<doc id="21212" wikidata="Q7318" url="?curid=21212" title="Nazi Germany">
<text>Nazi Germany, officially known as the German Reich and later the Greater German Reich, was the German state between 1933 and 1945, when Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party controlled the country, transforming it into a totalitarian dictatorship. The Third Reich, meaning &quot;Third Realm&quot; or &quot;Third Empire&quot;, referred to the Nazi claim that Nazi Germany was the successor to the earlier Holy Roman Empire (800/962–1806) and German Empire (1871–1918). The Third Reich, which the Nazis referred to as the Thousand-Year Reich, ended in May 1945, after only 12 years, when the Allies defeated Germany and entered the capital, Berlin, ending World War II in Europe.

After Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933 by Paul von Hindenburg, the President of the Weimar Republic, the Nazi Party began to eliminate political opposition and consolidate power. Hindenburg died on 2 August 1934, and Hitler became dictator by merging the powers of the chancellery and presidency. A 1934 German referendum confirmed Hitler as sole &quot;Führer&quot; (leader). Power was centralised in Hitler&#x27;s person, and his word became the highest law. The government was not a coordinated, cooperating body, but rather a collection of factions struggling to amass power. In the midst of the Great Depression, the Nazis restored economic stability and ended mass unemployment using heavy military spending. Financed by deficit spending, the regime undertook extensive public works projects, including the &quot;Autobahnen&quot; (motorways) and a massive secret rearmament program, forming the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; (armed forces). The return to economic stability boosted the regime&#x27;s popularity. Germany made increasingly aggressive territorial demands, threatening war if they were not met. Germany seized Austria in the &quot;Anschluss&quot; of 1938, and demanded and received the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia. Germany signed a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union and invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, launching World War II in Europe. In alliance with Italy and other Axis powers, Germany conquered most of Europe by 1940 and threatened Great Britain.

Racism, Nazi eugenics, anti-Slavism, and especially antisemitism were central ideological features of the regime. The Germanic peoples were considered by the Nazis to be the &quot;master race&quot;, the purest branch of the Aryan race. Jews, Romani people, Slavs, homosexuals, liberals, socialists, communists, other political opponents, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, Freemasons, those who refused to work, and other &quot;undesirables&quot; were imprisoned, deported, or murdered. Christian churches and citizens that opposed Hitler&#x27;s rule were oppressed and leaders imprisoned. Education focused on racial biology, population policy, and fitness for military service. Career and educational opportunities for women were curtailed. Nazi Propaganda Ministry disseminated films, antisemitic canards, and organized mass rallies; fostering a pervasive cult of personality around Adolf Hitler to influence public opinion. The government controlled artistic expression, promoting specific art forms and banning or discouraging others. Genocide, mass murder, and large-scale forced labour became hallmarks of the regime; the implementation of the regime&#x27;s racial policies culminated in the Holocaust.

After the initial success of German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, Nazi Germany attempted to implement the &quot;Generalplan Ost&quot; and Hunger Plan, as part of its war of extermination in Eastern Europe. The Soviet resurgence and entry of the US into the war meant Germany lost the initiative in 1943 and by late 1944 had been pushed back to the 1939 border. Large-scale aerial bombing of Germany escalated and the Axis powers were driven back in Eastern and Southern Europe. Germany was conquered by the Soviet Union from the east and the other allies from the west, and capitulated on 8 May 1945. Hitler&#x27;s refusal to admit defeat led to massive destruction of German infrastructure and additional war-related deaths in the closing months of the war. The Allies initiated a policy of denazification and put many of the surviving Nazi leadership on trial for war crimes at the Nuremberg trials.

== Name ==
Common English terms for the German state in the Nazi era are &quot;Nazi Germany&quot; and the &quot;Third Reich&quot;, which Hitler and the Nazis also referred to as the &quot;Thousand-Year Reich&quot; (&quot;Tausendjähriges Reich&quot;). The latter, a translation of the Nazi propaganda term &quot;Drittes Reich&quot;, was first used in &quot;Das Dritte Reich&quot;, a 1923 book by Arthur Moeller van den Bruck. The book counted the Holy Roman Empire as the first Reich and the German Empire as the second.

== Background ==

Severe setbacks to the German economy began after World War I ended, partly because of reparations payments required under the 1919 Treaty of Versailles. The government printed money to make the payments and to repay the country&#x27;s war debt, but the resulting hyperinflation led to inflated prices, economic chaos, and food riots. When the government defaulted on their reparations payments in January 1923, French troops occupied German industrial areas along the Ruhr and widespread civil unrest followed.

The National Socialist German Workers&#x27; Party, commonly known as the Nazi Party, was founded in 1920. The Nazi party platform included destruction of the Weimar Republic, rejection of the Treaty of Versailles, radical antisemitism, and anti-Bolshevism. They promised a strong central government, increased &quot;Lebensraum&quot; (&quot;living space&quot;) for Germanic peoples, formation of a national community based on race, and racial cleansing via the active suppression of Jews, who would be stripped of their citizenship and civil rights. The Nazis proposed national and cultural renewal based upon the &quot;Völkisch&quot; movement. The party, especially its paramilitary organisation &quot;Sturmabteilung&quot; (SA; Storm Detachment), or Brownshirts, used physical violence to advance their political position, disrupting the meetings of rival organisations and attacking their members as well as Jewish people on the streets. Such far-right armed groups were common in Bavaria, and were tolerated by the sympathetic far-right state government of Gustav Ritter von Kahr.

When the stock market in the United States crashed in 1929, the effect in Germany was dire. Millions were thrown out of work and several major banks collapsed. Hitler and the Nazis prepared to take advantage of the emergency to gain support for their party. They promised to strengthen the economy and provide jobs. Many voters decided the Nazi Party was capable of restoring order, quelling civil unrest, and improving Germany&#x27;s international reputation. After the federal election of 1932, the party was the largest in the Reichstag, holding 230 seats with 37.4 per cent of the popular vote.

== History ==

=== Nazi seizure of power ===

Although the Nazis won the greatest share of the popular vote in the two Reichstag general elections of 1932, they did not have a majority. Hitler refused to participate in a coalition government unless he was its leader. Under pressure from politicians, industrialists, and the business community, President Paul von Hindenburg appointed Hitler as Chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933. This event is known as the &quot;Machtergreifung&quot; (&quot;seizure of power&quot;).

On the night of 27 February 1933, the Reichstag building was set afire. Marinus van der Lubbe, a Dutch communist, was found guilty of starting the blaze. Hitler proclaimed that the arson marked the start of a communist uprising. The Reichstag Fire Decree, imposed on 28 February 1933, rescinded most civil liberties, including rights of assembly and freedom of the press. The decree also allowed the police to detain people indefinitely without charges. The legislation was accompanied by a propaganda campaign that led to public support for the measure. Violent suppression of communists by the SA was undertaken nationwide and 4,000 members of the Communist Party of Germany were arrested.

On 23 March 1933, the Enabling Act, an amendment to the Weimar Constitution, passed in the Reichstag by a vote of 444 to 94. This amendment allowed Hitler and his cabinet to pass laws—even laws that violated the constitution—without the consent of the president or the Reichstag. As the bill required a two-thirds majority to pass, the Nazis used intimidation tactics as well as the provisions of the Reichstag Fire Decree to keep several Social Democratic deputies from attending, and the Communists had already been banned. The Enabling Act would subsequently serve as the legal foundation for the dictatorship the Nazis established.

On 10 May, the government seized the assets of the Social Democrats, and they were banned on 22 June. On 21 June, the SA raided the offices of the German National People&#x27;s Party – their former coalition partners – which then disbanded on 29 June. The remaining major political parties followed suit. On 14 July 1933 Germany became a one-party state with the passage of the Law Against the Formation of Parties, decreeing the Nazi Party to be the sole legal party in Germany. The founding of new parties was also made illegal, and all remaining political parties which had not already been dissolved were banned. Further elections in November 1933, 1936, and 1938 were Nazi-controlled, with only members of the Party and a small number of independents elected.

All civilian organisations had their leadership replaced with Nazi sympathisers or party members, and either merged with the Nazi Party or faced dissolution. The Nazi government declared a &quot;Day of National Labor&quot; for May Day 1933, and invited many trade union delegates to Berlin for celebrations. The day after, SA stormtroopers demolished union offices around the country; all trade unions were forced to dissolve and their leaders were arrested. The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service, passed in April, removed from their jobs all teachers, professors, judges, magistrates, and government officials who were Jewish or whose commitment to the party was suspect. This meant the only non-political institutions not under control of the Nazis were the churches.

The Nazi regime abolished the symbols of the Weimar Republic—including the black, red, and gold tricolour flag—and adopted reworked symbolism. The previous imperial black, white, and red tricolour was restored as one of Germany&#x27;s two official flags; the second was the swastika flag of the Nazi Party, which became the sole national flag in September 1935. The Party anthem &quot;Horst-Wessel-Lied&quot; (&quot;Horst Wessel Song&quot;) became a second national anthem.

Germany was still in a dire economic situation, as six million people were unemployed and the balance of trade deficit was daunting. Using deficit spending, public works projects were undertaken beginning in 1934, creating 1.7 million new jobs by the end of that year alone. Average wages began to rise.

=== Consolidation of power ===
The SA leadership continued to apply pressure for greater political and military power. In response, Hitler used the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS) and Gestapo to purge the entire SA leadership. Hitler targeted SA &quot;Stabschef&quot; (Chief of Staff) Ernst Röhm and other SA leaders who—along with a number of Hitler&#x27;s political adversaries (such as Gregor Strasser and former chancellor Kurt von Schleicher)—were arrested and shot. Up to 200 people were killed from 30 June to 2 July 1934 in an event that became known as the Night of the Long Knives.

On 2 August 1934, Hindenburg died. The previous day, the cabinet had enacted the &quot;Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich&quot;, which stated that upon Hindenburg&#x27;s death the office of Reich President would be abolished and its powers merged with those of Reich Chancellor. Hitler thus became head of state as well as head of government and was formally named as &quot;Führer und Reichskanzler&quot; (&quot;Leader and Chancellor&quot;), although eventually &quot;Reichskanzler&quot; was dropped. Germany was now a totalitarian state with Hitler at its head. As head of state, Hitler became Supreme Commander of the armed forces. The new law provided an altered loyalty oath for servicemen so that they affirmed loyalty to Hitler personally rather than the office of supreme commander or the state. On 19 August, the merger of the presidency with the chancellorship was approved by 90 per cent of the electorate in a plebiscite.
Most Germans were relieved that the conflicts and street fighting of the Weimar era had ended. They were deluged with propaganda orchestrated by Minister of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda Joseph Goebbels, who promised peace and plenty for all in a united, Marxist-free country without the constraints of the Versailles Treaty. The Nazi Party obtained and legitimised power through its initial revolutionary activities, then through manipulation of legal mechanisms, the use of police powers, and by taking control of the state and federal institutions. The first major Nazi concentration camp, initially for political prisoners, was opened at Dachau in 1933. Hundreds of camps of varying size and function were created by the end of the war.

Beginning in April 1933, scores of measures defining the status of Jews and their rights were instituted. These measures culminated in the establishment of the Nuremberg Laws of 1935, which stripped them of their basic rights. The Nazis would take from the Jews their wealth, their right to intermarry with non-Jews, and their right to occupy many fields of labour (such as law, medicine, or education). Eventually the Nazis declared the Jews as undesirable to remain among German citizens and society.

=== Military build-up ===
As early as February 1933, Hitler announced that rearmament must begin, albeit clandestinely at first, as to do so was in violation of the Versailles Treaty. On 17 May 1933, Hitler gave a speech before the Reichstag outlining his desire for world peace and accepted an offer from American President Franklin D. Roosevelt for military disarmament, provided the other nations of Europe did the same. When the other European powers failed to accept this offer, Hitler pulled Germany out of the World Disarmament Conference and the League of Nations in October, claiming its disarmament clauses were unfair if they applied only to Germany. In a referendum held in November, 95 per cent of voters supported Germany&#x27;s withdrawal.

In 1934, Hitler told his military leaders that rearmament needed to be complete by 1942, as by then the German people would require more living space and resources, so Germany would have to start a war of conquest to obtain more territory. The Saarland, which had been placed under League of Nations supervision for 15 years at the end of World War I, voted in January 1935 to become part of Germany. In March 1935, Hitler announced the creation of an air force, and that the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; would be increased to 550,000 men. Britain agreed to Germany building a naval fleet with the signing of the Anglo-German Naval Agreement on 18 June 1935.

When the Italian invasion of Ethiopia led to only mild protests by the British and French governments, on 7 March 1936 Hitler used the Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance as a pretext to order the army to march 3,000 troops into the demilitarised zone in the Rhineland in violation of the Versailles Treaty. As the territory was part of Germany, the British and French governments did not feel that attempting to enforce the treaty was worth the risk of war. In the one-party election held on 29 March, the Nazis received 98.9 per cent support. In 1936, Hitler signed an Anti-Comintern Pact with Japan and a non-aggression agreement with Mussolini, who was soon referring to a &quot;Rome-Berlin Axis&quot;.

Hitler sent military supplies and assistance to the Nationalist forces of General Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War, which began in July 1936. The German Condor Legion included a range of aircraft and their crews, as well as a tank contingent. The aircraft of the Legion destroyed the city of Guernica in 1937. The Nationalists were victorious in 1939 and became an informal ally of Nazi Germany.

==== Austria and Czechoslovakia ====


In February 1938, Hitler emphasised to Austrian Chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg the need for Germany to secure its frontiers. Schuschnigg scheduled a plebiscite regarding Austrian independence for 13 March, but Hitler sent an ultimatum to Schuschnigg on 11 March demanding that he hand over all power to the Austrian Nazi Party or face an invasion. German troops entered Austria the next day, to be greeted with enthusiasm by the populace.

The Republic of Czechoslovakia was home to a substantial minority of Germans, who lived mostly in the Sudetenland. Under pressure from separatist groups within the Sudeten German Party, the Czechoslovak government offered economic concessions to the region. Hitler decided not just to incorporate the Sudetenland into the Reich, but to destroy the country of Czechoslovakia entirely. The Nazis undertook a propaganda campaign to try to generate support for an invasion. Top German military leaders opposed the plan, as Germany was not yet ready for war.

The crisis led to war preparations by Britain, Czechoslovakia, and France (Czechoslovakia&#x27;s ally). Attempting to avoid war, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain arranged a series of meetings, the result of which was the Munich Agreement, signed on 29 September 1938. The Czechoslovak government was forced to accept the Sudetenland&#x27;s annexation into Germany. Chamberlain was greeted with cheers when he landed in London, saying the agreement brought &quot;peace for our time&quot;.

Austrian and Czech foreign exchange reserves were seized by the Nazis, as were stockpiles of raw materials such as metals and completed goods such as weaponry and aircraft, which were shipped to Germany. The &quot;Reichswerke Hermann Göring&quot; industrial conglomerate took control of steel and coal production facilities in both countries.

==== Poland ====
In January 1934, Germany signed a non-aggression pact with Poland. In March 1939, Hitler demanded the return of the Free City of Danzig and the Polish Corridor, a strip of land that separated East Prussia from the rest of Germany. The British announced they would come to the aid of Poland if it was attacked. Hitler, believing the British would not take action, ordered an invasion plan should be readied for September 1939. On 23 May, Hitler described to his generals his overall plan of not only seizing the Polish Corridor but greatly expanding German territory eastward at the expense of Poland. He expected this time they would be met by force.

The Germans reaffirmed their alliance with Italy and signed non-aggression pacts with Denmark, Estonia, and Latvia whilst trade links were formalised with Romania, Norway, and Sweden. Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop arranged in negotiations with the Soviet Union a non-aggression pact, the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, signed in August 1939. The treaty also contained secret protocols dividing Poland and the Baltic states into German and Soviet spheres of influence.

=== World War II ===
==== Foreign policy ====

Germany&#x27;s wartime foreign policy involved the creation of allied governments controlled directly or indirectly from Berlin. They intended to obtain soldiers from allies such as Italy and Hungary and workers and food supplies from allies such as Vichy France. Hungary was the fourth nation to join the Axis, signing the Tripartite Pact on 27 September 1940. Bulgaria signed the pact on 17 November. German efforts to secure oil included negotiating a supply from their new ally, Romania, who signed the Pact on 23 November, alongside the Slovak Republic. By late 1942, there were 24 divisions from Romania on the Eastern Front, 10 from Italy, and 10 from Hungary. Germany assumed full control in France in 1942, Italy in 1943, and Hungary in 1944. Although Japan was a powerful ally, the relationship was distant, with little co-ordination or co-operation. For example, Germany refused to share their formula for synthetic oil from coal until late in the war.

==== Outbreak of war ====
Germany invaded Poland and captured the Free City of Danzig on 1 September 1939, beginning World War II in Europe. Honouring their treaty obligations, Britain and France declared war on Germany two days later. Poland fell quickly, as the Soviet Union attacked from the east on 17 September. Reinhard Heydrich, chief of the &quot;Sicherheitspolizei&quot; (SiPo; Security Police) and &quot;Sicherheitsdienst&quot; (SD; Security Service), ordered on 21 September that Polish Jews should be rounded up and concentrated into cities with good rail links. Initially the intention was to deport them further east, or possibly to Madagascar. Using lists prepared in advance, some 65,000 Polish intelligentsia, noblemen, clergy, and teachers were murdered by the end of 1939 in an attempt to destroy Poland&#x27;s identity as a nation. Soviet forces advanced into Finland in the Winter War, and German forces saw action at sea. But little other activity occurred until May, so the period became known as the &quot;Phoney War&quot;.

From the start of the war, a British blockade on shipments to Germany affected its economy. Germany was particularly dependent on foreign supplies of oil, coal, and grain. Thanks to trade embargoes and the blockade, imports into Germany declined by 80 per cent. To safeguard Swedish iron ore shipments to Germany, Hitler ordered the invasion of Denmark and Norway, which began on 9 April. Denmark fell after less than a day, while most of Norway followed by the end of the month. By early June, Germany occupied all of Norway.

==== Conquest of Europe ====
Against the advice of many of his senior military officers, in May 1940 Hitler ordered an attack on France and the Low Countries. They quickly conquered Luxembourg and the Netherlands and outmanoeuvred the Allies in Belgium, forcing the evacuation of many British and French troops at Dunkirk. France fell as well, surrendering to Germany on 22 June. The victory in France resulted in an upswing in Hitler&#x27;s popularity and an upsurge in war fever in Germany.

In violation of the provisions of the Hague Convention, industrial firms in the Netherlands, France, and Belgium were put to work producing war materiel for Germany.
The Nazis seized from the French thousands of locomotives and rolling stock, stockpiles of weapons, and raw materials such as copper, tin, oil, and nickel. Payments for occupation costs were levied upon France, Belgium, and Norway. Barriers to trade led to hoarding, black markets, and uncertainty about the future. Food supplies were precarious; production dropped in most of Europe. Famine was experienced in many occupied countries.

Hitler&#x27;s peace overtures to the new British Prime Minister Winston Churchill were rejected in July 1940. Grand Admiral Erich Raeder had advised Hitler in June that air superiority was a pre-condition for a successful invasion of Britain, so Hitler ordered a series of aerial attacks on Royal Air Force (RAF) airbases and radar stations, as well as nightly air raids on British cities, including London, Plymouth, and Coventry. The German Luftwaffe failed to defeat the RAF in what became known as the Battle of Britain, and by the end of October, Hitler realised that air superiority would not be achieved. He permanently postponed the invasion, a plan which the commanders of the German army had never taken entirely seriously. Several historians, including Andrew Gordon, believe the primary reason for the failure of the invasion plan was the superiority of the Royal Navy, not the actions of the RAF.

In February 1941, the German &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; arrived in Libya to aid the Italians in the North African Campaign. On 6 April, Germany launched an invasion of Yugoslavia and Greece. All of Yugoslavia and parts of Greece were subsequently divided between Germany, Hungary, Italy, and Bulgaria.

==== Invasion of the Soviet Union ====

On 22 June 1941, contravening the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, about 3.8 million Axis troops attacked the Soviet Union. In addition to Hitler&#x27;s stated purpose of acquiring &quot;Lebensraum&quot;, this large-scale offensive—codenamed Operation Barbarossa—was intended to destroy the Soviet Union and seize its natural resources for subsequent aggression against the Western powers. The reaction among Germans was one of surprise and trepidation as many were concerned about how much longer the war would continue or suspected that Germany could not win a war fought on two fronts.
The invasion conquered a huge area, including the Baltic states, Belarus, and west Ukraine. After the successful Battle of Smolensk in September 1941, Hitler ordered Army Group Centre to halt its advance to Moscow and temporarily divert its Panzer groups to aid in the encirclement of Leningrad and Kiev. This pause provided the Red Army with an opportunity to mobilise fresh reserves. The Moscow offensive, which resumed in October 1941, ended disastrously in December. On 7 December 1941, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Four days later, Germany declared war on the United States.

Food was in short supply in the conquered areas of the Soviet Union and Poland, as the retreating armies had burned the crops in some areas, and much of the remainder was sent back to the Reich. In Germany, rations were cut in 1942. In his role as Plenipotentiary of the Four Year Plan, Hermann Göring demanded increased shipments of grain from France and fish from Norway. The 1942 harvest was good, and food supplies remained adequate in Western Europe.

Germany and Europe as a whole were almost totally dependent on foreign oil imports. In an attempt to resolve the shortage, in June 1942 Germany launched &quot;Fall Blau&quot; (&quot;Case Blue&quot;), an offensive against the Caucasian oilfields. The Red Army launched a counter-offensive on 19 November and encircled the Axis forces, who were trapped in Stalingrad on 23 November. Göring assured Hitler that the 6th Army could be supplied by air, but this turned out to be infeasible. Hitler&#x27;s refusal to allow a retreat led to the deaths of 200,000 German and Romanian soldiers; of the 91,000 men who surrendered in the city on 31 January 1943, only 6,000 survivors returned to Germany after the war.

==== Turning point and collapse ====

Losses continued to mount after Stalingrad, leading to a sharp reduction in the popularity of the Nazi Party and deteriorating morale. Soviet forces continued to push westward after the failed German offensive at the Battle of Kursk in the summer of 1943. By the end of 1943, the Germans had lost most of their eastern territorial gains. In Egypt, Field Marshal Erwin Rommel&#x27;s &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; were defeated by British forces under Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery in October 1942. The Allies landed in Sicily in July 1943 and were on the Italian peninsula by September. Meanwhile, American and British bomber fleets based in Britain began operations against Germany. Many sorties were intentionally given civilian targets in an effort to destroy German morale. The bombing of aircraft factories as well as Peenemünde Army Research Center, where V-1 and V-2 rockets were being developed and produced, were also deemed particularly important. German aircraft production could not keep pace with losses, and without air cover the Allied bombing campaign became even more devastating. By targeting oil refineries and factories, they crippled the German war effort by late 1944.

On 6 June 1944, American, British, and Canadian forces established a front in France with the D-Day landings in Normandy. On 20 July 1944, Hitler survived an assassination attempt. He ordered brutal reprisals, resulting in 7,000 arrests and the execution of more than 4,900 people. The failed Ardennes Offensive (16 December 1944 – 25 January 1945) was the last major German offensive on the western front, and Soviet forces entered Germany on 27 January. Hitler&#x27;s refusal to admit defeat and his insistence that the war be fought to the last man led to unnecessary death and destruction in the war&#x27;s closing months. Through his Justice Minister Otto Georg Thierack, Hitler ordered that anyone who was not prepared to fight should be court-martialed, and thousands of people were executed. In many areas, people surrendered to the approaching Allies in spite of exhortations of local leaders to continue to fight. Hitler ordered the destruction of transport, bridges, industries, and other infrastructure—a scorched earth decree—but Armaments Minister Albert Speer prevented this order from being fully carried out.

During the Battle of Berlin (16 April – 2 May 1945), Hitler and his staff lived in the underground &quot;Führerbunker&quot; while the Red Army approached. On 30 April, when Soviet troops were within two blocks of the Reich Chancellery, Hitler and his wife Eva Braun committed suicide. On 2 May, General Helmuth Weidling unconditionally surrendered Berlin to Soviet General Vasily Chuikov. Hitler was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz as Reich President and Goebbels as Reich Chancellor. Goebbels and his wife Magda committed suicide the next day after murdering their six children. Between 4 and 8 May 1945, most of the remaining German armed forces unconditionally surrendered. The German Instrument of Surrender was signed 8 May, marking the end of the Nazi regime and the end of World War II in Europe.

Popular support for Hitler almost completely disappeared as the war drew to a close. Suicide rates in Germany increased, particularly in areas where the Red Army was advancing. Among soldiers and party personnel, suicide was often deemed an honourable and heroic alternative to surrender. First-hand accounts and propaganda about the uncivilised behaviour of the advancing Soviet troops caused panic among civilians on the Eastern Front, especially women, who feared being raped. More than a thousand people (out of a population of around 16,000) committed suicide in Demmin around 1 May 1945 as the 65th Army of 2nd Belorussian Front first broke into a distillery and then rampaged through the town, committing mass rapes, arbitrarily executing civilians, and setting fire to buildings. High numbers of suicides took place in many other locations, including Neubrandenburg (600 dead), Stolp in Pommern (1,000 dead), and Berlin, where at least 7,057 people committed suicide in 1945.

==== German casualties ====

Estimates of the total German war dead range from 5.5 to 6.9 million persons. A study by German historian Rüdiger Overmans puts the number of German military dead and missing at 5.3 million, including 900,000 men conscripted from outside of Germany&#x27;s 1937 borders. Richard Overy estimated in 2014 that about 353,000 civilians were killed in Allied air raids. Other civilian deaths include 300,000 Germans (including Jews) who were victims of Nazi political, racial, and religious persecution and 200,000 who were murdered in the Nazi euthanasia program. Political courts called &quot;Sondergerichte&quot; sentenced some 12,000 members of the German resistance to death, and civil courts sentenced an additional 40,000 Germans. Mass rapes of German women also took place.

== Geography ==
=== Territorial changes ===

As a result of their defeat in World War I and the resulting Treaty of Versailles, Germany lost Alsace-Lorraine, Northern Schleswig, and Memel. The Saarland became a protectorate of France under the condition that its residents would later decide by referendum which country to join, and Poland became a separate nation and was given access to the sea by the creation of the Polish Corridor, which separated Prussia from the rest of Germany, while Danzig was made a free city.

Germany regained control of the Saarland through a referendum held in 1935 and annexed Austria in the &quot;Anschluss&quot; of 1938. The Munich Agreement of 1938 gave Germany control of the Sudetenland, and they seized the remainder of Czechoslovakia six months later. Under threat of invasion by sea, Lithuania surrendered the Memel district in March 1939.

Between 1939 and 1941, German forces invaded Poland, Denmark, Norway, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Belgium, Yugoslavia, Greece, and the Soviet Union. Germany annexed parts of northern Yugoslavia in April 1941, while Mussolini ceded Trieste, South Tyrol, and Istria to Germany in 1943.

=== Occupied territories ===

Some of the conquered territories were incorporated into Germany as part of Hitler&#x27;s long-term goal of creating a Greater Germanic Reich. Several areas, such as Alsace-Lorraine, were placed under the authority of an adjacent &quot;Gau&quot; (regional district). The &quot;Reichskommissariate&quot; (Reich Commissariats), quasi-colonial regimes, were established in some occupied countries. Areas placed under German administration included the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, &quot;Reichskommissariat Ostland&quot; (encompassing the Baltic states and Belarus), and &quot;Reichskommissariat Ukraine&quot;. Conquered areas of Belgium and France were placed under control of the Military Administration in Belgium and Northern France. Belgian Eupen-Malmedy, which had been part of Germany until 1919, was annexed. Part of Poland was incorporated into the Reich, and the General Government was established in occupied central Poland. The governments of Denmark, Norway (&quot;Reichskommissariat Norwegen&quot;), and the Netherlands (&quot;Reichskommissariat Niederlande&quot;) were placed under civilian administrations staffed largely by natives. Hitler intended to eventually incorporate many of these areas into the Reich. Germany occupied the Italian protectorate of Albania and the Italian governorate of Montenegro in 1943 and installed a puppet government in occupied Serbia in 1941.
== Politics ==
=== Ideology ===

The Nazis were a far-right fascist political party which arose during the social and financial upheavals that occurred following the end of World War I. The Party remained small and marginalised, receiving 2.6% of the federal vote in 1928, prior to the onset of the Great Depression in 1929. By 1930 the Party won 18.3% of the federal vote, making it the Reichstag&#x27;s second largest political party. While in prison after the failed Beer Hall Putsch of 1923, Hitler wrote &quot;Mein Kampf&quot;, which laid out his plan for transforming German society into one based on race. Nazi ideology brought together elements of antisemitism, racial hygiene, and eugenics, and combined them with pan-Germanism and territorial expansionism with the goal of obtaining more &quot;Lebensraum&quot; for the Germanic people.

The regime attempted to obtain this new territory by attacking Poland and the Soviet Union, intending to mass-murder or deport the Jews and Slavs living there, who it viewed as being inferior to the Aryan master race and part of a Jewish-Bolshevik conspiracy. The Nazi regime believed that only Germany could defeat the forces of Bolshevism and save humanity from world domination by International Jewry. Other people deemed life unworthy of life by the Nazis included the mentally and physically disabled, Romani people, homosexuals, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and social misfits. Additionally, Freemasons were heavily monitored and persecuted.

Influenced by the &quot;Völkisch&quot; movement, the regime was against cultural modernism and supported the development of an extensive military at the expense of intellectualism. Creativity and art were stifled, except where they could serve as propaganda media. The party used symbols such as the Blood Flag and rituals such as the Nazi Party rallies to foster unity and bolster the regime&#x27;s popularity.

=== Government ===
Hitler ruled Germany autocratically by asserting the &quot;Führerprinzip&quot; (&quot;leader principle&quot;), which called for absolute obedience by all subordinates. He viewed the government structure as a pyramid, with himself—the infallible leader—at the apex. Party rank was not determined by elections, and positions were filled through appointment by those of higher rank. The party used propaganda to develop a cult of personality around Hitler. Historians such as Kershaw emphasise the psychological impact of Hitler&#x27;s skill as an orator. Roger Gill states: &quot;His moving speeches captured the minds and hearts of a vast number of the German people: he virtually hypnotized his audiences&quot;.

While top officials reported to Hitler and followed his policies, they had considerable autonomy. He expected officials to &quot;work towards the Führer&quot; – to take the initiative in promoting policies and actions in line with party goals and Hitler&#x27;s wishes, without his involvement in day-to-day decision-making. The government was a disorganised collection of factions led by the party elite, who struggled to amass power and gain the Führer&#x27;s favour. Hitler&#x27;s leadership style was to give contradictory orders to his subordinates and to place them in positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped. In this way he fostered distrust, competition, and infighting among his subordinates to consolidate and maximise his own power.

Successive &quot;Reichsstatthalter&quot; decrees between 1933 and 1935 abolished the existing &quot;Länder&quot; (constituent states) of Germany and replaced them with new administrative divisions, the &quot;Gaue&quot;, governed by Nazi leaders (&quot;Gauleiters&quot;). The change was never fully implemented, as the Länder were still used as administrative divisions for some government departments such as education. This led to a bureaucratic tangle of overlapping jurisdictions and responsibilities typical of the administrative style of the Nazi regime.

Jewish civil servants lost their jobs in 1933, except for those who had seen military service in World War I. Members of the Party or party supporters were appointed in their place. As part of the process of &quot;Gleichschaltung&quot;, the Reich Local Government Law of 1935 abolished local elections, and mayors were appointed by the Ministry of the Interior.

=== Law ===
In August 1934, civil servants and members of the military were required to swear an oath of unconditional obedience to Hitler. These laws became the basis of the &quot;Führerprinzip&quot;, the concept that Hitler&#x27;s word overrode all existing laws. Any acts that were sanctioned by Hitler—even murder—thus became legal. All legislation proposed by cabinet ministers had to be approved by the office of Deputy Führer Rudolf Hess, who could also veto top civil service appointments.

Most of the judicial system and legal codes of the Weimar Republic remained in place to deal with non-political crimes. The courts issued and carried out far more death sentences than before the Nazis took power. People who were convicted of three or more offences—even petty ones—could be deemed habitual offenders and jailed indefinitely. People such as prostitutes and pickpockets were judged to be inherently criminal and a threat to the community. Thousands were arrested and confined indefinitely without trial.
A new type of court, the &quot;Volksgerichtshof&quot; (&quot;People&#x27;s Court&quot;), was established in 1934 to deal with political cases. This court handed out over 5,000 death sentences until its dissolution in 1945. The death penalty could be issued for offences such as being a communist, printing seditious leaflets, or even making jokes about Hitler or other officials. The Gestapo was in charge of investigative policing to enforce Nazi ideology as they located and confined political offenders, Jews, and others deemed undesirable. Political offenders who were released from prison were often immediately re-arrested by the Gestapo and confined in a concentration camp.

The Nazis used propaganda to promulgate the concept of &quot;Rassenschande&quot; (&quot;race defilement&quot;) to justify the need for racial laws. In September 1935, the Nuremberg Laws were enacted. These laws initially prohibited sexual relations and marriages between Aryans and Jews and were later extended to include &quot;Gypsies, Negroes or their bastard offspring&quot;. The law also forbade the employment of German women under the age of 45 as domestic servants in Jewish households. The Reich Citizenship Law stated that only those of &quot;German or related blood&quot; could be citizens. Thus Jews and other non-Aryans were stripped of their German citizenship. The law also permitted the Nazis to deny citizenship to anyone who was not supportive enough of the regime. A supplementary decree issued in November defined as Jewish anyone with three Jewish grandparents, or two grandparents if the Jewish faith was followed.

== Military and paramilitary ==
=== Wehrmacht ===

The unified armed forces of Germany from 1935 to 1945 were called the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; (defence force). This included the &quot;Heer&quot; (army), &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot; (navy), and the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; (air force). From 2 August 1934, members of the armed forces were required to pledge an oath of unconditional obedience to Hitler personally. In contrast to the previous oath, which required allegiance to the constitution of the country and its lawful establishments, this new oath required members of the military to obey Hitler even if they were being ordered to do something illegal. Hitler decreed that the army would have to tolerate and even offer logistical support to the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;—the mobile death squads responsible for millions of murders in Eastern Europe—when it was tactically possible to do so. &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; troops also participated directly in the Holocaust by shooting civilians or committing genocide under the guise of anti-partisan operations. The party line was that the Jews were the instigators of the partisan struggle and therefore needed to be eliminated. On 8 July 1941, Heydrich announced that all Jews in the eastern conquered territories were to be regarded as partisans and gave the order for all male Jews between the ages of 15 and 45 to be shot. By August, this was extended to include the entire Jewish population.

In spite of efforts to prepare the country militarily, the economy could not sustain a lengthy war of attrition. A strategy was developed based on the tactic of &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; (&quot;lightning war&quot;), which involved using quick coordinated assaults that avoided enemy strong points. Attacks began with artillery bombardment, followed by bombing and strafing runs. Next the tanks would attack and finally the infantry would move in to secure the captured area. Victories continued through mid-1940, but the failure to defeat Britain was the first major turning point in the war. The decision to attack the Soviet Union and the decisive defeat at Stalingrad led to the retreat of the German armies and the eventual loss of the war. The total number of soldiers who served in the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; from 1935 to 1945 was around 18.2 million, of whom 5.3 million died.

=== SA and SS ===

The &quot;Sturmabteilung&quot; (SA; Storm Detachment), or Brownshirts, founded in 1921, was the first paramilitary wing of the Nazi Party; their initial assignment was to protect Nazi leaders at rallies and assemblies. They also took part in street battles against the forces of rival political parties and violent actions against Jews and others. Under Ernst Röhm&#x27;s leadership the SA grew by 1934 to over half a million members—4.5 million including reserves—at a time when the regular army was still limited to 100,000 men by the Versailles Treaty.

Röhm hoped to assume command of the army and absorb it into the ranks of the SA. Hindenburg and Defence Minister Werner von Blomberg threatened to impose martial law if the activities of the SA were not curtailed. Therefore, less than a year and a half after seizing power, Hitler ordered the deaths of the SA leadership, including Rohm. After the purge of 1934, the SA was no longer a major force.

Initially a small bodyguard unit under the auspices of the SA, the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS; Protection Squadron) grew to become one of the largest and most powerful groups in Nazi Germany. Led by &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot; Heinrich Himmler from 1929, the SS had over a quarter million members by 1938. Himmler initially envisioned the SS as being an elite group of guards, Hitler&#x27;s last line of defence. The Waffen-SS, the military branch of the SS, evolved into a second army. It was dependent on the regular army for heavy weaponry and equipment, and most units were under tactical control of the High Command of the Armed Forces (OKW). By the end of 1942, the stringent selection and racial requirements that had initially been in place were no longer followed. With recruitment and conscription based only on expansion, by 1943 the Waffen-SS could not longer claim to be an elite fighting force.

SS formations committed many war crimes against civilians and allied servicemen. From 1935 onward, the SS spearheaded the persecution of Jews, who were rounded up into ghettos and concentration camps. With the outbreak of World War II, the SS &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; units followed the army into Poland and the Soviet Union, where from 1941 to 1945 they murdered more than two million people, including 1.3 million Jews. A third of the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; members were recruited from &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; personnel. The &quot;SS-Totenkopfverbände&quot; (death&#x27;s head units) ran the concentration camps and extermination camps, where millions more were murdered. Up to 60,000 Waffen-SS men served in the camps.

In 1931, Himmler organised an SS intelligence service which became known as the &quot;Sicherheitsdienst&quot; (SD; Security Service) under his deputy, Heydrich. This organisation was tasked with locating and arresting communists and other political opponents. Himmler established the beginnings of a parallel economy under the auspices of the SS Economy and Administration Head Office. This holding company owned housing corporations, factories, and publishing houses.

== Economy ==
=== Reich economics ===

The most pressing economic matter the Nazis initially faced was the 30 per cent national unemployment rate. Economist Hjalmar Schacht, President of the Reichsbank and Minister of Economics, created a scheme for deficit financing in May 1933. Capital projects were paid for with the issuance of promissory notes called Mefo bills. When the notes were presented for payment, the Reichsbank printed money. Hitler and his economic team expected that the upcoming territorial expansion would provide the means of repaying the soaring national debt. Schacht&#x27;s administration achieved a rapid decline in the unemployment rate, the largest of any country during the Great Depression. Economic recovery was uneven, with reduced hours of work and erratic availability of necessities, leading to disenchantment with the regime as early as 1934.

In October 1933, the Junkers Aircraft Works was expropriated. In concert with other aircraft manufacturers and under the direction of Aviation Minister Göring, production was ramped up. From a workforce of 3,200 people producing 100 units per year in 1932, the industry grew to employ a quarter of a million workers manufacturing over 10,000 technically advanced aircraft annually less than ten years later.

An elaborate bureaucracy was created to regulate imports of raw materials and finished goods with the intention of eliminating foreign competition in the German marketplace and improving the nation&#x27;s balance of payments. The Nazis encouraged the development of synthetic replacements for materials such as oil and textiles. As the market was experiencing a glut and prices for petroleum were low, in 1933 the Nazi government made a profit-sharing agreement with IG Farben, guaranteeing them a 5 per cent return on capital invested in their synthetic oil plant at Leuna. Any profits in excess of that amount would be turned over to the Reich. By 1936, Farben regretted making the deal, as excess profits were by then being generated. In another attempt to secure an adequate wartime supply of petroleum, Germany intimidated Romania into signing a trade agreement in March 1939.

Major public works projects financed with deficit spending included the construction of a network of &quot;Autobahnen&quot; and providing funding for programmes initiated by the previous government for housing and agricultural improvements. To stimulate the construction industry, credit was offered to private businesses and subsidies were made available for home purchases and repairs. On the condition that the wife would leave the workforce, a loan of up to 1,000 Reichsmarks could be accessed by young couples of Aryan descent who intended to marry, and the amount that had to be repaid was reduced by 25 per cent for each child born. The caveat that the woman had to remain unemployed outside the home was dropped by 1937 due to a shortage of skilled labourers.

Envisioning widespread car ownership as part of the new Germany, Hitler arranged for designer Ferdinand Porsche to draw up plans for the &quot;KdF-wagen&quot; (Strength Through Joy car), intended to be an automobile that everyone could afford. A prototype was displayed at the International Motor Show in Berlin on 17 February 1939. With the outbreak of World War II, the factory was converted to produce military vehicles. None were sold until after the war, when the vehicle was renamed the Volkswagen (people&#x27;s car).

Six million people were unemployed when the Nazis took power in 1933 and by 1937 there were fewer than a million. This was in part due to the removal of women from the workforce. Real wages dropped by 25 per cent between 1933 and 1938. After the dissolution of the trade unions in May 1933, their funds were seized and their leadership arrested, including those who attempted to co-operate with the Nazis. A new organisation, the German Labour Front, was created and placed under Nazi Party functionary Robert Ley. Many unemployed people were forcibly drafted into this organisation, where they were given uniforms and tools and put to work. As a result, unemployed people disappeared from the streets, contributing to the perception that the Nazis were improving economic conditions. The average work week was 43 hours in 1933; by 1939 this increased to 47 hours.

By early 1934, the focus shifted towards rearmament. By 1935, military expenditures accounted for 73 per cent of the government&#x27;s purchases of goods and services. On 18 October 1936, Hitler named Göring as Plenipotentiary of the Four Year Plan, intended to speed up rearmament. In addition to calling for the rapid construction of steel mills, synthetic rubber plants, and other factories, Göring instituted wage and price controls and restricted the issuance of stock dividends. Large expenditures were made on rearmament in spite of growing deficits. Plans unveiled in late 1938 for massive increases to the navy and air force were impossible to fulfil, as Germany lacked the finances and material resources to build the planned units, as well as the necessary fuel required to keep them running. With the introduction of compulsory military service in 1935, the &quot;Reichswehr&quot;, which had been limited to 100,000 by the terms of the Versailles Treaty, expanded to 750,000 on active service at the start of World War II, with a million more in the reserve. By January 1939, unemployment was down to 301,800 and it dropped to only 77,500 by September.

=== Wartime economy and forced labour ===

The Nazi war economy was a mixed economy that combined a free market with central planning. Historian Richard Overy describes it as being somewhere in between the command economy of the Soviet Union and the capitalist system of the United States.

In 1942, after the death of Armaments Minister Fritz Todt, Hitler appointed Albert Speer as his replacement. Wartime rationing of consumer goods led to an increase in personal savings, funds which were in turn lent to the government to support the war effort. By 1944, the war was consuming 75 per cent of Germany&#x27;s gross domestic product, compared to 60 per cent in the Soviet Union and 55 per cent in Britain. Speer improved production by centralising planning and control, reducing production of consumer goods, and using forced labour and slavery. The wartime economy eventually relied heavily upon the large-scale employment of slave labour. Germany imported and enslaved some 12 million people from 20 European countries to work in factories and on farms. Approximately 75 per cent were Eastern European. Many were casualties of Allied bombing, as they received poor air raid protection. Poor living conditions led to high rates of sickness, injury, and death, as well as sabotage and criminal activity. The wartime economy also relied upon large-scale robbery, initially through the state seizing the property of Jewish citizens and later by plundering the resources of occupied territories.

Foreign workers brought into Germany were put into four classifications: guest workers, military internees, civilian workers, and Eastern workers. Each group was subject to different regulations. The Nazis issued a ban on sexual relations between Germans and foreign workers.

By 1944, over a half million women served as auxiliaries in the German armed forces. The number of women in paid employment only increased by 271,000 (1.8 per cent) from 1939 to 1944. As the production of consumer goods had been cut back, women left those industries for employment in the war economy. They also took jobs formerly held by men, especially on farms and in family-owned shops.

Very heavy strategic bombing by the Allies targeted refineries producing synthetic oil and gasoline, as well as the German transportation system, especially rail yards and canals. The armaments industry began to break down by September 1944. By November, fuel coal was no longer reaching its destinations and the production of new armaments was no longer possible. Overy argues that the bombing strained the German war economy and forced it to divert up to one-fourth of its manpower and industry into anti-aircraft resources, which very likely shortened the war.

== Racial policy and eugenics ==
===Racism and antisemitism===

Racism and antisemitism were basic tenets of the Nazi Party and the Nazi regime. Nazi Germany&#x27;s racial policy was based on their belief in the existence of a superior master race. The Nazis postulated the existence of a racial conflict between the Aryan master race and inferior races, particularly Jews, who were viewed as a mixed race that had infiltrated society and were responsible for the exploitation and repression of the Aryan race.

=== Persecution of Jews ===
Discrimination against Jews began immediately after the seizure of power. Following a month-long series of attacks by members of the SA on Jewish businesses and synagogues, on 1 April 1933 Hitler declared a national boycott of Jewish businesses. The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service passed on 7 April forced all non-Aryan civil servants to retire from the legal profession and civil service. Similar legislation soon deprived other Jewish professionals of their right to practise, and on 11 April a decree was promulgated that stated anyone who had even one Jewish parent or grandparent was considered non-Aryan. As part of the drive to remove Jewish influence from cultural life, members of the National Socialist German Students&#x27; League removed from libraries any books considered un-German, and a nationwide book burning was held on 10 May.

The regime used violence and economic pressure to encourage Jews to leave the country voluntarily. Jewish businesses were denied access to markets, forbidden to advertise, and deprived of access to government contracts. Citizens were harassed and subjected to violent attacks. Many towns posted signs forbidding entry to Jews.

On 7 November 1938 a young Jewish man, Herschel Grynszpan, shot and killed Ernst vom Rath, a legation secretary at the German embassy in Paris, to protest his family&#x27;s treatment in Germany. This incident provided the pretext for a pogrom the Nazis incited against the Jews two days later. Members of the SA damaged or destroyed synagogues and Jewish property throughout Germany. At least 91 German Jews were murdered during this pogrom, later called &quot;Kristallnacht&quot;, the Night of Broken Glass. Further restrictions were imposed on Jews in the coming months – they were forbidden to own businesses or work in retail shops, drive cars, go to the cinema, visit the library, or own weapons, and Jewish pupils were removed from schools. The Jewish community was fined one billion marks to pay for the damage caused by &quot;Kristallnacht&quot; and told that any insurance settlements would be confiscated. By 1939, around 250,000 of Germany&#x27;s 437,000 Jews had emigrated to the United States, Argentina, Great Britain, Palestine, and other countries. Many chose to stay in continental Europe. Emigrants to Palestine were allowed to transfer property there under the terms of the Haavara Agreement, but those moving to other countries had to leave virtually all their property behind, and it was seized by the government.

=== Persecution of Romani ===

Like the Jews, the Romani were subjected to persecution from the early days of the regime. The Romani were forbidden to marry people of German extraction. They were shipped to concentration camps starting in 1935 and many were murdered. Following the invasion of Poland, 2,500 Roma and Sinti people were deported from Germany to the General Government, where they were imprisoned in labour camps. The survivors were likely exterminated at Bełżec, Sobibor, or Treblinka. A further 5,000 Sinti and Austrian Lalleri people were deported to the Łódź Ghetto in late 1941, where half were estimated to have died. The Romani survivors of the ghetto were subsequently moved to the Chełmno extermination camp in early 1942.

The Nazis intended on deporting all Romani people from Germany, and confined them to &quot;Zigeunerlager&quot; (Gypsy camps) for this purpose. Himmler ordered their deportation from Germany in December 1942, with few exceptions. A total of 23,000 Romani were deported to Auschwitz concentration camp, of whom 19,000 died. Outside of Germany, the Romani people were regularly used for forced labour, though many were murdered outright. In the Baltic states and the Soviet Union, 30,000 Romani were murdered by the SS, the German Army, and &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;. In occupied Serbia, 1,000 to 12,000 Romani were murdered, while nearly all 25,000 Romani living in the Independent State of Croatia were murdered. The estimates at end of the war put the total number of Romani victims at around 220,000, which equalled approximately 25 per cent of the Romani population in Europe.

=== Other persecuted groups ===
Action T4 was a programme of systematic murder of the physically and mentally handicapped and patients in psychiatric hospitals that took place mainly from 1939 to 1941, and continued until the end of the war. Initially the victims were shot by the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; and others; gas chambers and gas vans using carbon monoxide were used by early 1940. Under the Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring, enacted on 14 July 1933, over 400,000 individuals underwent compulsory sterilisation. Over half were those considered mentally deficient, which included not only people who scored poorly on intelligence tests, but those who deviated from expected standards of behaviour regarding thrift, sexual behaviour, and cleanliness. Most of the victims came from disadvantaged groups such as prostitutes, the poor, the homeless, and criminals. Other groups persecuted and murdered included Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, homosexuals, social misfits, and members of the political and religious opposition.

=== Generalplan Ost ===
Germany&#x27;s war in the East was based on Hitler&#x27;s long-standing view that Jews were the great enemy of the German people and that &quot;Lebensraum&quot; was needed for Germany&#x27;s expansion. Hitler focused his attention on Eastern Europe, aiming to conquer Poland and the Soviet Union. Hitler&#x27;s belief in the racial inferiority of Russians, as well as Slavs in general, had convinced him that a German conquest of Russia was inevitable. After the occupation of Poland in 1939, all Jews living in the General Government were confined to ghettos, and those who were physically fit were required to perform compulsory labour. In 1941 Hitler decided to destroy the Polish nation completely; within 15 to 20 years the General Government was to be cleared of ethnic Poles and resettled by German colonists. About 3.8 to 4 million Poles would remain as slaves, part of a slave labour force of 14 million the Nazis intended to create using citizens of conquered nations.

To determine who should be killed, Himmler created the &quot;Volksliste&quot;, a system of classification of people deemed to be of German blood. He ordered that those of Germanic descent who refused to be classified as ethnic Germans should be deported to concentration camps, have their children taken away, or be assigned to forced labour. The plan also included the kidnapping of children deemed to have Aryan-Nordic traits, who were presumed to be of German descent. The goal was to implement &quot;Generalplan Ost&quot; after the conquest of the Soviet Union, but when the invasion failed Hitler had to consider other options. One suggestion was a mass forced deportation of Jews to Poland, Palestine, or Madagascar.

In addition, the Nazis planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by 30 million people through starvation in an action called the Hunger Plan. Food supplies would be diverted to the German army and German civilians. Cities would be razed and the land allowed to return to forest or resettled by German colonists. Together, the Hunger Plan and &quot;Generalplan Ost&quot; would have led to the starvation of 80 million people in the Soviet Union. These partially fulfilled plans resulted in the democidal deaths of an estimated 19.3 million civilians and prisoners of war (POWs) throughout the USSR and elsewhere in Europe. During the course of the war, the Soviet Union lost a total of 27 million people; less than nine million of these were combat deaths. One in four of the Soviet population were killed or wounded.

=== The Holocaust and Final Solution ===
Around the time of the failed offensive against Moscow in December 1941, Hitler resolved that the Jews of Europe were to be exterminated immediately. While the murder of Jewish civilians had been ongoing in the occupied territories of Poland and the Soviet Union, plans for the total eradication of the Jewish population of Europe—eleven million people—were formalised at the Wannsee Conference on 20 January 1942. Some would be worked to death and the rest would be murdered in the implementation of the Final Solution to the Jewish Question. Initially the victims were murdered by &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; firing squads, then by stationary gas chambers or by gas vans, but these methods proved impractical for an operation of this scale. By 1942 extermination camps equipped with gas chambers were established at Auschwitz, Chełmno, Sobibor, Treblinka, and elsewhere. The total number of Jews murdered is estimated at 5.5 to six million, including over a million children.

The Allies received information about the murders from the Polish government-in-exile and Polish leadership in Warsaw, based mostly on intelligence from the Polish underground. German citizens had access to information about what was happening, as soldiers returning from the occupied territories reported on what they had seen and done. Historian Richard J. Evans states that most German citizens disapproved of the genocide.

=== Oppression of ethnic Poles ===
Poles were viewed by Nazis as subhuman non-Aryans, and during the German occupation of Poland 2.7 million ethnic Poles died. Polish civilians were subject to forced labour in German industry, internment, wholesale expulsions to make way for German colonists, and mass executions. The German authorities engaged in a systematic effort to destroy Polish culture and national identity. During operation AB-Aktion, many university professors and members of the Polish intelligentsia were arrested, transported to concentration camps, or executed. During the war, Poland lost an estimated 39 to 45 per cent of its physicians and dentists, 26 to 57 per cent of its lawyers, 15 to 30 per cent of its teachers, 30 to 40 per cent of its scientists and university professors, and 18 to 28 per cent of its clergy.

=== Mistreatment of Soviet POWs ===
The Nazis captured 5.75 million Soviet prisoners of war, more than they took from all the other Allied powers combined. Of these, they killed an estimated 3.3 million, with 2.8 million of them being killed between June 1941 and January 1942. Many POWs starved to death or resorted to cannibalism while being held in open-air pens at Auschwitz and elsewhere.

From 1942 onward, Soviet POWs were viewed as a source of forced labour, and received better treatment so they could work. By December 1944, 750,000 Soviet POWs were working, including in German armaments factories (in violation of the Hague and Geneva conventions), mines, and farms.

== Society ==
=== Education ===

Antisemitic legislation passed in 1933 led to the removal of all Jewish teachers, professors, and officials from the education system. Most teachers were required to belong to the &quot;Nationalsozialistischer Lehrerbund&quot; (NSLB; National Socialist Teachers League) and university professors were required to join the National Socialist German Lecturers. Teachers had to take an oath of loyalty and obedience to Hitler, and those who failed to show sufficient conformity to party ideals were often reported by students or fellow teachers and dismissed. Lack of funding for salaries led to many teachers leaving the profession. The average class size increased from 37 in 1927 to 43 in 1938 due to the resulting teacher shortage.

Frequent and often contradictory directives were issued by Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick, Bernhard Rust of the Reich Ministry of Science, Education and Culture, and other agencies regarding content of lessons and acceptable textbooks for use in primary and secondary schools. Books deemed unacceptable to the regime were removed from school libraries. Indoctrination in Nazi ideology was made compulsory in January 1934. Students selected as future members of the party elite were indoctrinated from the age of 12 at Adolf Hitler Schools for primary education and National Political Institutes of Education for secondary education. Detailed indoctrination of future holders of elite military rank was undertaken at Order Castles.

Primary and secondary education focused on racial biology, population policy, culture, geography, and physical fitness. The curriculum in most subjects, including biology, geography, and even arithmetic, was altered to change the focus to race. Military education became the central component of physical education, and education in physics was oriented toward subjects with military applications, such as ballistics and aerodynamics. Students were required to watch all films prepared by the school division of the Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda.

At universities, appointments to top posts were the subject of power struggles between the education ministry, the university boards, and the National Socialist German Students&#x27; League. In spite of pressure from the League and various government ministries, most university professors did not make changes to their lectures or syllabus during the Nazi period. This was especially true of universities located in predominantly Catholic regions. Enrolment at German universities declined from 104,000 students in 1931 to 41,000 in 1939, but enrolment in medical schools rose sharply as Jewish doctors had been forced to leave the profession, so medical graduates had good job prospects. From 1934, university students were required to attend frequent and time-consuming military training sessions run by the SA. First-year students also had to serve six months in a labour camp for the Reich Labour Service; an additional ten weeks service were required of second-year students.

=== Role of women and family ===

Women were a cornerstone of Nazi social policy. The Nazis opposed the feminist movement, claiming that it was the creation of Jewish intellectuals, instead advocating a patriarchal society in which the German woman would recognise that her &quot;world is her husband, her family, her children, and her home&quot;. Feminist groups were shut down or incorporated into the National Socialist Women&#x27;s League, which coordinated groups throughout the country to promote motherhood and household activities. Courses were offered on childrearing, sewing, and cooking. Prominent feminists, including Anita Augspurg, Lida Gustava Heymann, and Helene Stöcker, felt forced to live in exile. The League published the &quot;NS-Frauen-Warte&quot;, the only Nazi-approved women&#x27;s magazine in Nazi Germany; despite some propaganda aspects, it was predominantly an ordinary woman&#x27;s magazine.

Women were encouraged to leave the workforce, and the creation of large families by racially suitable women was promoted through propaganda campaigns. Women received a bronze award—known as the &quot;Ehrenkreuz der Deutschen Mutter&quot; (Cross of Honour of the German Mother)—for giving birth to four children, silver for six, and gold for eight or more. Large families received subsidies to help with expenses. Though the measures led to increases in the birth rate, the number of families having four or more children declined by five per cent between 1935 and 1940. Removing women from the workforce did not have the intended effect of freeing up jobs for men, as women were for the most part employed as domestic servants, weavers, or in the food and drink industries—jobs that were not of interest to men. Nazi philosophy prevented large numbers of women from being hired to work in munitions factories in the build-up to the war, so foreign labourers were brought in. After the war started, slave labourers were extensively used. In January 1943, Hitler signed a decree requiring all women under the age of fifty to report for work assignments to help the war effort. Thereafter women were funnelled into agricultural and industrial jobs, and by September 1944 14.9 million women were working in munitions production.

Nazi leaders endorsed the idea that rational and theoretical work was alien to a woman&#x27;s nature, and as such discouraged women from seeking higher education. A law passed in April 1933 limited the number of women admitted to university to ten per cent of the number of men. This resulted in female enrolment in secondary schools dropping from 437,000 in 1926 to 205,000 in 1937. The number of women enrolled in post-secondary schools dropped from 128,000 in 1933 to 51,000 in 1938. However, with the requirement that men be enlisted into the armed forces during the war, women comprised half of the enrolment in the post-secondary system by 1944.

Women were expected to be strong, healthy, and vital. The sturdy peasant woman who worked the land and bore strong children was considered ideal, and women were praised for being athletic and tanned from working outdoors. Organisations were created for the indoctrination of Nazi values. From 25 March 1939 membership in the Hitler Youth was made compulsory for all children over the age of ten. The &quot;Jungmädelbund&quot; (Young Girls League) section of the Hitler Youth was for girls age 10 to 14, and the &quot;Bund Deutscher Mädel&quot; (BDM; League of German Girls) for young women age 14 to 18. The BDM&#x27;s activities focused on physical education.

The Nazi regime promoted a liberal code of conduct regarding sexual matters and was sympathetic to women who bore children out of wedlock. Promiscuity increased as the war progressed, with unmarried soldiers often intimately involved with several women simultaneously. Soldiers&#x27; wives were frequently involved in extramarital relationships. Sex was sometimes used as a commodity to obtain better work from a foreign labourer. Pamphlets enjoined German women to avoid sexual relations with foreign workers as a danger to their blood.

With Hitler&#x27;s approval, Himmler intended that the new society of the Nazi regime should destigmatise illegitimate births, particularly of children fathered by members of the SS, who were vetted for racial purity. His hope was that each SS family would have between four and six children. The &quot;Lebensborn&quot; (Fountain of Life) association, founded by Himmler in 1935, created a series of maternity homes to accommodate single mothers during their pregnancies. Both parents were examined for racial suitability before acceptance. The resulting children were often adopted into SS families. The homes were also made available to the wives of SS and Nazi Party members, who quickly filled over half the available spots.

Existing laws banning abortion except for medical reasons were strictly enforced by the Nazi regime. The number of abortions declined from 35,000 per year at the start of the 1930s to fewer than 2,000 per year at the end of the decade, though in 1935 a law was passed allowing abortions for eugenics reasons.

=== Health ===

Nazi Germany had a strong anti-tobacco movement, as pioneering research by Franz H. Müller in 1939 demonstrated a causal link between smoking and lung cancer. The Reich Health Office took measures to try to limit smoking, including producing lectures and pamphlets. Smoking was banned in many workplaces, on trains, and among on-duty members of the military. Government agencies also worked to control other carcinogenic substances such as asbestos and pesticides. As part of a general public health campaign, water supplies were cleaned up, lead and mercury were removed from consumer products, and women were urged to undergo regular screenings for breast cancer.

Government-run health care insurance plans were available, but Jews were denied coverage starting in 1933. That same year, Jewish doctors were forbidden to treat government-insured patients. In 1937, Jewish doctors were forbidden to treat non-Jewish patients, and in 1938 their right to practice medicine was removed entirely.

Medical experiments, many of them pseudoscientific, were performed on concentration camp inmates beginning in 1941. The most notorious doctor to perform medical experiments was SS-&quot;Hauptsturmführer&quot; Josef Mengele, camp doctor at Auschwitz. Many of his victims died. Concentration camp inmates were made available for purchase by pharmaceutical companies for drug testing and other experiments.

=== Environmentalism ===

Nazi society had elements supportive of animal rights and many people were fond of zoos and wildlife. The government took several measures to ensure the protection of animals and the environment. In 1933, the Nazis enacted a stringent animal-protection law that affected what was allowed for medical research. The law was only loosely enforced, and in spite of a ban on vivisection, the Ministry of the Interior readily handed out permits for experiments on animals.

The Reich Forestry Office under Göring enforced regulations that required foresters to plant a variety of trees to ensure suitable habitat for wildlife, and a new Reich Animal Protection Act became law in 1933. The regime enacted the Reich Nature Protection Act in 1935 to protect the natural landscape from excessive economic development. It allowed for the expropriation of privately owned land to create nature preserves and aided in long-range planning. Perfunctory efforts were made to curb air pollution, but little enforcement was undertaken once the war began.

=== Religion ===
When the Nazis seized power in 1933, roughly 67 per cent of the population of Germany was Protestant, 33 per cent was Roman Catholic, while Jews made up less than 1 per cent. According to the 1939 census, taken following the annexation of Austria, 54 per cent of the population considered themselves Protestant, 40 per cent Roman Catholic, 3.5 per cent &quot;Gottgläubig&quot; (God-believing; a Nazi religious movement) and 1.5 per cent nonreligious. Nazi Germany extensively employed Christian imagery and instituted a variety of new Christian celebrations, such as a massive celebration marking the 1200th anniversary of the birth of Frankish emperor Charlemagne, who Christianized neighbouring continental Germanic peoples by force. Nazi propaganda stylised Hitler as a Christ-like messiah, a &quot;figure of redemption according to the Christian model&quot;, &quot;who would liberate the world from the Antichrist&quot;.

Under the &quot;Gleichschaltung&quot; process, Hitler attempted to create a unified Protestant Reich Church from Germany&#x27;s 28 existing Protestant state churches. Pro-Nazi Ludwig Müller was installed as Reich Bishop and the pro-Nazi pressure group German Christians gained control of the new church. They objected to the Old Testament because of its Jewish origins and demanded that converted Jews be barred from their church. Pastor Martin Niemöller responded with the formation of the Confessing Church, from which some clergymen opposed the Nazi regime. When in 1935 the Confessing Church synod protested the Nazi policy on religion, 700 of their pastors were arrested. Müller resigned and Hitler appointed Hanns Kerrl as Minister for Church Affairs to continue efforts to control Protestantism. In 1936, a Confessing Church envoy protested to Hitler against the religious persecutions and human rights abuses. Hundreds more pastors were arrested. The church continued to resist and by early 1937 Hitler abandoned his hope of uniting the Protestant churches. Niemöller was arrested on 1 July 1937 and spent most of the next seven years in Sachsenhausen concentration camp and Dachau. Theological universities were closed and pastors and theologians of other Protestant denominations were also arrested.
Persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany followed the Nazi takeover. Hitler moved quickly to eliminate political Catholicism, rounding up functionaries of the Catholic-aligned Bavarian People&#x27;s Party and Catholic Centre Party, which along with all other non-Nazi political parties ceased to exist by July. The &quot;Reichskonkordat&quot; (Reich Concordat) treaty with the Vatican was signed in 1933, amid continuing harassment of the church in Germany. The treaty required the regime to honour the independence of Catholic institutions and prohibited clergy from involvement in politics. Hitler routinely disregarded the Concordat, closing all Catholic institutions whose functions were not strictly religious. Clergy, nuns and lay leaders were targeted, with thousands of arrests over the ensuing years, often on trumped-up charges of currency smuggling or immorality. Several Catholic leaders were targeted in the 1934 Night of the Long Knives assassinations. Most Catholic youth groups refused to dissolve themselves and Hitler Youth leader Baldur von Schirach encouraged members to attack Catholic boys in the streets. Propaganda campaigns claimed the church was corrupt, restrictions were placed on public meetings and Catholic publications faced censorship. Catholic schools were required to reduce religious instruction and crucifixes were removed from state buildings.

Pope Pius XI had the &quot;Mit brennender Sorge&quot; (&quot;With Burning Concern&quot;) encyclical smuggled into Germany for Passion Sunday 1937 and read from every pulpit as it denounced the systematic hostility of the regime toward the church. In response, Goebbels renewed the regime&#x27;s crackdown and propaganda against Catholics. Enrolment in denominational schools dropped sharply and by 1939 all such schools were disbanded or converted to public facilities. Later Catholic protests included the 22 March 1942 pastoral letter by the German bishops on &quot;The Struggle against Christianity and the Church&quot;. About 30 per cent of Catholic priests were disciplined by police during the Nazi era. A vast security network spied on clergy and priests were frequently denounced, arrested or sent to concentration camps – many to the dedicated clergy barracks at Dachau. In the areas of Poland annexed in 1939, the Nazis instigated a brutal suppression and systematic dismantling of the Catholic Church.

Alfred Rosenberg, head of the Nazi Party Office of Foreign Affairs and Hitler&#x27;s appointed cultural and educational leader for Nazi Germany, considered Catholicism to be among the Nazis&#x27; chief enemies. He planned the &quot;extermination of the foreign Christian faiths imported into Germany&quot;, and for the Bible and Christian cross to be replaced in all churches, cathedrals, and chapels with copies of &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; and the swastika. Other sects of Christianity were also targeted, with Chief of the Nazi Party Chancellery Martin Bormann publicly proclaiming in 1941, &quot;National Socialism and Christianity are irreconcilable.&quot;

== Culture ==

The regime promoted the concept of &quot;Volksgemeinschaft&quot;, a national German ethnic community. The goal was to build a classless society based on racial purity and the perceived need to prepare for warfare, conquest and a struggle against Marxism. The German Labour Front founded the &quot;Kraft durch Freude&quot; (KdF; Strength Through Joy) organisation in 1933. As well as taking control of tens of thousands of privately run recreational clubs, it offered highly regimented holidays and entertainment such as cruises, vacation destinations and concerts.

The &quot;Reichskulturkammer&quot; (Reich Chamber of Culture) was organised under the control of the Propaganda Ministry in September 1933. Sub-chambers were set up to control aspects of cultural life such as film, radio, newspapers, fine arts, music, theatre and literature. Members of these professions were required to join their respective organisation. Jews and people considered politically unreliable were prevented from working in the arts, and many emigrated. Books and scripts had to be approved by the Propaganda Ministry prior to publication. Standards deteriorated as the regime sought to use cultural outlets exclusively as propaganda.

Radio became popular in Germany during the 1930s; over 70 per cent of households owned a receiver by 1939, more than any other country. By July 1933, radio station staffs were purged of leftists and others deemed undesirable. Propaganda and speeches were typical radio fare immediately after the seizure of power, but as time went on Goebbels insisted that more music be played so that listeners would not turn to foreign broadcasters for entertainment.
=== Censorship ===
Newspapers, like other media, were controlled by the state; the Reich Press Chamber shut down or bought newspapers and publishing houses. By 1939, over two-thirds of the newspapers and magazines were directly owned by the Propaganda Ministry. The Nazi Party daily newspaper, the &quot;Völkischer Beobachter&quot; (&quot;Ethnic Observer&quot;), was edited by Rosenberg. Goebbels controlled the wire services and insisted that all newspapers in Germany only publish content favourable to the regime. Under Goebbels, the Propaganda Ministry issued two dozen directives every week on exactly what news should be published and what angles to use; the typical newspaper followed the directives closely, especially regarding what to omit. Newspaper readership plummeted, partly because of the decreased quality of the content and partly because of the surge in popularity of radio. Propaganda became less effective towards the end of the war, as people were able to obtain information outside of official channels.

Many authors left the country and some wrote material critical of the regime while in exile. Goebbels recommended that the remaining authors concentrate on books themed on Germanic myths and the concept of blood and soil. By the end of 1933, over a thousand books—most of them by Jewish authors or featuring Jewish characters—had been banned by the Nazi regime. Nazi book burnings took place; nineteen such events were held on the night of 10 May 1933. Tens of thousands of books from dozens of figures, including Albert Einstein, Sigmund Freud, Helen Keller, Alfred Kerr, Marcel Proust, Erich Maria Remarque, Upton Sinclair, Jakob Wassermann, H. G. Wells, and Émile Zola were publicly burned. Pacifist works, and literature espousing liberal, democratic values were targeted for destruction, as well as any writings supporting the Weimar Republic or those written by Jewish authors.

=== Architecture and art ===

Hitler took a personal interest in architecture and worked closely with state architects Paul Troost and Albert Speer to create public buildings in a neoclassical style based on Roman architecture. Speer constructed imposing structures such as the Nazi party rally grounds in Nuremberg and a new Reich Chancellery building in Berlin. Hitler&#x27;s plans for rebuilding Berlin included a gigantic dome based on the Pantheon in Rome and a triumphal arch more than double the height of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. Neither structure was built.

Hitler&#x27;s belief that abstract, Dadaist, expressionist and modern art were decadent became the basis for policy. Many art museum directors lost their posts in 1933 and were replaced by party members. Some 6,500 modern works of art were removed from museums and replaced with works chosen by a Nazi jury. Exhibitions of the rejected pieces, under titles such as &quot;Decadence in Art&quot;, were launched in sixteen different cities by 1935. The Degenerate Art Exhibition, organised by Goebbels, ran in Munich from July to November 1937. The exhibition proved wildly popular, attracting over two million visitors.

Composer Richard Strauss was appointed president of the &quot;Reichsmusikkammer&quot; (Reich Music Chamber) on its founding in November 1933. As was the case with other art forms, the Nazis ostracised musicians who were deemed racially unacceptable and for the most part disapproved of music that was too modern or atonal. Jazz was considered especially inappropriate and foreign jazz musicians left the country or were expelled. Hitler favoured the music of Richard Wagner, especially pieces based on Germanic myths and heroic stories, and attended the Bayreuth Festival each year from 1933 to 1942.

=== Film ===

Movies were popular in Germany in the 1930s and 1940s, with admissions of over a billion people in 1942, 1943, and 1944. By 1934, German regulations restricting currency exports made it impossible for US film makers to take their profits back to America, so the major film studios closed their German branches. Exports of German films plummeted, as their antisemitic content made them impossible to show in other countries. The two largest film companies, Universum Film AG and Tobis, were purchased by the Propaganda Ministry, which by 1939 was producing most German films. The productions were not always overtly propagandistic, but generally had a political subtext and followed party lines regarding themes and content. Scripts were pre-censored.

Leni Riefenstahl&#x27;s &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot; (1935)—documenting the 1934 Nuremberg Rally—and &quot;Olympia&quot; (1938)—covering the 1936 Summer Olympics—pioneered techniques of camera movement and editing that influenced later films. New techniques such as telephoto lenses and cameras mounted on tracks were employed. Both films remain controversial, as their aesthetic merit is inseparable from their propagandising of Nazi ideals.

== Legacy ==

The Allied powers organised war crimes trials, beginning with the Nuremberg trials, held from November 1945 to October 1946, of 23 top Nazi officials. They were charged with conspiracy to commit crimes, crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. All but three were found guilty and twelve were sentenced to death. Twelve subsequent Nuremberg trials of 184 defendants were held between 1946 and 1949. Between 1946 and 1949, the Allies investigated 3,887 cases, of which 489 were brought to trial. The result was convictions of 1,426 people; 297 of these were sentenced to death and 279 to life in prison, with the remainder receiving lesser sentences. About 65 per cent of the death sentences were carried out. Poland was more active than other nations in investigating war crimes, for example prosecuting 673 of the total 789 Auschwitz staff brought to trial.

The political programme espoused by Hitler and the Nazis brought about a world war, leaving behind a devastated and impoverished Europe. Germany itself suffered wholesale destruction, characterised as (Zero Hour). The number of civilians killed during the Second World War was unprecedented in the history of warfare. As a result, Nazi ideology and the actions taken by the regime are almost universally regarded as gravely immoral. Historians, philosophers, and politicians often use the word &quot;evil&quot; to describe Hitler and the Nazi regime. Interest in Nazi Germany continues in the media and the academic world. While Evans remarks that the era &quot;exerts an almost universal appeal because its murderous racism stands as a warning to the whole of humanity&quot;, young neo-Nazis enjoy the shock value that Nazi symbols or slogans provide. The display or use of Nazi symbolism is illegal in Germany and Austria.

Nazi Germany was succeeded by three states: West Germany (the Federal Republic of Germany or &quot;FRG&quot;), East Germany (the German Democratic Republic or &quot;GDR&quot;), and Austria.
The process of denazification initiated by the Allies was only partially successful, as the need for experts in such fields as medicine and engineering was too great. However, expression of Nazi views was frowned upon, and those who expressed such views were frequently dismissed from their jobs. From the immediate post-war period through the 1950s, Germans kept quiet about their wartime experiences and felt a sense of communal guilt.

The trial of Adolf Eichmann in 1961 and the broadcast of the television miniseries &quot;Holocaust&quot; in 1978 brought the process of (coping with the past) to the forefront for many Germans. Once study of Nazi Germany was introduced into the school curriculum starting in the 1970s, people began researching the experiences of their family members. Study of the era and a willingness to critically examine its mistakes has led to the development of a strong democracy in Germany, but with lingering undercurrents of antisemitism and neo-Nazi thought.

In 2017, a Körber Foundation survey found that just 47 per cent of 14 to 16-year-olds polled knew what Auschwitz was. The journalist Alan Posener attributed the country&#x27;s &quot;growing historical amnesia&quot; in part to a failure by German film and television to reflect the country&#x27;s history accurately.

== See also ==

*Collaboration with the Axis powers
*European interwar dictatorships
*Glossary of Nazi Germany
*List of Nazi Party leaders and officials
*Nazi songs
*Orders, decorations, and medals of Nazi Germany
*Sonderweg
*Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany

== References ==
=== Explanatory notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


== External links ==
*
*German Propaganda Archive hosted by Calvin College</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="0" end="12" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="38" end="50" title="Nazi Germany" label="German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="65" end="85" title="Nazi Germany" label="Greater German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206012" start="95" end="107" title="German Reich" label="German state"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="136" end="148" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="157" end="167" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="215" end="240" title="Totalitarianism" label="totalitarian dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="246" end="257" title="Nazi Germany" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="398" end="415" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="435" end="448" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="514" end="533" title="Nazi Germany" label="Thousand-Year Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="584" end="590" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="633" end="639" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="641" end="670" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="ending World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="700" end="721" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="744" end="763" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="786" end="801" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305909" start="1001" end="1023" title="1934 German referendum" label="1934 German referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q484079" start="1055" end="1061" title="Führer" label="Führer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1301" end="1317" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="1428" end="1444" title="deficit spending" label="deficit spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q320008" start="1520" end="1530" title="Reichsautobahn" label="Autobahnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q702246" start="1563" end="1588" title="German rearmament" label="secret rearmament program"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="1608" end="1617" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q176495" start="1822" end="1829" title="Federal State of Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="1843" end="1852" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="1898" end="1909" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="1951" end="1972" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="a non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1982" end="1994" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="1999" end="2013" title="Invasion of Poland" label="invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="2045" end="2067" title="European theatre of World War II" label="World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="2086" end="2091" title="Fascist Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="2102" end="2113" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="2187" end="2193" title="Racism" label="Racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q701673" start="2195" end="2208" title="Nazi eugenics" label="Nazi eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406911" start="2210" end="2222" title="anti-Slavism" label="anti-Slavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2239" end="2251" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2305" end="2321" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="2367" end="2378" title="master race" label="master race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2423" end="2427" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="2429" end="2442" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="2444" end="2449" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="2451" end="2462" title="homosexuals" label="homosexuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="2464" end="2472" title="liberalism" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="2474" end="2484" title="socialists" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2486" end="2496" title="communists" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="2525" end="2549" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2551" end="2561" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q250452" start="2573" end="2588" title="refusal of work" label="refused to work"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="2642" end="2650" title="Deportation" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q327401" start="2702" end="2728" title="German resistance to Nazism" label="opposed Hitler&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="2789" end="2803" title="scientific racism" label="racial biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q474862" start="2905" end="2919" title="Women in Nazi Germany" label="were curtailed"/>
<link wikidata="Q158689" start="2921" end="2945" title="Nazi Propaganda Ministry" label="Nazi Propaganda Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839017" start="2966" end="2985" title="antisemitic canards" label="antisemitic canards"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616778" start="3027" end="3056" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s cult of personality" label="pervasive cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="3218" end="3226" title="Genocide" label="Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="3228" end="3239" title="mass murder" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="3245" end="3270" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="large-scale forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="3373" end="3386" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="3418" end="3433" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="German invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q156115" start="3509" end="3524" title="Generalplan Ost" label="Generalplan Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q546403" start="3535" end="3546" title="Hunger Plan" label="Hunger Plan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3563" end="3583" title="War of extermination#Nazi warfare" label="war of extermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="3971" end="3982" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="capitulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="4189" end="4203" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="4281" end="4297" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226389" start="4656" end="4672" title="Das Dritte Reich" label="Das Dritte Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q77466" start="4695" end="4723" title="Arthur Moeller van den Bruck" label="Arthur Moeller van den Bruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4746" end="4763" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q960541" start="4777" end="4782" title="Reich" label="Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="4791" end="4804" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4889" end="4900" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q687013" start="4926" end="4946" title="World War I reparations" label="reparations payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="4971" end="4991" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="5265" end="5297" title="Occupation of the Ruhr" label="occupied German industrial areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="5308" end="5312" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="5356" end="5401" title="Nazi Party" label="National Socialist German Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q217334" start="5462" end="5481" title="National Socialist Program" label="Nazi party platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="5574" end="5586" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q472940" start="5597" end="5607" title="Bolshevism" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="5668" end="5678" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5834" end="5838" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="5965" end="5994" title="Völkisch movement" label="&amp;quot;Völkisch&amp;quot; movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="6054" end="6068" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Sturmabteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="6334" end="6341" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q58860" start="6411" end="6433" title="Gustav Ritter von Kahr" label="Gustav Ritter von Kahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="6479" end="6494" title="Wall Street crash of 1929" label="crashed in 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q702170" start="6907" end="6931" title="German federal election, July 1932" label="federal election of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="6966" end="6975" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="7391" end="7410" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="7431" end="7452" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153992" start="7599" end="7631" title="Reichstag fire" label="Reichstag building was set afire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157888" start="7633" end="7654" title="Marinus van der Lubbe" label="Marinus van der Lubbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q696629" start="7794" end="7815" title="Reichstag Fire Decree" label="Reichstag Fire Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="8211" end="8237" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q310218" start="8276" end="8288" title="Enabling Act of 1933" label="Enabling Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="8310" end="8329" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="8693" end="8710" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="9229" end="9244" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q257313" start="9269" end="9305" title="Law Against the Formation of Parties" label="Law Against the Formation of Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q638389" start="9526" end="9542" title="November 1933 German parliamentary election" label="in November 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q389024" start="9544" end="9548" title="1936 German parliamentary election and referendum" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q447420" start="9554" end="9558" title="1938 German parliamentary election and referendum" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q900013" start="9884" end="9891" title="May Day" label="May Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q457260" start="10120" end="10177" title="Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service" label="Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48160" start="10527" end="10562" title="Flag of Germany" label="black, red, and gold tricolour flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073388" start="10726" end="10739" title="swastika flag" label="swastika flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q154059" start="10837" end="10854" title="Horst-Wessel-Lied" label="Horst-Wessel-Lied"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="11021" end="11037" title="balance of trade" label="balance of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="11066" end="11082" title="deficit spending" label="deficit spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="11386" end="11399" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="11415" end="11422" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484212" start="11483" end="11492" title="Stabschef" label="Stabschef"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="11516" end="11526" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q76638" start="11620" end="11635" title="Gregor Strasser" label="Gregor Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q57133" start="11658" end="11677" title="Kurt von Schleicher" label="Kurt von Schleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="11797" end="11821" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q19208438" start="11911" end="11963" title="Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich" label="Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q484079" start="12216" end="12240" title="Führer" label="Führer und Reichskanzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898371" start="12549" end="12586" title="Hitler oath" label="affirmed loyalty to Hitler personally"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305909" start="12763" end="12773" title="German referendum, 1934" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="12968" end="12983" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="13349" end="13372" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="13423" end="13429" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="13683" end="13697" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q238651" start="14294" end="14305" title="world peace" label="world peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="14352" end="14373" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q691249" start="14544" end="14572" title="World Disarmament Conference" label="World Disarmament Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="14581" end="14598" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551458" start="14692" end="14721" title="German referendum, 1933" label="a referendum held in November"/>
<link wikidata="Q170361" start="15027" end="15035" title="Territory of the Saar Basin" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="15265" end="15275" title="Reichswehr" label="Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q707678" start="15390" end="15418" title="Anglo-German Naval Agreement" label="Anglo-German Naval Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="15454" end="15474" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="invasion of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826038" start="15572" end="15613" title="Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance" label="Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="15702" end="15711" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="16014" end="16033" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="16233" end="16249" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="16257" end="16274" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153324" start="16313" end="16326" title="Condor Legion" label="Condor Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170351" start="16430" end="16460" title="Bombing of Guernica" label="destroyed the city of Guernica"/>
<link wikidata="Q738635" start="16655" end="16671" title="Kurt Schuschnigg" label="Kurt Schuschnigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="17037" end="17063" title="First Czechoslovak Republic" label="Republic of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="17135" end="17146" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q678584" start="17197" end="17217" title="Sudeten German Party" label="Sudeten German Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="17740" end="17759" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="17819" end="17835" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q566448" start="18301" end="18327" title="Reichswerke Hermann Göring" label="Reichswerke Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q126413" start="18482" end="18513" title="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression" label="non-aggression pact with Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="18564" end="18583" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q156654" start="18592" end="18607" title="Polish Corridor" label="Polish Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="18640" end="18652" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="19301" end="19323" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="19398" end="19421" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="19870" end="19882" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="19944" end="19959" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="20103" end="20110" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="20611" end="20633" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Germany invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="20902" end="20919" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q684065" start="20940" end="20958" title="Sicherheitspolizei" label="Sicherheitspolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="20999" end="21016" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q312490" start="21232" end="21242" title="Madagascar Plan" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q702638" start="21250" end="21275" title="Operation Tannenberg" label="lists prepared in advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="21480" end="21490" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190882" start="21615" end="21625" title="Phoney War" label="Phoney War"/>
<link wikidata="Q115702" start="21663" end="21679" title="Blockade of Germany (1939–45)" label="British blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="21967" end="21997" title="Operation Weserübung" label="invasion of Denmark and Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308186" start="22023" end="22057" title="German invasion of Denmark (1940)" label="Denmark fell after less than a day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="22065" end="22088" title="Norwegian Campaign" label="most of Norway followed"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="22137" end="22159" title="German occupation of Norway" label="occupied all of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="22281" end="22297" title="Battle of France" label="attack on France"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="22306" end="22319" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13435464" start="22344" end="22354" title="Invasion of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649081" start="22363" end="22374" title="Battle of the Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q697625" start="22407" end="22414" title="Battle of Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="22416" end="22438" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="forcing the evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="22476" end="22483" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="22506" end="22540" title="Armistice of 22 June 1940" label="surrendering to Germany on 22 June"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="22694" end="22710" title="Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907" label="Hague Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="22800" end="22808" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="23089" end="23101" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="23323" end="23340" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q57154" start="23383" end="23395" title="Erich Raeder" label="Erich Raeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="23481" end="23500" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="23550" end="23565" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="23612" end="23629" title="The Blitz" label="nightly air raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="23659" end="23665" title="London Blitz" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205768" start="23667" end="23675" title="Plymouth Blitz" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875586" start="23681" end="23689" title="Coventry Blitz" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="23765" end="23782" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757127" start="24023" end="24036" title="Andrew Gordon (naval historian)" label="Andrew Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="24205" end="24217" title="Afrika Korps" label="Afrika Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="24235" end="24240" title="Italian Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="24268" end="24290" title="North African Campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="24324" end="24346" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="24351" end="24357" title="Battle of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="24745" end="24765" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="25142" end="25148" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="25157" end="25164" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="25175" end="25182" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162357" start="25205" end="25223" title="Battle of Smolensk (1941)" label="Battle of Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="25258" end="25275" title="Army Group Centre" label="Army Group Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="25377" end="25386" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="25391" end="25395" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="25421" end="25429" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="25531" end="25561" title="Battle of Moscow" label="ended disastrously in December"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="25589" end="25610" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attacked Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217354" start="25929" end="25944" title="Plenipotentiary" label="Plenipotentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q704959" start="25952" end="25966" title="Four Year Plan" label="Four Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="25968" end="25982" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q158287" start="26297" end="26306" title="Fall Blau" label="Fall Blau"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="26492" end="26502" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q161213" start="26550" end="26558" title="6th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="6th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="27101" end="27116" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="27246" end="27258" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="27343" end="27361" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704274" start="27537" end="27563" title="Defence of the Reich" label="operations against Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q897509" start="27704" end="27735" title="Peenemünde Army Research Center" label="Peenemünde Army Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="27743" end="27746" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="27751" end="27754" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="28167" end="28172" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="28185" end="28193" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="28198" end="28210" title="20 July plot" label="20 July 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="28366" end="28384" title="Ardennes Offensive" label="Ardennes Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q57814" start="28729" end="28748" title="Otto Georg Thierack" label="Otto Georg Thierack"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="29090" end="29104" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="29135" end="29147" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="29211" end="29227" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153491" start="29305" end="29317" title="Führerbunker" label="Führerbunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q698208" start="29417" end="29434" title="Reich Chancellery" label="Reich Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q76433" start="29456" end="29465" title="Eva Braun" label="Eva Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993476" start="29466" end="29483" title="Death of Adolf Hitler" label="committed suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q57271" start="29503" end="29519" title="Helmuth Weidling" label="Helmuth Weidling"/>
<link wikidata="Q157594" start="29573" end="29587" title="Vasily Chuikov" label="Vasily Chuikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q76437" start="29627" end="29638" title="Karl Dönitz" label="Karl Dönitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q57202" start="29714" end="29719" title="Magda Goebbels" label="Magda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293505" start="29773" end="29785" title="Goebbels children" label="six children"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="29888" end="29918" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="German Instrument of Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="29980" end="30009" title="end of World War II in Europe" label="end of World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784091" start="30559" end="30586" title="Mass suicide in Demmin" label="committed suicide in Demmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210633" start="30625" end="30646" title="2nd Belorussian Front" label="2nd Belorussian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958" start="30871" end="30885" title="Neubrandenburg" label="Neubrandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q105048" start="30898" end="30914" title="Słupsk" label="Stolp in Pommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q107918" start="31132" end="31148" title="Rüdiger Overmans" label="Rüdiger Overmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376016" start="31296" end="31309" title="Richard Overy" label="Richard Overy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154494" start="31560" end="31583" title="Aktion T4" label="Nazi euthanasia program"/>
<link wikidata="Q896060" start="31615" end="31628" title="Sondergericht" label="Sondergericht"/>
<link wikidata="Q327401" start="31673" end="31690" title="German resistance to Nazism" label="German resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q536034" start="31758" end="31784" title="Rape during the occupation of Germany" label="Mass rapes of German women"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="31944" end="31959" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q164071" start="31961" end="31979" title="Northern Schleswig" label="Northern Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q161334" start="31985" end="31990" title="Klaipėda Region" label="Memel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201" start="31996" end="32004" title="Saarland" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q310293" start="32012" end="32026" title="Saar Protectorate" label="a protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156654" start="32223" end="32238" title="Polish Corridor" label="Polish Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="32296" end="32323" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Danzig was made a free city"/>
<link wikidata="Q571893" start="32595" end="32607" title="1939 German ultimatum to Lithuania" label="Under threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="32722" end="32736" title="Invasion of Poland" label="invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644947" start="32738" end="32745" title="Invasion of Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="32747" end="32753" title="Operation Weserübung" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="32755" end="32761" title="Battle of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q13435464" start="32763" end="32773" title="Invasion of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649081" start="32775" end="32790" title="Battle of the Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q697625" start="32792" end="32799" title="Battle of Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="32801" end="32811" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="32813" end="32819" title="Battle of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="32825" end="32841" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036446" start="32851" end="32887" title="Slovene Lands in World War II" label="annexed parts of northern Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="32925" end="32932" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="32934" end="32945" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="32951" end="32957" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914778" start="33128" end="33150" title="Greater Germanic Reich" label="Greater Germanic Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252884" start="33245" end="33248" title="Gau (country subdivision)" label="Gau"/>
<link wikidata="Q543813" start="33286" end="33304" title="Reichskommissariat" label="Reichskommissariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="33458" end="33493" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156031" start="33501" end="33527" title="Reichskommissariat Ostland" label="Reichskommissariat Ostland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46315" start="33590" end="33616" title="Reichskommissariat Ukraine" label="Reichskommissariat Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18701358" start="33695" end="33749" title="Military Administration in Belgium and Northern France" label="Military Administration in Belgium and Northern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514886" start="33759" end="33772" title="Eupen-Malmedy" label="Eupen-Malmedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="33886" end="33904" title="General Government" label="General Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q335200" start="33991" end="34018" title="Reichskommissariat Norwegen" label="Reichskommissariat Norwegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q596214" start="34054" end="34084" title="Reichskommissariat Niederlande" label="Reichskommissariat Niederlande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448131" start="34262" end="34293" title="Italian protectorate of Albania (1939–1943)" label="Italian protectorate of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q616992" start="34302" end="34335" title="Italian governorate of Montenegro" label="Italian governorate of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589262" start="34358" end="34377" title="Government of National Salvation" label="a puppet government"/>
<link wikidata="Q701914" start="34381" end="34396" title="Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia" label="occupied Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="34466" end="34473" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="34876" end="34892" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="34921" end="34931" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q717939" start="35076" end="35090" title="racial hygiene" label="racial hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="35096" end="35104" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q155812" start="35129" end="35142" title="pan-Germanism" label="pan-Germanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="35393" end="35398" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="35458" end="35469" title="master race" label="master race"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="35484" end="35500" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jewish-Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q282728" start="35637" end="35656" title="International Jewry" label="International Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142150" start="35678" end="35699" title="life unworthy of life" label="life unworthy of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="35760" end="35773" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q718858" start="35775" end="35786" title="Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany and the Holocaust" label="homosexuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644355" start="35788" end="35812" title="Persecution of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses in Nazi Germany" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="35848" end="35858" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35864" end="35896" title="Anti-Masonry#Nazi Germany and occupied Europe" label="heavily monitored and persecuted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35917" end="35946" title="Völkisch movement#Influence on Nazism" label="&amp;quot;Völkisch&amp;quot; movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="35980" end="35989" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q699962" start="36199" end="36209" title="Blutfahne" label="Blood Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q160225" start="36234" end="36252" title="Nuremberg Rally" label="Nazi Party rallies"/>
<link wikidata="Q706501" start="36390" end="36403" title="Führerprinzip" label="Führerprinzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="36750" end="36769" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q646040" start="37826" end="37843" title="Reichsstatthalter" label="Reichsstatthalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712151" start="37923" end="37941" title="States of the Weimar Republic" label="constituent states"/>
<link wikidata="Q440902" start="37981" end="38005" title="Administrative divisions of Nazi Germany" label="administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451250" start="38061" end="38070" title="Gauleiter" label="Gauleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="39152" end="39165" title="Deputy Führer" label="Deputy Führer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="39166" end="39177" title="Rudolf Hess" label="Rudolf Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q312506" start="39781" end="39797" title="Volksgerichtshof" label="Volksgerichtshof"/>
<link wikidata="Q565284" start="40494" end="40507" title="Rassenschande" label="Rassenschande"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="41497" end="41506" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="41554" end="41558" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="41579" end="41591" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="41620" end="41629" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="42122" end="42136" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="42322" end="42335" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="42980" end="42990" title="Blitzkrieg" label="Blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="43723" end="43737" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Sturmabteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="44067" end="44077" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q70992" start="44383" end="44402" title="Werner von Blomberg" label="Werner von Blomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="44743" end="44756" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q162312" start="44878" end="44893" title="Reichsführer-SS" label="Reichsführer-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="45090" end="45099" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="45281" end="45313" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="High Command of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="45832" end="45846" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312204" start="46120" end="46140" title="SS-Totenkopfverbände" label="SS-Totenkopfverbände"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="46205" end="46223" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="46396" end="46413" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q151691" start="46937" end="46952" title="Hjalmar Schacht" label="Hjalmar Schacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q560183" start="46971" end="46981" title="Reichsbank" label="Reichsbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q520987" start="47137" end="47147" title="Mefo bills" label="Mefo bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q161168" start="47680" end="47702" title="Junkers" label="Junkers Aircraft Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="48273" end="48292" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="48535" end="48544" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q505191" start="48636" end="48641" title="Leuna" label="Leuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="48896" end="48903" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q320008" start="49058" end="49068" title="Reichsautobahn" label="Autobahnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57249" start="49814" end="49831" title="Ferdinand Porsche" label="Ferdinand Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q157329" start="49880" end="49900" title="Strength Through Joy" label="Strength Through Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57583" start="49997" end="50021" title="International Motor Show Germany" label="International Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="50213" end="50223" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312526" start="50676" end="50695" title="German Labour Front" label="German Labour Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q58645" start="50749" end="50759" title="Robert Ley" label="Robert Ley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217354" start="51323" end="51338" title="Plenipotentiary" label="Plenipotentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308177" start="51525" end="51548" title="wage and price controls" label="wage and price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="51580" end="51594" title="stock dividend" label="stock dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="52348" end="52361" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376016" start="52423" end="52436" title="Richard Overy" label="Richard Overy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994254" start="52484" end="52519" title="Economy of the Soviet Union" label="command economy of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="52528" end="52566" title="Economy of the United States" label="capitalist system of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q57149" start="52616" end="52626" title="Fritz Todt" label="Fritz Todt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="52890" end="52912" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="53093" end="53124" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="using forced labour and slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="53207" end="53219" title="slave labour" label="slave labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q10512400" start="53774" end="53788" title="Foreign worker" label="Foreign worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="54454" end="54471" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909622" start="54486" end="54542" title="Oil Campaign of World War II" label="targeted refineries producing synthetic oil and gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="55083" end="55095" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="55244" end="55255" title="master race" label="master race"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="55325" end="55330" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466036" start="55755" end="55792" title="Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses" label="national boycott of Jewish businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q457260" start="55798" end="55855" title="Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service" label="Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q650112" start="56269" end="56316" title="National Socialist German Students&amp;#x27; League" label="National Socialist German Students&amp;#x27; League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927614" start="56389" end="56401" title="Nazi book burnings" label="book burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q313863" start="56790" end="56808" title="Herschel Grynszpan" label="Herschel Grynszpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76883" start="56826" end="56840" title="Ernst vom Rath" label="Ernst vom Rath"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="56987" end="56993" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="57212" end="57225" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q661547" start="57944" end="57961" title="Haavara Agreement" label="Haavara Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="58137" end="58143" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q840648" start="58404" end="58409" title="Sinti" label="Sinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q160143" start="58557" end="58563" title="Bełżec extermination camp" label="Bełżec"/>
<link wikidata="Q152658" start="58565" end="58572" title="Sobibor extermination camp" label="Sobibor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="58577" end="58586" title="Treblinka" label="Treblinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q327895" start="58659" end="58670" title="Łódź Ghetto" label="Łódź Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q160152" start="58791" end="58817" title="Chełmno extermination camp" label="Chełmno extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="59105" end="59133" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q701914" start="59403" end="59418" title="Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia" label="occupied Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="59503" end="59531" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="60035" end="60046" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q152982" start="60052" end="60059" title="Nazi gas van" label="gas van"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="60067" end="60082" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518946" start="60118" end="60175" title="Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring" label="Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="60237" end="60261" title="compulsory sterilisation" label="compulsory sterilisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60716" end="60765" title="Holocaust#The political left" label="members of the political and religious opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="60792" end="60822" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s war in the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="61139" end="61147" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="61160" end="61165" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583015" start="61344" end="61351" title="Ghettos in Nazi-occupied Europe" label="ghettos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836025" start="61550" end="61573" title="Expulsion of Poles by Nazi Germany" label="cleared of ethnic Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q481516" start="61833" end="61843" title="Volksliste" label="Volksliste"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833200" start="62142" end="62164" title="Kidnapping of children for forced Germanization by Nazi Germany" label="kidnapping of children"/>
<link wikidata="Q714773" start="62186" end="62192" title="Nordic race" label="Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q546403" start="62645" end="62656" title="Hunger Plan" label="Hunger Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186609" start="63009" end="63018" title="democide" label="democidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="63069" end="63085" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4374773" start="63172" end="63218" title="World War II casualties of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union lost a total of 27 million people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893461" start="63448" end="63463" title="Reich Chancellery meeting of 12 December 1941" label="Hitler resolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q152120" start="63751" end="63769" title="Wannsee Conference" label="Wannsee Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q321194" start="63804" end="63819" title="Extermination through labour" label="worked to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="63880" end="63917" title="Final Solution to the Jewish Question" label="Final Solution to the Jewish Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q154494" start="64008" end="64031" title="Aktion T4" label="stationary gas chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152982" start="64038" end="64046" title="gas vans" label="gas vans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="64192" end="64201" title="Auschwitz II" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160152" start="64203" end="64210" title="Chełmno extermination camp" label="Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="64412" end="64438" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="64510" end="64528" title="Polish underground" label="Polish underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q607427" start="64701" end="64717" title="Richard J. Evans" label="Richard J. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="64889" end="64909" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–45)" label="occupation of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="65008" end="65018" title="internment" label="internment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836025" start="65020" end="65040" title="Expulsion of Poles by Nazi Germany" label="wholesale expulsions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350719" start="65143" end="65175" title="Polish culture during World War II" label="effort to destroy Polish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q286474" start="65216" end="65225" title="AB-Aktion" label="AB-Aktion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="66250" end="66255" title="Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907" label="Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="66260" end="66278" title="Geneva conventions" label="Geneva conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q323119" start="66519" end="66553" title="National Socialist Teachers League" label="Nationalsozialistischer Lehrerbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969308" start="66655" end="66690" title="National Socialist German Lecturers League" label="National Socialist German Lecturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q57698" start="67159" end="67172" title="Bernhard Rust" label="Bernhard Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q476299" start="67180" end="67228" title="Reich Ministry of Science, Education and Culture" label="Reich Ministry of Science, Education and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q360587" start="67586" end="67606" title="Adolf Hitler Schools" label="Adolf Hitler Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q697004" start="67633" end="67675" title="National Political Institutes of Education" label="National Political Institutes of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012800" start="67784" end="67797" title="NS-Ordensburgen" label="Order Castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q158689" start="68316" end="68369" title="Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda" label="Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q318359" start="69261" end="69281" title="Reich Labour Service" label="Reich Labour Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="69558" end="69569" title="patriarchal" label="patriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q119239" start="69759" end="69797" title="National Socialist Women&amp;#x27;s League" label="National Socialist Women&amp;#x27;s League"/>
<link wikidata="Q71410" start="69985" end="69999" title="Anita Augspurg" label="Anita Augspurg"/>
<link wikidata="Q91904" start="70001" end="70021" title="Lida Gustava Heymann" label="Lida Gustava Heymann"/>
<link wikidata="Q72913" start="70027" end="70041" title="Helene Stöcker" label="Helene Stöcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961432" start="70104" end="70119" title="NS-Frauen-Warte" label="NS-Frauen-Warte"/>
<link wikidata="Q498853" start="70479" end="70510" title="Cross of Honour of the German Mother" label="Ehrenkreuz der Deutschen Mutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q570012" start="72341" end="72356" title="Blood and soil" label="worked the land"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="72583" end="72595" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087316" start="72664" end="72677" title="Jungmädelbund" label="Jungmädelbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q38780" start="72769" end="72801" title="League of German Girls" label="&amp;quot;Bund Deutscher Mädel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q168489" start="73762" end="73772" title="Lebensborn" label="Lebensborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q159488" start="74541" end="74562" title="Anti-tobacco movement in Nazi Germany" label="anti-tobacco movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="75544" end="75560" title="pseudoscientific" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q162387" start="75696" end="75712" title="Hauptsturmführer" label="Hauptsturmführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57109" start="75719" end="75732" title="Josef Mengele" label="Josef Mengele"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="75981" end="75994" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q259567" start="76311" end="76322" title="vivisection" label="vivisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q28133873" start="76413" end="76434" title="Reich Forestry Office" label="Reich Forestry Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="77086" end="77096" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="77114" end="77128" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="77136" end="77140" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436850" start="77355" end="77366" title="Gottgläubig" label="Gottgläubig"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="77433" end="77445" title="nonreligious" label="nonreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="77649" end="77660" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452502" start="77666" end="77721" title="Christianisation of the Germanic peoples" label="Christianized neighbouring continental Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="77769" end="77775" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="77781" end="77788" title="messiah" label="messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q313768" start="77938" end="77953" title="Gleichschaltung" label="Gleichschaltung"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="77998" end="78005" title="United and uniting churches" label="unified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202401" start="78006" end="78029" title="Protestant Reich Church" label="Protestant Reich Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q565744" start="78073" end="78087" title="Landeskirche" label="state churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q65908" start="78098" end="78111" title="Ludwig Müller" label="Ludwig Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q700820" start="78174" end="78191" title="German Christians (movement)" label="German Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="78247" end="78260" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q153839" start="78360" end="78376" title="Martin Niemöller" label="Martin Niemöller"/>
<link wikidata="Q161362" start="78413" end="78430" title="Confessing Church" label="Confessing Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q68721" start="78636" end="78647" title="Hanns Kerrl" label="Hanns Kerrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="79068" end="79100" title="Sachsenhausen concentration camp" label="Sachsenhausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q570555" start="79251" end="79277" title="Catholic Church in Germany" label="Catholic Church in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="79340" end="79361" title="political Catholicism" label="political Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q302884" start="79413" end="79441" title="Bavarian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Bavarian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="79446" end="79467" title="Catholic Centre Party" label="Catholic Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q126528" start="79558" end="79573" title="Reichskonkordat" label="Reichskonkordat"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="80163" end="80187" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q76876" start="80286" end="80305" title="Baldur von Schirach" label="Baldur von Schirach"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="80620" end="80632" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q162663" start="80647" end="80667" title="Mit brennender Sorge" label="Mit brennender Sorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033651" start="80746" end="80760" title="Passion Sunday" label="Passion Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149265" start="81473" end="81488" title="Priest Barracks of Dachau Concentration Camp" label="clergy barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276549" start="81507" end="81538" title="Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany" label="areas of Poland annexed in 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056517" start="81563" end="81581" title="Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland" label="brutal suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="81634" end="81650" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q789946" start="81664" end="81700" title="NSDAP Office of Foreign Affairs" label="Nazi Party Office of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="81953" end="81958" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="81963" end="81978" title="Christian cross" label="Christian cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q320593" start="82157" end="82179" title="Nazi Party Chancellery" label="Nazi Party Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="82180" end="82194" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q457031" start="82350" end="82367" title="Volksgemeinschaft" label="Volksgemeinschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q157329" start="82606" end="82624" title="Strength Through Joy" label="Kraft durch Freude"/>
<link wikidata="Q695805" start="82885" end="82903" title="Reichskulturkammer" label="Reichskulturkammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152564" start="84284" end="84305" title="Völkischer Beobachter" label="Völkischer Beobachter"/>
<link wikidata="Q570012" start="85214" end="85228" title="blood and soil" label="blood and soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927614" start="85370" end="85388" title="Nazi book burnings" label="Nazi book burnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="85522" end="85537" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="85539" end="85552" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q38203" start="85554" end="85566" title="Helen Keller" label="Helen Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q70396" start="85568" end="85579" title="Alfred Kerr" label="Alfred Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="85581" end="85594" title="Marcel Proust" label="Marcel Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q47293" start="85596" end="85616" title="Erich Maria Remarque" label="Erich Maria Remarque"/>
<link wikidata="Q216134" start="85618" end="85632" title="Upton Sinclair" label="Upton Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q60369" start="85634" end="85650" title="Jakob Wassermann" label="Jakob Wassermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="85652" end="85663" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="85669" end="85679" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q63199" start="86012" end="86023" title="Paul Troost" label="Paul Troost"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="86028" end="86040" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="86073" end="86085" title="neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="86101" end="86119" title="Roman architecture" label="Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q819439" start="86171" end="86195" title="Nazi party rally grounds" label="Nazi party rally grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="86199" end="86208" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q698208" start="86219" end="86236" title="Reich Chancellery" label="Reich Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="86337" end="86345" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="86360" end="86374" title="triumphal arch" label="triumphal arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="86410" end="86425" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="86492" end="86500" title="abstract art" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="86502" end="86509" title="Dadaist" label="Dadaist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="86511" end="86524" title="expressionist" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="86529" end="86539" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q329154" start="86916" end="86941" title="Degenerate Art Exhibition" label="Degenerate Art Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="87094" end="87109" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q653754" start="87147" end="87164" title="Reichsmusikkammer" label="Reichsmusikkammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="87400" end="87406" title="atonal" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="87408" end="87412" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="87544" end="87558" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q157596" start="87639" end="87656" title="Bayreuth Festival" label="Bayreuth Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41468" start="88157" end="88174" title="Universum Film AG" label="Universum Film AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568777" start="88179" end="88184" title="Wien-Film" label="Tobis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55415" start="88453" end="88469" title="Leni Riefenstahl" label="Leni Riefenstahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q156497" start="88483" end="88502" title="Triumph of the Will" label="Triumph of the Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q158069" start="88563" end="88570" title="Olympia (1938 film)" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="88597" end="88617" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="88980" end="88996" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="89139" end="89148" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="89154" end="89177" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070370" start="89254" end="89281" title="subsequent Nuremberg trials" label="subsequent Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q15292" start="90294" end="90298" title="evil" label="evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079999" start="90669" end="90683" title="Nazi symbolism" label="Nazi symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="90764" end="90776" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="90831" end="90843" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q596239" start="90901" end="90908" title="Allied-occupied Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085" start="91362" end="91376" title="Adolf Eichmann" label="Adolf Eichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q702858" start="91438" end="91447" title="Holocaust (miniseries)" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q207137" start="91601" end="91611" title="curriculum" label="curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="91885" end="91893" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796604" start="91915" end="91932" title="Körber Foundation" label="Körber Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="92007" end="92016" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q118369" start="92037" end="92049" title="Alan Posener" label="Alan Posener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="92238" end="92272" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="Collaboration with the Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106982795" start="92274" end="92305" title="European interwar dictatorships" label="European interwar dictatorships"/>
<link wikidata="Q682540" start="92307" end="92331" title="Glossary of Nazi Germany" label="Glossary of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q542459" start="92333" end="92373" title="List of Nazi Party leaders and officials" label="List of Nazi Party leaders and officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983421" start="92375" end="92385" title="Nazi songs" label="Nazi songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152354" start="92387" end="92434" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Nazi Germany" label="Orders, decorations, and medals of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q704946" start="92436" end="92445" title="Sonderweg" label="Sonderweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q718858" start="92447" end="92489" title="Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany" label="Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698482" start="92788" end="92802" title="Calvin College" label="Calvin College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21214" wikidata="Q150727" url="?curid=21214" title="Naraoiidae">
<text>Naraoiidae is a family, of extinct, soft-shelled trilobite-like arthropods, that belongs to the order Nektaspida. Species included in the Naraoiidae are known from the second half of the Lower Cambrian to the end of the Upper Silurian. The total number of collection sites is limited and distributed over a vast period of time: Maotianshan Shale and Balang Formation (China), Burgess Shale and Bertie Formation (Canada), the Šárka Formation (Czech Republic), Emu Bay Shale (Australia), Idaho and Utah (USA). This is probably due to the rare occurrence of the right circumstances for soft tissue preservation, needed for these non-calcified exoskeletons.

== Ecology ==
Naraoiids probably were deposit feeders (&quot;Naraoia&quot; and &quot;Pseudonaraoia&quot;), predators or scavengers (&quot;Misszhouia&quot;), living on the sea floor.

== Description ==

The species of the family &quot;Naraoiidae&quot; are almost flat (dorso-ventrally). The upper (or dorsal) side of the body consists of a non-calcified transversely oval or semi-circular headshield (cephalon), and a circular to long oval tailshield (pygidium) equal to or longer than the cephalon, without any body segments in between. The body is narrowed at the articulation between cephalon and pygidium. The antennas are long and many-segmented. There are no eyes. The 17 to 25 pairs of legs have two branches on a common basis, like trilobites. The outer (dorsal) branches of the limbs (exopods) have flattened side branches (setae) on the shaft (probably acting as gills). The inner branches (or endopods are composed of 6 or 7 segments (or podomeres).

=== Differences with other Nectaspida ===
Naraoiidae lack thoracic segments (or tergites), while the species of the sister family Liwiidae have between 3 and 6 tergites.

== Taxonomic history ==
The taxonomic placement of the Naraoiidae has long been debated until detailed appendages were uncovered, that showed that &quot;N. compacta&quot; shares biramous legs of very comparable anatomy with trilobites. Some debate is still going on if the parent taxon &quot;Nektaspida&quot; should be included in the Trilobita, or is better placed as a sister group.

== Key to the genera ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Are Naraoids trilobites? Photographs of specimens and discussion of classification controversy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150727" start="0" end="10" title="Naraoiidae" label="Naraoiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="16" end="22" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="49" end="58" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="64" end="73" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="96" end="101" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337678" start="102" end="112" title="Nektaspida" label="Nektaspida"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="187" end="201" title="Lower Cambrian" label="Lower Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="220" end="234" title="Silurian" label="Upper Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811179" start="328" end="345" title="Maotianshan Shale" label="Maotianshan Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256075" start="350" end="366" title="Balang Formation" label="Balang Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852085" start="376" end="389" title="Burgess Shale" label="Burgess Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q94767" start="459" end="472" title="Emu Bay Shale" label="Emu Bay Shale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="607" title="Burgess Shale type preservation#Preservational regime" label="soft tissue preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="640" end="652" title="exoskeletons" label="exoskeletons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="693" end="707" title="deposit feeder" label="deposit feeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798189" start="740" end="753" title="Pseudonaraoia" label="Pseudonaraoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="762" end="770" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="775" end="784" title="scavenger" label="scavenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10994170" start="1055" end="1063" title="Cephalon (arthropod head)" label="cephalon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1106" end="1114" title="Trilobite#Pygidium" label="pygidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="1527" end="1532" title="gills" label="gills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835661" start="1746" end="1754" title="Liwiidae" label="Liwiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="2011" end="2021" title="Trilobita" label="trilobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="2067" end="2072" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21215" wikidata="Q81136" url="?curid=21215" title="Northwest Passage">
<text>The Northwest Passage (NWP) is the sea lane between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans through the Arctic Ocean, near the northern coast of North America via waterways through the Arctic Archipelago of Canada. The eastern route along the Arctic coasts of Norway and Siberia is accordingly called the Northeast Passage (NEP).
The various islands of the archipelago are separated from one another and from mainland Canada by a series of Arctic waterways collectively known as the Northwest Passages, Northwestern Passages or the Canadian Internal Waters.

For centuries, European explorers, beginning with Christopher Columbus in 1492, sought a navigable passage as a possible trade route to Asia, but were blocked by North, Central, and South America; by ice, or by rough waters (e.g. Tierra del Fuego). An ice-bound northern route was discovered in 1850 by the Irish explorer Robert McClure, whose expedition completed the passage by hauling sledges. Scotsman John Rae explored a more southerly area in 1854 through which Norwegian Roald Amundsen made the first complete passage entirely by ship in 1903–1906. Until 2009, the Arctic pack ice prevented regular marine shipping throughout most of the year. Arctic sea ice decline, linked primarily to climate change, has rendered the waterways more navigable for ice navigation.

The contested sovereignty claims over the waters may complicate future shipping through the region: the Canadian government maintains that the Northwestern Passages are part of Canadian Internal Waters, but the United States claims that they are an international strait and transit passage, allowing free and unencumbered passage. If, as the head of a Canadian mining company claims, parts of the eastern end of the Passage are barely deep, the route&#x27;s viability as a Euro-Asian shipping route is reduced. In 2016, Chinese shipping line COSCO expressed a desire to make regular voyages of cargo ships using the passage to the eastern United States and Europe, after a successful passage by &quot;Nordic Orion&quot; of 73,500 tonnes deadweight tonnage in September 2013. Fully laden, &quot;Nordic Orion&quot; sat too deep in the water to sail through the Panama Canal.

==Routes==
The Northwest Passage has three sections:
* East
** East of Baffin Island: Baffin Bay between Greenland and Baffin Island to Lancaster Sound at the north end of Baffin Island, or
** West of Baffin Island (impractical): Through Hudson Strait south of Baffin Island, north through the Foxe Basin, west through the Fury and Hecla Strait, north to Lancaster Sound through the Gulf of Boothia and Prince Regent Inlet. The Fury and Hecla Strait is usually closed by ice.
* Centre: Canadian Arctic Archipelago
** North: From Lancaster Sound west through the Parry Channel to the Prince of Wales Strait on the northwest side of Victoria Island. M&#x27;Clure Strait to the northwest is ice-filled; southwest through the Prince of Wales Strait between Victoria Island and Banks Island might be passable, or
** South: From Lancaster Sound west past Prince Regent Inlet (basically a cul-de-sac but it may be possible to exit west through the Bellot Strait), past Somerset Island, south through Peel Sound between Somerset Island and Prince of Wales Island, either southwest through Victoria Strait (ice-choked), or directly south along the coast through Rae Strait and James Ross Strait and west through Simpson Strait south of King William Island (shallow) into Queen Maud Gulf, then west along the mainland coast south of Victoria Island.
* West: There being no major islands, follow the coast to the Bering Strait.

Many attempts were made to find a salt water exit west from Hudson Bay, but the Fury and Hecla Strait in the far north is blocked by ice. The eastern entrance and main axis of the northwest passage, the Parry Channel, was found in 1819. The approach from the west through Bering Strait is impractical because of the need to sail around ice near Point Barrow. East of Point Barrow the coast is fairly clear in summer. This area was mapped in pieces from overland in 1821–1839. This leaves the large rectangle north of the coast, south of Parry Channel and west of Baffin Island. This area was mostly mapped in 1848–1854 by ships looking for Franklin&#x27;s lost expedition. The first crossing was made by Roald Amundsen in 1903–1906. He used a small ship and hugged the coast.

==Overview==

===Early expeditions===

Before the Little Ice Age (late Middle Ages to the 19th century), Norwegian Vikings sailed as far north and west as Ellesmere Island, Skraeling Island and Ruin Island for hunting expeditions and trading with the Inuit and people of the Dorset culture who inhabited the region. Between the end of the 15th century and the 20th century, colonial powers from Europe dispatched explorers to discover a commercial sea route north and west around North America. The Northwest Passage represented a new route to the established trading nations of Asia.

England called the hypothetical northern route the &quot;Northwest Passage&quot;. The desire to establish such a route motivated much of the European exploration of both coasts of North America, also known as the New World. When it became apparent that there was no route through the heart of the continent, attention turned to the possibility of a passage through northern waters. There was a lack of scientific knowledge about conditions; for instance, some people believed that seawater was incapable of freezing. (As late as the mid-18th century, Captain James Cook had reported that Antarctic icebergs had yielded fresh water, seemingly confirming the hypothesis.) Explorers thought that an Open Polar Sea close to the North Pole must exist. The belief that a route lay to the far north persisted for several centuries and led to numerous expeditions into the Arctic. Many ended in disaster, including that by Sir John Franklin in 1845. While searching for him the McClure Arctic Expedition discovered the Northwest Passage in 1850.

In 1906, the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen was the first to complete the passage solely by ship, from Greenland to Alaska in the sloop . Since that date, several fortified ships have made the journey.

From east to west, the direction of most early exploration attempts, expeditions entered the passage from the Atlantic Ocean via the Davis Strait and through Baffin Bay, both of which are in Canada. Five to seven routes have been taken through the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, via the McClure Strait, Dease Strait, and the Prince of Wales Strait, but not all of them are suitable for larger ships. From there ships passed through westward through the Beaufort Sea and the Chukchi Sea, and then southwards through the Bering Strait (separating Russia and Alaska), into the Pacific Ocean.

===Potential as a shipping lane===

In the 21st century, major changes to the ice pack due to climate change have stirred speculation that the passage may become clear enough of ice to permit safe commercial shipping for at least part of the year. On August 21, 2007, the Northwest Passage became open to ships without the need of an icebreaker. According to Nalan Koc of the Norwegian Polar Institute, this was the first time the Passage has been clear since they began keeping records in 1972. The Northwest Passage opened again on August 25, 2008. It is usually reported that ocean thawing will open up the Northwest Passage (and the Northern Sea Route) for various kind of ships, making it possible to sail around the Arctic ice cap and possibly cutting thousands of miles off shipping routes. Warning that the NASA satellite images suggested that the Arctic had entered a &quot;death spiral&quot; caused by climate change, Professor Mark Serreze, a sea ice specialist at the U.S. National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) said: &quot;The passages are open. It&#x27;s a historic event. We are going to see this more and more as the years go by.&quot;

However, some thick sections of ice will remain hard to melt in the shorter term. Drifting and persistence of large chunks of ice, especially in springtime, can be problematic as they can clog entire straits or severely damage a ship&#x27;s hull. Cargo routes may thus be slow and uncertain, depending on prevailing conditions and the ability to predict them. Because much containerized traffic operates in a just-in-time mode (which does not tolerate delays well) and because of the relative isolation of the passage (which impedes shipping companies from optimizing their operations by grouping multiple stopovers on the same itinerary), the Northwest Passage and other Arctic routes are not always seen as promising shipping lanes by industry insiders, at least for the time being. The uncertainty related to physical damage to ships is also thought to translate into higher insurance premiums, especially because of the technical challenges posed by Arctic navigation (as of 2014, only 12 percent of Canada&#x27;s Arctic waters have been charted to modern standards).
The Beluga group of Bremen, Germany, sent the first Western commercial vessels through the Northern Sea Route (Northeast Passage) in 2009. Canada&#x27;s Prime Minister Stephen Harper announced that &quot;ships entering the North-West passage should first report to his government&quot;.

The first commercial cargo ship to have sailed through the Northwest Passage was in August 1969. SS &quot;Manhattan&quot;, of 115,000 deadweight tonnage, was the largest commercial vessel ever to navigate the Northwest Passage.

The largest passenger ship to navigate the Northwest Passage was the cruise liner of gross tonnage 69,000. Starting on August 10, 2016, the ship sailed from Vancouver to New York City with 1,500 passengers and crew, taking 28 days.

In 2018, two of the freighters leaving Baffinland&#x27;s port in the Milne Inlet, on Baffin Island&#x27;s north shore, were bound for ports in Asia. Those freighters did not sail west through the remainder of the Northwest Passage; they sailed east, rounded the tip of Greenland, and transited Russia&#x27;s Northern Sea Route.

Experts predict that the passage may be traversable four months of the year by the end of the 21st century.

==Extent==

The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Northwestern Passages as follows:

==Historical expeditions==

As a result of their westward explorations and their settlement of Greenland, the Vikings sailed as far north and west as Ellesmere Island, Skraeling Island for hunting expeditions and trading with Inuit groups. The subsequent arrival of the Little Ice Age is thought to have been one of the reasons that European seafaring into the Northwest Passage ceased until the late 15th century.

===Strait of Anián===

In 1539, Hernán Cortés commissioned Francisco de Ulloa to sail along the Baja California Peninsula on the western coast of North America. Ulloa concluded that the Gulf of California was the southernmost section of a strait supposedly linking the Pacific with the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. His voyage perpetuated the notion of the Island of California and saw the beginning of a search for the Strait of Anián.

The strait probably took its name from Ania, a Chinese province mentioned in a 1559 edition of Marco Polo&#x27;s book; it first appears on a map issued by Italian cartographer Giacomo Gastaldi about 1562. Five years later Bolognino Zaltieri issued a map showing a narrow and crooked Strait of Anian separating Asia from the Americas. The strait grew in European imagination as an easy sea lane linking Europe with the residence of Khagan (the Great Khan) in Cathay (northern China).

Cartographers and seamen tried to demonstrate its reality. Sir Francis Drake sought the western entrance in 1579. The Greek pilot Juan de Fuca, sailing from Acapulco (in Mexico) under the flag of the Spanish crown, claimed he had sailed the strait from the Pacific to the North Sea and back in 1592. The Spaniard Bartholomew de Fonte claimed to have sailed from Hudson Bay to the Pacific via the strait in 1640.

===Northern Atlantic===

The first recorded attempt to discover the Northwest Passage was the east–west voyage of John Cabot in 1497, sent by Henry VII in search of a direct route to the Orient. In 1524, Charles V sent Estêvão Gomes to find a northern Atlantic passage to the Spice Islands. An English expedition was launched in 1576 by Martin Frobisher, who took three trips west to what is now the Canadian Arctic in order to find the passage. Frobisher Bay, which he first charted, is named after him.

As part of another expedition, in July 1583 Sir Humphrey Gilbert, who had written a treatise on the discovery of the passage and was a backer of Frobisher, claimed the territory of Newfoundland for the English crown. On August 8, 1585, the English explorer John Davis entered Cumberland Sound, Baffin Island.

The major rivers on the east coast were also explored in case they could lead to a transcontinental passage. Jacques Cartier&#x27;s explorations of the Saint Lawrence River in 1535 were initiated in hope of finding a way through the continent. Cartier became persuaded that the St. Lawrence was the Passage; when he found the way blocked by rapids at what is now Montreal, he was so certain that these rapids were all that was keeping him from China (in French, &quot;la Chine&quot;), that he named the rapids for China. Samuel de Champlain renamed them Sault Saint-Louis in 1611, but the name was changed to Lachine Rapids in the mid-19th century.

In 1602, George Weymouth became the first European to explore what would later be called Hudson Strait when he sailed into the Strait. Weymouth&#x27;s expedition to find the Northwest Passage was funded jointly by the British East India Company and the Muscovy Company. &quot;Discovery&quot; was the same ship used by Henry Hudson on his final voyage.

John Knight, employed by the British East India Company and the Muscovy Company, set out in 1606 to follow up on Weymouth&#x27;s discoveries and find the Northwest Passage. After his ship ran aground and was nearly crushed by ice, Knight disappeared while searching for a better anchorage.

In 1609, Henry Hudson sailed up what is now called the Hudson River in search of the Passage; encouraged by the saltiness of the water in the estuary, he reached present-day Albany, New York, before giving up. On September 14, 1609, Hudson entered the Tappan Zee while sailing upstream from New York Harbor. At first, Hudson believed the widening of the river indicated that he had found the Northwest Passage. He proceeded upstream as far as present-day Troy before concluding that no such strait existed there. He later explored the Arctic and Hudson Bay.

In 1611, while in James Bay, Hudson&#x27;s crew mutinied. They set Hudson and his teenage son John, along with seven sick, infirm, or loyal crewmen, adrift in a small open boat. He was never seen again.

A mission was sent out in 1612, again in &quot;Discovery&quot;, commanded by Sir Thomas Button to find Henry Hudson and continue through the Northwest Passage. After failing to find Hudson, and exploring the west coast of Hudson Bay, Button returned home due to illness in the crew. In 1614, William Gibbons attempted to find the Passage, but was turned back by ice. The next year, 1615, Robert Bylot, a survivor of Hudson&#x27;s crew, returned to Hudson Strait in &quot;Discovery&quot;, but was turned back by ice. Bylot tried again in 1616 with William Baffin. They sailed as far as Lancaster Sound and reached 77°45′ North latitude, a record which stood for 236 years, before being blocked by ice.

On May 9, 1619, under the auspices of King Christian IV of Denmark–Norway, Jens Munk set out with 65 men and the king&#x27;s two ships, &quot;Einhörningen&quot; (Unicorn), a small frigate, and &quot;Lamprenen&quot; (Lamprey), a sloop, which were outfitted under his own supervision. His mission was to discover the Northwest Passage to the Indies and China. Munk penetrated Davis Strait as far north as 69°, found Frobisher Bay, and then spent almost a month fighting his way through Hudson Strait. In September 1619, he found the entrance to Hudson Bay and spent the winter near the mouth of the Churchill River. Cold, famine, and scurvy destroyed so many of his men that only he and two other men survived. With these men, he sailed for home with &quot;Lamprey&quot; on July 16, 1620, reaching Bergen, Norway, on September 20, 1620.

René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle built the sailing ship, , in his quest to find the Northwest Passage via the upper Great Lakes. He made his way across Lake Erie and Lake Huron, making port on Mackinac Island before landing at Washington Island at the mouth of Green Bay to trade for furs with Pottawatomie Indians. La Salle stayed behind while the ship sailed back to Mackinac with the furs. &quot;Le Griffon&quot; disappeared in 1679 on the return trip of her maiden voyage. In the spring of 1682, La Salle made his famous voyage down the Mississippi River to the Gulf of Mexico. La Salle led an expedition from France in 1684 to establish a French colony on the Gulf of Mexico. He was murdered by his followers in 1687.
Henry Ellis, born in Ireland, was part of a company aiming to discover the Northwest Passage in May 1746. After the difficult extinction of a fire on board the ship, he sailed to Greenland, where he traded goods with the Inuit peoples on July 8, 1746. He crossed to the town of Fort Nelson and spent the summer on the Hayes River. He renewed his efforts in June 1747, without success, before returning to England.

In 1772, the English fur trader Samuel Hearne travelled overland northwest from Hudson Bay to the Arctic Ocean, thereby proving that there was no strait connecting Hudson Bay to the Pacific Ocean.

===Northern Pacific===
 Most Northwest Passage expeditions originated in Europe or on the east coast of North America, seeking to traverse the Passage in the westbound direction. Some progress was made in exploring the western reaches of the imagined passage.

In 1728 Vitus Bering, a Danish-born Russian navy officer, used the strait first discovered by Semyon Dezhnyov in 1648 but later accredited to and named after Bering (the Bering Strait). He concluded that North America and Russia were separate land masses by sailing between them. In 1741 with Lieutenant Aleksei Chirikov, he explored seeking further lands beyond Siberia. While they were separated, Chirikov discovered several of the Aleutian Islands while Bering charted the Alaskan region. His ship was wrecked off the Kamchatka Peninsula, as many of his crew were disabled by scurvy.

The Spanish made several voyages to the northwest coast of North America during the late 18th century. Determining whether a Northwest Passage existed was one of the motives for their efforts. Among the voyages that involved careful searches for a Passage included the 1775 and 1779 voyages of Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra. The journal of Francisco Antonio Mourelle, who served as Quadra&#x27;s second in command in 1775, fell into English hands. It was translated and published in London, stimulating exploration.

Captain James Cook made use of the journal during his explorations of the region. In 1791 Alessandro Malaspina sailed to Yakutat Bay, Alaska, which was rumoured to be a Passage. In 1790 and 1791 Francisco de Eliza led several exploring voyages into the Strait of Juan de Fuca, searching for a possible Northwest Passage and finding the Strait of Georgia. To fully explore this new inland sea, an expedition under Dionisio Alcalá Galiano was sent in 1792. He was explicitly ordered to explore all channels that might turn out to be a Northwest Passage.

===Cook and Vancouver===

In 1776, Captain James Cook was dispatched by the Admiralty in Great Britain on an expedition to explore the Passage. A 1745 act, when extended in 1775, promised a £20,000 prize for whoever discovered the passage. Initially the Admiralty had wanted Charles Clerke to lead the expedition, with Cook (in retirement following his exploits in the Pacific) acting as a consultant. However, Cook had researched Bering&#x27;s expeditions, and the Admiralty ultimately placed their faith in the veteran explorer to lead, with Clerke accompanying him.

After journeying through the Pacific, to make an attempt from the west, Cook began at Nootka Sound in April 1778. He headed north along the coastline, charting the lands and searching for the regions sailed by the Russians 40 years previously. The Admiralty&#x27;s orders had commanded the expedition to ignore all inlets and rivers until they reached a latitude of 65°N. Cook, however, failed to make any progress in sighting a Northwestern Passage.

Various officers on the expedition, including William Bligh, George Vancouver, and John Gore, thought the existence of a route was &#x27;improbable&#x27;. Before reaching 65°N they found the coastline pushing them further south, but Gore convinced Cook to sail on into the Cook Inlet in the hope of finding the route. They continued to the limits of the Alaskan peninsula and the start of the chain of Aleutian Islands. Despite reaching 70°N, they encountered nothing but icebergs.

From 1792 to 1794, the Vancouver Expedition (led by George Vancouver who had previously accompanied Cook) surveyed in detail all the passages from the Northwest Coast. He confirmed that there was no such passage south of the Bering Strait. This conclusion was supported by the evidence of Alexander MacKenzie, who explored the Arctic and Pacific Oceans in 1793.

===19th century===

In the first half of the 19th century, some parts of the Northwest Passage (north of the Bering Strait) were explored separately by many expeditions, including those by John Ross, Elisha Kent Kane, William Edward Parry, and James Clark Ross; overland expeditions were also led by John Franklin, George Back, Peter Warren Dease, Thomas Simpson, and John Rae. In 1826 Frederick William Beechey explored the north coast of Alaska, discovering Point Barrow.

Sir Robert McClure was credited with the discovery of the Northwest Passage in 1851 when he looked across McClure Strait from Banks Island and viewed Melville Island. However, this strait was not navigable to ships at that time. The only usable route linking the entrances of Lancaster Sound and Dolphin and Union Strait was discovered by John Rae in 1854.

===Franklin expedition===
In 1845, a lavishly equipped two-ship expedition led by Sir John Franklin sailed to the Canadian Arctic to chart the last unknown swaths of the Northwest Passage. Confidence was high, as they estimated there was less than remaining of unexplored Arctic mainland coast. When the ships failed to return, relief expeditions and search parties explored the Canadian Arctic, which resulted in a thorough charting of the region, along with a possible passage. Many artifacts from the expedition were found over the next century and a half, including notes that the ships were ice-locked in 1846 near King William Island, about halfway through the passage, and unable to break free. Records showed Franklin died in 1847 and Captain Francis Rawdon Moira Crozier took over command. In 1848 the expedition abandoned the two ships and its members tried to escape south across the tundra by sledge. Although some of the crew may have survived into the early 1850s, no evidence has ever been found of any survivors. In 1853, explorer John Rae was told by local Inuit about the disastrous fate of Franklin&#x27;s expedition, but his reports were not welcomed in Britain on account of his reports of cannibalism amongst the surviving crews.

Starvation, exposure and scurvy all contributed to the men&#x27;s deaths. In 1981 Owen Beattie, an anthropologist from the University of Alberta, examined remains from sites associated with the expedition. This led to further investigations and the examination of tissue and bone from the frozen bodies of three seamen, John Torrington, William Braine and John Hartnell, exhumed from the permafrost of Beechey Island. Laboratory tests revealed high concentrations of lead in all three (the expedition carried 8,000 tins of food sealed with a lead-based solder). Another researcher has suggested botulism caused deaths among crew members. Evidence from 1996, that confirms reports first made by John Rae in 1854 based on Inuit accounts, suggests that the last of the crew may have resorted to cannibalism of deceased members in an effort to survive.

===McClure expedition===
During the search for Franklin, Commander Robert McClure and his crew in traversed the Northwest Passage from west to east in the years 1850 to 1854, partly by ship and partly by sledge. McClure started out from England in December 1849, sailed the Atlantic Ocean south to Cape Horn and entered the Pacific Ocean. He sailed the Pacific north and passed through the Bering Strait, turning east at that point and reaching Banks Island.

McClure&#x27;s ship was trapped in the ice for three winters near Banks Island, at the western end of Viscount Melville Sound. Finally McClure and his crew—who were by that time dying of starvation—were found by searchers who had travelled by sledge over the ice from a ship of Sir Edward Belcher&#x27;s expedition. They rescued McClure and his crew, returning with them to Belcher&#x27;s ships, which had entered the Sound from the east. McClure and his crew returned to England in 1854 on one of Belcher&#x27;s ships. They were the first people known to circumnavigate the Americas and to discover and transit the Northwest Passage, albeit by ship and by sledge over the ice. (Both McClure and his ship were found by a party from HMS &quot;Resolute&quot;, one of Belcher&#x27;s ships, so his sledge journey was relatively short.)

This was an astonishing feat for that day and age, and McClure was knighted and promoted in rank. (He was made rear-admiral in 1867.) Both he and his crew also shared £10,000 awarded them by the British Parliament. In July 2010 Canadian archaeologists found his ship, HMS &quot;Investigator,&quot; fairly intact but sunk about below the surface.

===John Rae===
The expeditions by Franklin and McClure were in the tradition of British exploration: well-funded ship expeditions using modern technology, and usually including British Naval personnel. By contrast, John Rae was an employee of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company, which operated a far-flung trade network and drove exploration of the Canadian North. They adopted a pragmatic approach and tended to be land-based. While Franklin and McClure tried to explore the passage by sea, Rae explored by land. He used dog sleds and techniques of surviving in the environment which he had learned from the native Inuit. The Franklin and McClure expeditions each employed hundreds of personnel and multiple ships. John Rae&#x27;s expeditions included fewer than ten people and succeeded. Rae was also the explorer with the best safety record, having lost only one man in years of traversing Arctic lands. In 1854, Rae returned to the cities with information from the Inuit about the disastrous fate of the Franklin expedition.

===Amundsen expedition===
The first explorer to traverse the Northwest Passage solely by ship was the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen. In a three-year journey between 1903 and 1906, Amundsen explored the passage with a crew of six. Amundsen, who had sailed to escape creditors seeking to stop the expedition, completed the voyage in the converted 45 net register tonnage () herring boat &quot;Gjøa&quot;. &quot;Gjøa&quot; was much smaller than vessels used by other Arctic expeditions and had a shallow draft. Amundsen intended to hug the shore, live off the limited resources of the land and sea through which he was to travel, and had determined that he needed to have a tiny crew to make this work. (Trying to support much larger crews had contributed to the catastrophic failure of John Franklin&#x27;s expedition fifty years previously, losing two ships and their crews). The ship&#x27;s shallow draft was intended to help her traverse the shoals of the Arctic straits.

Amundsen set out from Kristiania (Oslo) in June 1903 and was west of the Boothia Peninsula by late September. &quot;Gjøa&quot; was put into a natural harbour on the south shore of King William Island; by October 3 she was iced in. There the expedition remained for nearly two years, with the expedition members learning from the local Inuit and undertaking measurements to determine the location of the North Magnetic Pole. The harbour, now known as Gjoa Haven, later developed as the only permanent settlement on the island.

After completing the Northwest Passage portion of this trip and having anchored near Herschel Island, Amundsen skied to the city of Eagle, Alaska. He sent a telegram announcing his success and skied the return to rejoin his companions. Although his chosen east–west route, via the Rae Strait, contained young ice and thus was navigable, some of the waterways were extremely shallow ( deep), making the route commercially impractical.
===Later expeditions===
The first traversal of the Northwest Passage via dog sled was accomplished by Greenlander Knud Rasmussen while on the Fifth Thule Expedition (1921–1924). Rasmussen and two Greenland Inuit travelled from the Atlantic to the Pacific over the course of 16 months via dog sled.

Canadian Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer Henry Larsen was the second to sail the passage, crossing west to east, leaving Vancouver on June 23, 1940, and arriving at Halifax on October 11, 1942. More than once on this trip, he was uncertain whether , a Royal Canadian Mounted Police &quot;ice-fortified&quot; schooner, would survive the pressures of the sea ice. At one point, Larsen wondered &quot;if we had come this far only to be crushed like a nut on a shoal and then buried by the ice.&quot; The ship and all but one of her crew survived the winter on Boothia Peninsula. Each of the men on the trip was awarded a medal by Canada&#x27;s sovereign, King George VI, in recognition of this feat of Arctic navigation.

Later in 1944, Larsen&#x27;s return trip was far more swift than his first. He made the trip in 86 days to sail back from Halifax, Nova Scotia, to Vancouver, British Columbia. He set a record for traversing the route in a single season. The ship, after extensive upgrades, followed a more northerly, partially uncharted route.

In 1954, completed the east-to-west transit, under the command of Captain O.C.S. Robertson, conducting hydrographic soundings along the route. She was the first warship (and the first deep draft ship) to transit the Northwest Passage and the first warship to circumnavigate North America. In 1956, HMCS &quot;Labrador&quot; again completed the east-to-west transit, this time under the command of Captain T.C. Pullen.

On July 1, 1957, the United States Coast Guard Cutter departed in company with and to search for a deep-draft channel through the Arctic Ocean and to collect hydrographic information. The US Coast Guard Squadron was escorted through Bellot Strait and the Eastern Arctic by HMCS &quot;Labrador&quot;. Upon her return to Greenland waters, &quot;Storis&quot; became the first U.S.-registered vessel to circumnavigate North America. Shortly after her return in late 1957, she was reassigned to her new home port of Kodiak, Alaska.

In 1960, completed the first submarine transit of the Northwest Passage, heading east-to-west.

In 1969, SS &quot;Manhattan&quot; made the passage, accompanied by the Canadian icebreakers and . The U.S. Coast Guard icebreakers and also sailed in support of the expedition.

&quot;Manhattan&quot; was a specially reinforced supertanker sent to test the viability of the passage for the transport of oil. While &quot;Manhattan&quot; succeeded, the route was deemed not to be cost-effective. The United States built the Alaska Pipeline instead.

In June 1977, sailor Willy de Roos left Belgium to attempt the Northwest Passage in his steel yacht &quot;Williwaw&quot;. He reached the Bering Strait in September and after a stopover in Victoria, British Columbia, went on to round Cape Horn and sail back to Belgium, thus being the first sailor to circumnavigate the Americas entirely by ship.

In 1981 as part of the Transglobe Expedition, Ranulph Fiennes and Charles R. Burton completed the Northwest Passage. They left Tuktoyaktuk on July 26, 1981, in the open Boston Whaler and reached Tanquary Fiord on August 31, 1981. Their journey was the first open-boat transit from west to east and covered around , taking a route through Dolphin and Union Strait following the south coast of Victoria and King William islands, north to Resolute Bay via Franklin Strait and Peel Sound, around the south and east coasts of Devon Island, through Hell Gate and across Norwegian Bay to Eureka, Greely Bay and the head of Tanquary Fiord. Once they reached Tanquary Fiord, they had to trek via Lake Hazen to Alert before setting up their winter base camp.

In 1984, the commercial passenger vessel (which sank in the Antarctic Ocean in 2007) became the first cruise ship to navigate the Northwest Passage.

In July 1986, Jeff MacInnis and Mike Beedell set out on an catamaran called &quot;Perception&quot; on a 100-day sail, west to east, through the Northwest Passage. This pair was the first to sail the passage, although they had the benefit of doing so over a couple of summers.

In July 1986, David Scott Cowper set out from England in a lifeboat named &quot;Mabel El Holland&quot;, and survived three Arctic winters in the Northwest Passage before reaching the Bering Strait in August 1989. He continued around the world via the Cape of Good Hope to return to England on September 24, 1990. His was the first vessel to circumnavigate the world via the Northwest Passage.

On July 1, 2000, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police patrol vessel , having assumed the name &quot;St Roch II&quot;, departed Vancouver on a &quot;Voyage of Rediscovery.&quot; &quot;Nadon&quot;″s mission was to circumnavigate North America via the Northwest Passage and the Panama Canal, recreating the epic voyage of her predecessor, &quot;St. Roch.&quot; The Voyage of Rediscovery was intended to raise awareness concerning &quot;St. Roch&quot; and kick off the fund-raising efforts necessary to ensure the continued preservation of &quot;St. Roch&quot;. The voyage was organized by the Vancouver Maritime Museum and supported by a variety of corporate sponsors and agencies of the Canadian government.
&quot;Nadon&quot; is an aluminum, catamaran-hulled, high-speed patrol vessel. To make the voyage possible, she was escorted and supported by the Canadian Coast Guard icebreaker . The Coast Guard vessel was chartered by the Voyage of Rediscovery and crewed by volunteers. Throughout the voyage, she provided a variety of necessary services, including provisions and spares, fuel and water, helicopter facilities, and ice escort; she also conducted oceanographic research during the voyage. The Voyage of Rediscovery was completed in five and a half months, with &quot;Nadon&quot; reaching Vancouver on December 16, 2000.

On September 1, 2001, &quot;Northabout&quot;, an aluminium sailboat with diesel engine, built and captained by Jarlath Cunnane, completed the Northwest Passage east-to-west from Ireland to the Bering Strait. The voyage from the Atlantic to the Pacific was completed in 24 days. Cunnane cruised in &quot;Northabout&quot; in Canada for two years before returning to Ireland in 2005 via the Northeast Passage; he completed the first east-to-west circumnavigation of the pole by a single sailboat. The Northeast Passage return along the coast of Russia was slower, starting in 2004, requiring an ice stop and winter over in Khatanga, Siberia. He returned to Ireland via the Norwegian coast in October 2005. On January 18, 2006, the Cruising Club of America awarded Jarlath Cunnane their Blue Water Medal, an award for &quot;meritorious seamanship and adventure upon the sea displayed by amateur sailors of all nationalities.&quot;

On July 18, 2003, a father-and-son team, Richard and Andrew Wood, with Zoe Birchenough, sailed the yacht &quot;Norwegian Blue&quot; into the Bering Strait. Two months later she sailed into the Davis Strait to become the first British yacht to transit the Northwest Passage from west to east. She also became the only British vessel to complete the Northwest Passage in one season, as well as the only British sailing yacht to return from there to British waters.

In 2006, a scheduled cruise liner () successfully ran the Northwest Passage, helped by satellite images telling the location of sea ice.

On May 19, 2007, a French sailor, Sébastien Roubinet, and one other crew member left Anchorage, Alaska, in &quot;Babouche&quot;, a ice catamaran designed to sail on water and slide over ice. The goal was to navigate west to east through the Northwest Passage by sail only. Following a journey of more than , Roubinet reached Greenland on September 9, 2007, thereby completing the first Northwest Passage voyage made in one season without engine.
In April 2009, planetary scientist Pascal Lee and a team of four on the Northwest Passage Drive Expedition drove the HMP &quot;Okarian&quot; Humvee rover a record-setting on sea-ice from Kugluktuk to Cambridge Bay, Nunavut, the longest distance driven on sea-ice in a road vehicle. The HMP &quot;Okarian&quot; was being ferried from the North American mainland to the Haughton–Mars Project (HMP) Research Station on Devon Island, where it would be used as a simulator of future pressurized rovers for astronauts on the Moon and Mars. The HMP &quot;Okarian&quot; was eventually flown from Cambridge Bay to Resolute Bay in May 2009, and then driven again on sea-ice by Lee and a team of five from Resolute to the West coast of Devon Island in May 2010. The HMP &quot;Okarian&quot; reached the HMP Research Station in July 2011. The Northwest Passage Drive Expedition is captured in the motion picture documentary film &quot;Passage To Mars&quot; (2016).

In 2009, sea ice conditions were such that at least nine small vessels and two cruise ships completed the transit of the Northwest Passage. These trips included one by Eric Forsyth on board the Westsail sailboat &quot;Fiona&quot;, a boat he built in the 1980s. Self-financed, Forsyth, a retired engineer from the Brookhaven National Laboratory, and winner of the Cruising Club of America&#x27;s Blue Water Medal, sailed the Canadian Archipelago with sailor Joey Waits, airline captain Russ Roberts and carpenter David Wilson. After successfully sailing the Passage, the 77-year-old Forsyth completed the circumnavigation of North America, returning to his home port on Long Island, New York.

Cameron Dueck and his crew aboard the sailing yacht &quot;Silent Sound&quot; also transited in the summer of 2009. Their voyage began in Victoria, BC, on June 6, and they arrived in Halifax on October 10. Dueck wrote a book about the voyage called &quot;The New Northwest Passage&quot;.

In August–September 2010, Graeme Kendall (New Zealand) sailed the &quot;Astral Express&quot; through the Northwest Passage. He was the first person to sail solo non-stop through the passage. He began in Lancaster Sound on August 27 and ended 12 days later at Point Barrow, Alaska, on September 9. The trip covered . It was part of a circumnavigation that started and ended in New Zealand.

On September 9, 2010, Bear Grylls and a team of five completed a point-to-point navigation between Pond Inlet and Tuktoyaktuk in the Northwest Territories on a rigid inflatable boat (RIB). The expedition drew attention to how the effects of global warming made this journey possible and raised funds for the Global Angels charity.

On August 30, 2012 Sailing yacht , , an English SY, successfully completed the Northwest Passage in Nome, Alaska, while sailing a northern route never sailed by a sailing pleasure vessel before. After six cruising seasons in the Arctic (Greenland, Baffin Bay, Devon Island, Kane Basin, Lancaster Sound, Peel Sound, Regent Sound) and four seasons in the South (Antarctic Peninsula, Patagonia, Falkland Islands, South Georgia), SY &quot;Billy Budd&quot;, owned by and under the command of an Italian sporting enthusiast, Mariacristina Rapisardi. Crewed by Marco Bonzanigo, five Italian friends, one Australian, one Dutch, one South African, and one New Zealander, it sailed through the Northwest Passage. The northernmost route was chosen. &quot;Billy Budd&quot; sailed through the Parry Channel, Viscount Melville Sound and Prince of Wales Strait, a channel long and wide which flows south into the Amundsen Gulf. During the passage &quot;Billy Budd&quot; – likely a first for a pleasure vessel – anchored in Winter Harbour in Melville Island, the very same site where almost 200 years ago Sir William Parry was blocked by ice and forced to winter.

On August 29, 2012, the Swedish yacht &quot;Belzebub II,&quot; a fibreglass cutter captained by Canadian Nicolas Peissel, Swede Edvin Buregren and Morgan Peissel, became the first sailboat in history to sail through McClure Strait, part of a journey of achieving the most northerly Northwest Passage. &quot;Belzebub II&quot; departed Newfoundland following the coast of Greenland to Qaanaaq before tracking the sea ice to Grise Fiord, Canada&#x27;s most northern community. From there the team continued through Parry Channel into McClure Strait and the Beaufort Sea, tracking the highest latitudes of 2012&#x27;s record sea ice depletion before completing their Northwest Passage September 14, 2012. The expedition received extensive media coverage, including recognition by former U.S. Vice President Al Gore. The accomplishment is recorded in the Polar Scott Institute&#x27;s record of Northwest Passage Transits and recognized by the Explorers Club and the Royal Canadian Geographic Society.

At 18:45 GMT on September 18, 2012, &quot;Best Explorer&quot;, a steel cutter , skipper Nanni Acquarone, passing between the two Diomedes, was the first Italian sailboat to complete the Northwest Passage along the classical Amundsen route. Twenty-two Italian amateur sailors took part of the trip, in eight legs from Tromsø, Norway, to King Cove, Alaska, totalling . Later in 2019 &quot;Best Explorer&quot; skippered again by Nanni Acquarone became the first Italian sailboat to circumnavigate the Arctic sailing north of Siberia from Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky to Tromsø and the second ever to do it clockwise.

Setting sail from Nome, Alaska, on August 18, 2012, and reaching Nuuk, Greenland, on September 12, 2012, became the largest passenger vessel to transit the Northwest Passage. The ship, carrying 481 passengers, for 26 days and at sea, followed in the path of Captain Roald Amundsen. &quot;The World&quot; transit of the Northwest Passage was documented by &quot;National Geographic&quot; photographer Raul Touzon.

In September 2013, became the first commercial bulk carrier to transit the Northwest Passage. She was carrying a cargo of of coking coal from Port Metro Vancouver, Canada, to the Finnish Port of Pori, more than would have been possible via the traditional Panama Canal route. The Northwest Passage shortened the distance by compared to traditional route via the Panama Canal.

In August and September 2016 a cruise ship was sailed through the Northwest Passage. The ship &quot;Crystal Serenity&quot;, (with 1,000 passengers, and 600 crew) left Seward, Alaska, used Amundsen&#x27;s route and reached New York on September 17. Tickets for the 32-day trip started at $22,000 and were quickly sold out. The trip was repeated in 2017. In 2017 33 vessels made a complete transit, breaking the prior record of 20 in 2012.

In September 2018, sailing yacht &quot;Infinity&quot; (a 36.6 m ketch) and her 22-person crew successfully sailed through the Northwest Passage. This was part of their mission to plant the flag of Earth on the remaining Arctic ice. Supported by the EarthToday initiative, this voyage was a symbol for future global collaboration against climate change. The flag of Planet Earth was planted on September 21, 2018, the International Day of Peace.

From July to October 2023, the Arctic Cowboys, became the first people to kayak the central portion of the Northwest Passage from Pond Inlet to Cape Bathurst, marking them as the first to navigate the Canadian Archipelago completely self-propelled, meaning no motors or sails were used. Additionally, the team completed the expedition in a single season. The expedition was led and organised by West Hansen, along with Jeff Wueste, Mark Agnew, and Eileen Visser. The four travelled in two tandem kayaks. Agnew was awarded European Adventurer of the Year as a result.

==International waters dispute==
The Canadian government classifies the waters of the Northwest Passage in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, as internal waters of Canada as per the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and by the precedent in the drawing of baselines for other archipelagos, giving Canada the right to bar transit through these waters. Some maritime nations, notably the United States, claim these waters to be an international strait, where foreign vessels have the right of &quot;transit passage.&quot; In such a regime, Canada would have the right to enact fishing and environmental regulation, and fiscal and smuggling laws, as well as laws intended for the safety of shipping, but not the right to close the passage. While Canada is a party to the 1982 convention, the United States has not ratified it.

The dispute between Canada and the United States arose in 1969 with the trip of the U.S. oil tanker through the Arctic Archipelago. The prospect of more American traffic headed to the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field made the Canadian government realize that political action was required. If the passage&#x27;s deep waters become completely ice-free in summer months, they will be particularly enticing for supertankers that are too big to pass through the Panama Canal and must otherwise navigate around the tip of South America.

In 1985, the U.S. Coast Guard icebreaker passed through from Greenland to Alaska; the ship submitted to inspection by the Canadian Coast Guard before passing through, but the event infuriated the Canadian public and resulted in a diplomatic incident. The United States government, when asked by a Canadian reporter, indicated that it did not ask for permission as it insists that the waters were an international strait. The Canadian government issued a declaration in 1986 reaffirming Canadian rights to the waters. The United States refused to recognize the Canadian claim. In 1988 the governments of Canada and the United States signed an agreement, &quot;Arctic Cooperation,&quot; that resolved the practical issue without solving the sovereignty questions. Under the law of the sea, ships engaged in transit passage are not permitted to engage in research. The agreement states that all U.S. Coast Guard and Navy vessels are engaged in research, and so would require permission from the Government of Canada to pass through.

However, in late 2005, it was reported that U.S. nuclear submarines had travelled unannounced through Canadian Arctic waters, breaking the &quot;Arctic Cooperation&quot; agreement and sparking outrage in Canada. In his first news conference after the 2006 federal election, Prime Minister-designate Stephen Harper contested an earlier statement made by the U.S. ambassador that Arctic waters were international, stating the Canadian government&#x27;s intention to enforce its sovereignty there. The allegations arose after the U.S. Navy released photographs of surfaced at the North Pole.

On April 9, 2006, Canada&#x27;s Joint Task Force (North) declared that the Canadian Forces will no longer refer to the region as the Northwest Passage, but as the Canadian Internal Waters. The declaration came after the successful completion of Operation Nunalivut (Inuktitut for &quot;the land is ours&quot;), which was an expedition into the region by five military patrols.

In 2006 a report prepared by the staff of the Parliamentary Information and Research Service of Canada suggested that because of the September 11 attacks, the United States might be less interested in pursuing the international waterways claim in the interests of having a more secure North American perimeter. This report was based on an earlier paper, &quot;The Northwest Passage Shipping Channel: Is Canada&#x27;s Sovereignty Really Floating Away?&quot; by Andrea Charron, given to the 2004 Canadian Defence and Foreign Affairs Institute Symposium. Later in 2006 former United States Ambassador to Canada, Paul Cellucci agreed with this position; however, the succeeding ambassador, David Wilkins, stated that the Northwest Passage was in international waters.

On July 9, 2007, Prime Minister Harper announced the establishment of a deep-water port in the far North. In the press release Harper said, &quot;Canada has a choice when it comes to defending our sovereignty over the Arctic. We either use it or lose it. And make no mistake, this Government intends to use it. Because Canada&#x27;s Arctic is central to our national identity as a northern nation. It is part of our history. And it represents the tremendous potential of our future.&quot;

On July 10, 2007, Rear Admiral Timothy McGee of the U.S. Navy and Rear Admiral Brian Salerno of the U.S. Coast Guard announced that the United States would be increasing its ability to patrol the Arctic.

In June 2019, the U.S. State Department spokesperson Morgan Ortagus said, &quot;We view Canada&#x27;s claim that the waters of the Northwest Passage are internal waters of Canada as inconsistent with international law,&quot; despite historical precedent regarding archipelago baselines.

==Thinning ice cover and the Northwest Passage==

In summer 2000, two Canadian ships took advantage of thinning summer ice cover on the Arctic Ocean to make the crossing. It is thought that climate change is likely to open the passage for increasing periods, making it potentially attractive as a major shipping route. However, the passage through the Arctic Ocean would require significant investment in escort vessels and staging ports, and it would remain seasonal. Therefore, the route has not become a viable alternative to the Panama Canal.

On September 14, 2007, the European Space Agency (ESA) stated that ice loss that year had opened up the historically impassable passage, setting a new low of ice cover as seen in satellite measurements which went back to 1978. According to the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment, the latter part of the 20th century and the start of the 21st had seen marked shrinkage of ice cover. The extreme loss in 2007 rendered the passage &quot;fully navigable.&quot; However, the ESA study was based only on analysis of satellite images and could in practice not confirm anything about the actual navigation of the waters of the passage. ESA suggested the passage would be navigable &quot;during reduced ice cover by multi-year ice pack&quot; (namely sea ice surviving one or more summers) where previously any traverse of the route had to be undertaken during favourable seasonable climatic conditions or by specialist vessels or expeditions. The agency&#x27;s report speculated that the conditions prevalent in 2007 had shown the passage may &quot;open&quot; sooner than expected. An expedition in May 2008 reported that the passage was not yet continuously navigable even by an icebreaker and not yet ice-free.

Scientists at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union on December 13, 2007, revealed that NASA satellites observing the western Arctic showed a 16% decrease in cloud coverage during the summer of 2007 compared to 2006. This would have the effect of allowing more sunlight to penetrate Earth&#x27;s atmosphere and warm the Arctic Ocean waters, thus melting sea ice and contributing to opening the Northwest Passage.

However more recent observations show that the annual window for safe shipping in the Arctic ocean is shrinking, apparently because rapid melting of thin sea ice allows thicker multiyear ice to move around and clog ship channels.

In 2006 the cruise liner successfully ran the Northwest Passage, helped by satellite images telling where sea ice was.

On November 28, 2008, the Canadian Coast Guard confirmed the first commercial ship sailed through the Northwest Passage. In September 2008, , owned by Desgagnés Transarctik Inc. and, along with the Arctic Cooperative, part of Nunavut Sealift and Supply Incorporated (NSSI), transported cargo from Montreal to the hamlets of Cambridge Bay, Kugluktuk, Gjoa Haven, and Taloyoak. A member of the crew is reported to have claimed that &quot;there was no ice whatsoever.&quot; Shipping from the east was to resume in the fall of 2009. Although sealift is an annual feature of the Canadian Arctic this was the first time that the western communities had been serviced from the east. The western portion of the Canadian Arctic is normally supplied by Northern Transportation Company Limited (NTCL) from Hay River, and the eastern portion by NNSI and NTCL from Churchill and Montreal.

In January 2010, the ongoing reduction in the Arctic sea ice led telecoms cable specialist Kodiak-Kenai Cable to propose the laying of a fibre-optic cable connecting London and Tokyo by way of the Northwest Passage, saying the proposed system would nearly cut in half the time it takes to send messages from the United Kingdom to Japan.

In September 2013, the first large ice-strengthened sea freighter, &quot;Nordic Orion&quot;, used the passage.

In 2016 a new record was set when the cruise ship &quot;Crystal Serenity&quot; transited with 1,700 passengers and crew. &quot;Crystal Serenity&quot; is the largest cruise ship to navigate the Northwest Passage. Starting on August 10, 2016, the ship sailed from Vancouver to New York City, taking 28 days for the journey.

Plans to lay a fibre-optic cable through the passage were revived in 2021, the project is known as Far North Fiber.

===Transfer of Pacific species to North Atlantic===
Scientists believe that reduced sea ice in the Northwest Passage has permitted some new species to migrate across the Arctic Ocean. The gray whale &quot;Eschrichtius robustus&quot; has not been seen in the Atlantic since it was hunted to extinction there in the 18th century, but in May 2010, one such whale turned up in the Mediterranean. Scientists speculated the whale had followed its food sources through the Northwest Passage and simply kept on going.

The plankton species &quot;Neodenticula seminae&quot; had not been recorded in the Atlantic for 800,000 years. However, it has become increasingly prevalent there. Again, scientists believe that it got there through the reopened Northwest Passage.

In August 2010, two bowhead whales from West Greenland and Alaska respectively, entered the Northwest Passage from opposite directions and spent approximately 10 days in the same area.

==See also==

* Arctic Bridge
* Arctic exploration
* Discovery of North-West Passage Act 1744
* List of Arctic expeditions
* Northern Sea Route
* Northwest Passage expedition of 1741
* Northwest Passage Territorial Park
* Panama Canal
* Strait of Anián
* Territorial claims in the Arctic

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* Illustrated with black&amp;white photos and reproductions and with maps (some fold to open out).
* 

==External links==
* List of 287 voyages and map 
* US Navy: Identifying Surface Warfare Missions in an Ice-free Arctic 
* 
* 
* site has articles, photographs and maps about the Northwest Passage, particularly the 1845 Franklin and 1903 Amundsen expeditions
* Mission to Utjulik
* The Voyage of the &quot;Manhattan&quot;
* Virtual exhibit of documents about arctic exploration &quot;Frozen Ocean: Search for the North-west Passage&quot;
* Daily satellite view of NW Passage (during summer) – arctic.io
* Northwest Passage website History of NW exploration with numerous maps and illustrations.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="4" end="21" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="23" end="26" title="Northwest Passage" label="NWP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757209" start="35" end="43" title="sea lane" label="sea lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q85377" start="177" end="195" title="Arctic Archipelago" label="Arctic Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q203117" start="297" end="314" title="Northeast Passage" label="Northeast Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="349" end="360" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="475" end="493" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passages"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="495" end="516" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwestern Passages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030194" start="524" end="548" title="Canadian Internal Waters" label="Canadian Internal Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="601" end="621" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="781" end="797" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021713" start="873" end="887" title="Robert McClure" label="Robert McClure"/>
<link wikidata="Q546572" start="957" end="965" title="John Rae (explorer)" label="John Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="1029" end="1043" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651008" start="1123" end="1138" title="Arctic ice pack" label="Arctic pack ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="1157" end="1172" title="marine shipping" label="marine shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243069" start="1202" end="1224" title="Arctic sea ice decline" label="Arctic sea ice decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1246" end="1260" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456040" start="1308" end="1322" title="ice navigation" label="ice navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="1339" end="1350" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="1429" end="1448" title="Canadian government" label="Canadian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030194" start="1502" end="1526" title="Canadian Internal Waters" label="Canadian Internal Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380574" start="1574" end="1594" title="international strait" label="international strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q117286" start="1867" end="1872" title="COSCO" label="COSCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058171" start="2026" end="2038" title="Nordic Orion" label="Nordic Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332978" start="2062" end="2080" title="deadweight tonnage" label="deadweight tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="2184" end="2196" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37040" start="2285" end="2295" title="Baffin Bay" label="Baffin Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="2318" end="2331" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285117" start="2335" end="2350" title="Lancaster Sound" label="Lancaster Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q207702" start="2437" end="2450" title="Hudson Strait" label="Hudson Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q845217" start="2493" end="2503" title="Foxe Basin" label="Foxe Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q691945" start="2522" end="2543" title="Fury and Hecla Strait" label="Fury and Hecla Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q919520" start="2582" end="2597" title="Gulf of Boothia" label="Gulf of Boothia"/>
<link wikidata="Q860663" start="2602" end="2621" title="Prince Regent Inlet" label="Prince Regent Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85377" start="2685" end="2712" title="Canadian Arctic Archipelago" label="Canadian Arctic Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054124" start="2761" end="2774" title="Parry Channel" label="Parry Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156271" start="2782" end="2804" title="Prince of Wales Strait" label="Prince of Wales Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q158129" start="2830" end="2845" title="Victoria Island" label="Victoria Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135336" start="2847" end="2866" title="M&amp;#x27;Clure Strait" label="M&amp;#x27;Clure Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q200226" start="2972" end="2984" title="Banks Island" label="Banks Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q860663" start="3048" end="3067" title="Prince Regent Inlet" label="Prince Regent Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q816043" start="3140" end="3153" title="Bellot Strait" label="Bellot Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q212219" start="3161" end="3176" title="Somerset Island (Nunavut)" label="Somerset Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892332" start="3192" end="3202" title="Peel Sound" label="Peel Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q207925" start="3231" end="3253" title="Prince of Wales Island (Nunavut)" label="Prince of Wales Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q601548" start="3280" end="3295" title="Victoria Strait" label="Victoria Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045416" start="3352" end="3362" title="Rae Strait" label="Rae Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681057" start="3367" end="3384" title="James Ross Strait" label="James Ross Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341999" start="3402" end="3416" title="Simpson Strait" label="Simpson Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q143246" start="3426" end="3445" title="King William Island" label="King William Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122604" start="3461" end="3476" title="Queen Maud Gulf" label="Queen Maud Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="3601" end="3614" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343019" start="3962" end="3974" title="Point Barrow" label="Point Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="4321" end="4335" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="4444" end="4458" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="4499" end="4508" title="Norwegian people" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="4509" end="4516" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q146841" start="4549" end="4565" title="Ellesmere Island" label="Ellesmere Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480252" start="4567" end="4583" title="Skraeling Island" label="Skraeling Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378757" start="4588" end="4599" title="Ruin Island" label="Ruin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="4645" end="4650" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q603749" start="4669" end="4683" title="Dorset culture" label="Dorset culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="4768" end="4783" title="colonial powers" label="colonial powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="5461" end="5469" title="seawater" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="5539" end="5549" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="5568" end="5577" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47568" start="5578" end="5585" title="iceberg" label="iceberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418698" start="5676" end="5690" title="Open Polar Sea" label="Open Polar Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655" start="5899" end="5912" title="John Franklin" label="John Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800397" start="5950" end="5975" title="McClure Arctic Expedition" label="McClure Arctic Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="6051" end="6065" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="6125" end="6134" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="6138" end="6144" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q210223" start="6152" end="6157" title="sloop" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q189262" start="6358" end="6370" title="Davis Strait" label="Davis Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37040" start="6383" end="6393" title="Baffin Bay" label="Baffin Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135336" start="6510" end="6524" title="McClure Strait" label="McClure Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q762651" start="6526" end="6538" title="Dease Strait" label="Dease Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q156271" start="6548" end="6570" title="Prince of Wales Strait" label="Prince of Wales Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q131274" start="6676" end="6688" title="Beaufort Sea" label="Beaufort Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159252" start="6697" end="6708" title="Chukchi Sea" label="Chukchi Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="6742" end="6755" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="6907" end="6921" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q14978" start="7147" end="7157" title="icebreaker" label="icebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q962986" start="7189" end="7214" title="Norwegian Polar Institute" label="Norwegian Polar Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q106080" start="7398" end="7405" title="thawing" label="thawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707256" start="7450" end="7468" title="Northern Sea Route" label="Northern Sea Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286914" start="7535" end="7549" title="Polar ice cap" label="Arctic ice cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7628" end="7632" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17306236" start="7751" end="7763" title="Mark Serreze" label="Mark Serreze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216646" start="7798" end="7831" title="National Snow and Ice Data Center" label="National Snow and Ice Data Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="8169" end="8176" title="straits" label="straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="8210" end="8214" title="Hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="8378" end="8390" title="Just-in-time manufacturing" label="just-in-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757209" start="8688" end="8702" title="shipping lanes" label="shipping lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q728502" start="9011" end="9018" title="Nautical chart" label="charted"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="9061" end="9067" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="9209" end="9223" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="9350" end="9360" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332978" start="9463" end="9481" title="deadweight tonnage" label="deadweight tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="9627" end="9639" title="cruise liner" label="cruise liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719498" start="9643" end="9656" title="gross tonnage" label="gross tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="9715" end="9724" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841326" start="9830" end="9840" title="Baffinland" label="Baffinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860196" start="9860" end="9871" title="Milne Inlet" label="Milne Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="9876" end="9889" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="10245" end="10284" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="10456" end="10462" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q582948" start="10464" end="10492" title="Norse colonization of North America" label="sailed as far north and west"/>
<link wikidata="Q146841" start="10496" end="10512" title="Ellesmere Island" label="Ellesmere Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480252" start="10514" end="10530" title="Skraeling Island" label="Skraeling Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="10794" end="10807" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q715754" start="10821" end="10839" title="Francisco de Ulloa" label="Francisco de Ulloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="10858" end="10883" title="Baja California Peninsula" label="Baja California Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q132811" start="10948" end="10966" title="Gulf of California" label="Gulf of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="11048" end="11070" title="Gulf of Saint Lawrence" label="Gulf of Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q844977" start="11113" end="11133" title="Island of California" label="Island of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="11289" end="11299" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="11357" end="11369" title="cartographer" label="cartographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364057" start="11370" end="11386" title="Giacomo Gastaldi" label="Giacomo Gastaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="11625" end="11631" title="Khagan" label="Khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050868" start="11652" end="11658" title="Cathay" label="Cathay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="11741" end="11754" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="11796" end="11801" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q504735" start="11808" end="11820" title="Juan de Fuca" label="Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="11950" end="11959" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326836" start="11991" end="12011" title="Bartholomew de Fonte" label="Bartholomew de Fonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="12040" end="12050" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q85642" start="12205" end="12215" title="John Cabot" label="John Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="12233" end="12242" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="12278" end="12284" title="Orient" label="Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="12295" end="12304" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320176" start="12310" end="12323" title="Estêvão Gomes" label="Estêvão Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="12367" end="12380" title="Spice Islands" label="Spice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q80288" start="12428" end="12444" title="Martin Frobisher" label="Martin Frobisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q764146" start="12491" end="12506" title="Canadian Arctic" label="Canadian Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004067" start="12537" end="12550" title="Frobisher Bay" label="Frobisher Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q447200" start="12645" end="12661" title="Humphrey Gilbert" label="Humphrey Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="12778" end="12790" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q311652" start="12854" end="12864" title="John Davis (English explorer)" label="John Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938327" start="12873" end="12889" title="Cumberland Sound" label="Cumberland Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321" start="13016" end="13031" title="Jacques Cartier" label="Jacques Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="13059" end="13079" title="Saint Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="13270" end="13278" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q68529" start="13428" end="13447" title="Samuel de Champlain" label="Samuel de Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q652156" start="13516" end="13530" title="Lachine Rapids" label="Lachine Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q433305" start="13566" end="13581" title="George Weymouth" label="George Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q207702" start="13646" end="13659" title="Hudson Strait" label="Hudson Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="13783" end="13801" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765656" start="13810" end="13825" title="Muscovy Company" label="Muscovy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q179167" start="13875" end="13887" title="Henry Hudson" label="Henry Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527167" start="13910" end="13921" title="John Knight (seafarer)" label="John Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="14256" end="14268" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="14375" end="14391" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781805" start="14453" end="14463" title="Tappan Zee" label="Tappan Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="14492" end="14507" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="14656" end="14660" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="14692" end="14698" title="strait" label="strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q223810" start="14778" end="14787" title="James Bay" label="James Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338420" start="15045" end="15058" title="Thomas Button" label="Thomas Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q654591" start="15352" end="15364" title="Robert Bylot" label="Robert Bylot"/>
<link wikidata="Q55807" start="15511" end="15525" title="William Baffin" label="William Baffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285117" start="15549" end="15564" title="Lancaster Sound" label="Lancaster Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q153586" start="15704" end="15721" title="King Christian IV" label="King Christian IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="15725" end="15739" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q924500" start="15741" end="15750" title="Jens Munk" label="Jens Munk"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="15846" end="15853" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="16286" end="16292" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="16298" end="16304" title="scurvy" label="scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="16462" end="16468" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="16502" end="16541" title="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle" label="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="16552" end="16564" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="16625" end="16636" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="16661" end="16670" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383" start="16675" end="16685" title="Lake Huron" label="Lake Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431148" start="16702" end="16717" title="Mackinac Island" label="Mackinac Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q947086" start="16770" end="16779" title="Green Bay (Lake Michigan)" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="16803" end="16815" title="Pottawatomie" label="Pottawatomie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="17050" end="17067" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="17075" end="17089" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884701" start="17153" end="17166" title="List of French possessions and colonies" label="French colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132772" start="17232" end="17243" title="Henry Ellis (governor)" label="Henry Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="17411" end="17420" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="17453" end="17458" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q72673" start="17550" end="17561" title="Hayes River" label="Hayes River"/>
<link wikidata="Q715285" start="17679" end="17692" title="Samuel Hearne" label="Samuel Hearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q127641" start="18114" end="18126" title="Vitus Bering" label="Vitus Bering"/>
<link wikidata="Q333210" start="18200" end="18215" title="Semyon Dezhnyov" label="Semyon Dezhnyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="18276" end="18289" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q32765" start="18410" end="18426" title="Aleksei Chirikov" label="Aleksei Chirikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="18469" end="18476" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="18540" end="18556" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="18627" end="18646" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q599852" start="18988" end="19024" title="Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra" label="Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317782" start="19041" end="19067" title="Francisco Antonio Mourelle" label="Francisco Antonio Mourelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="19226" end="19236" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q459906" start="19308" end="19328" title="Alessandro Malaspina" label="Alessandro Malaspina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476323" start="19339" end="19350" title="Yakutat Bay" label="Yakutat Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628203" start="19413" end="19431" title="Francisco de Eliza" label="Francisco de Eliza"/>
<link wikidata="Q867627" start="19471" end="19493" title="Strait of Juan de Fuca" label="Strait of Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258" start="19554" end="19571" title="Strait of Georgia" label="Strait of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626617" start="19631" end="19654" title="Dionisio Alcalá Galiano" label="Dionisio Alcalá Galiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="19847" end="19856" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="19860" end="19873" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063966" start="20046" end="20060" title="Charles Clerke" label="Charles Clerke"/>
<link wikidata="Q459810" start="20427" end="20439" title="Nootka Sound" label="Nootka Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="20695" end="20703" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255089" start="20707" end="20711" title="65th parallel north" label="65°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q294147" start="20839" end="20852" title="William Bligh" label="William Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q205485" start="20854" end="20870" title="George Vancouver" label="George Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700246" start="20876" end="20885" title="John Gore (seaman)" label="John Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129590" start="21066" end="21076" title="Cook Inlet" label="Cook Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255254" start="21230" end="21234" title="70th parallel north" label="70°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044451" start="21299" end="21319" title="Vancouver Expedition" label="Vancouver Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010627" start="21427" end="21442" title="British Columbia Coast" label="Northwest Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="21565" end="21584" title="Alexander Mackenzie (explorer)" label="Alexander MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q456083" start="21828" end="21837" title="John Ross (Arctic explorer)" label="John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330750" start="21839" end="21855" title="Elisha Kent Kane" label="Elisha Kent Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q437310" start="21857" end="21877" title="William Edward Parry" label="William Edward Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q200564" start="21883" end="21899" title="James Clark Ross" label="James Clark Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655" start="21939" end="21952" title="John Franklin" label="John Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q282922" start="21954" end="21965" title="George Back" label="George Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383112" start="21967" end="21985" title="Peter Warren Dease" label="Peter Warren Dease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793977" start="21987" end="22001" title="Thomas Simpson (explorer)" label="Thomas Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q546572" start="22007" end="22015" title="John Rae (explorer)" label="John Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q510721" start="22025" end="22050" title="Frederick William Beechey" label="Frederick William Beechey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021713" start="22118" end="22132" title="Robert McClure" label="Robert McClure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135336" start="22220" end="22234" title="McClure Strait" label="McClure Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q200226" start="22240" end="22252" title="Banks Island" label="Banks Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q134116" start="22264" end="22279" title="Melville Island (Northwest Territories and Nunavut)" label="Melville Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236433" start="22410" end="22434" title="Dolphin and Union Strait" label="Dolphin and Union Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q546572" start="22453" end="22461" title="John Rae (explorer)" label="John Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655" start="22558" end="22571" title="John Franklin" label="John Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q143246" start="23092" end="23111" title="King William Island" label="King William Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q548124" start="23223" end="23251" title="Francis Rawdon Moira Crozier" label="Francis Rawdon Moira Crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="23367" end="23373" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q181388" start="23377" end="23381" title="sled" label="sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q546572" start="23519" end="23527" title="John Rae (explorer)" label="John Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="23683" end="23694" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="23725" end="23735" title="Starvation" label="Starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358988" start="23807" end="23819" title="Owen Beattie" label="Owen Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q640694" start="23848" end="23869" title="University of Alberta" label="University of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111508" start="24045" end="24060" title="John Torrington" label="John Torrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342964" start="24062" end="24076" title="William Braine" label="William Braine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342963" start="24081" end="24094" title="John Hartnell" label="John Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="24113" end="24123" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q741133" start="24127" end="24141" title="Beechey Island" label="Beechey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="24169" end="24196" title="Lead poisoning" label="high concentrations of lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q866612" start="24278" end="24284" title="solder" label="solder"/>
<link wikidata="Q154865" start="24320" end="24328" title="botulism" label="botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="24517" end="24528" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021713" start="24642" end="24656" title="Robert McClure" label="Robert McClure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="24873" end="24882" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605258" start="25137" end="25160" title="Viscount Melville Sound" label="Viscount Melville Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q713398" start="25317" end="25331" title="Edward Belcher" label="Edward Belcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q414454" start="25767" end="25791" title="HMS Resolute (1850)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Resolute&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="25979" end="25991" title="rear-admiral" label="rear-admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="26063" end="26081" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="26392" end="26405" title="Royal Navy" label="British Naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q546572" start="26430" end="26438" title="John Rae (explorer)" label="John Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="26462" end="26487" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339732" start="26732" end="26740" title="dog sled" label="dog sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="27361" end="27375" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998519" start="27592" end="27612" title="net register tonnage" label="net register tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528966" start="27635" end="27639" title="Gjøa" label="Gjøa"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="28240" end="28250" title="Kristiania" label="Kristiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q893152" start="28291" end="28308" title="Boothia Peninsula" label="Boothia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q842763" start="28621" end="28640" title="North Magnetic Pole" label="North Magnetic Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q719585" start="28668" end="28678" title="Gjoa Haven" label="Gjoa Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547493" start="28830" end="28845" title="Herschel Island" label="Herschel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023677" start="28877" end="28890" title="Eagle, Alaska" label="Eagle, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045416" start="29026" end="29036" title="Rae Strait" label="Rae Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339732" start="29252" end="29260" title="dog sled" label="dog sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q312769" start="29293" end="29307" title="Knud Rasmussen" label="Knud Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q888553" start="29375" end="29390" title="Kalaallit" label="Greenland Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="29487" end="29516" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q935548" start="29525" end="29537" title="Henry Larsen (explorer)" label="Henry Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="29649" end="29656" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="29792" end="29800" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q893152" start="30041" end="30058" title="Boothia Peninsula" label="Boothia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="30136" end="30150" title="King George VI" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="30692" end="30699" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="30715" end="30725" title="deep draft" label="deep draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135885" start="30790" end="30804" title="circumnavigate" label="circumnavigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889620" start="30971" end="31003" title="United States Coast Guard Cutter" label="United States Coast Guard Cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q182468" start="31108" end="31120" title="Hydrography" label="hydrographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79985" start="31461" end="31475" title="Kodiak, Alaska" label="Kodiak, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q741346" start="31780" end="31800" title="Ice class" label="specially reinforced"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="31801" end="31812" title="Oil tanker" label="supertanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q937088" start="31995" end="32010" title="Alaska Pipeline" label="Alaska Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="32061" end="32068" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q170173" start="32115" end="32120" title="yacht" label="yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="32209" end="32235" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062335" start="32391" end="32412" title="Transglobe Expedition" label="Transglobe Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331624" start="32414" end="32429" title="Ranulph Fiennes" label="Ranulph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960070" start="32434" end="32451" title="Charles R. Burton" label="Charles R. Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q719547" start="32495" end="32506" title="Tuktoyaktuk" label="Tuktoyaktuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q894602" start="32537" end="32550" title="Boston Whaler" label="Boston Whaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683746" start="32563" end="32577" title="Tanquary Fiord" label="Tanquary Fiord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="33178" end="33193" title="Antarctic Ocean" label="Antarctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="33220" end="33231" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="33327" end="33336" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239594" start="33559" end="33577" title="David Scott Cowper" label="David Scott Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361551" start="33604" end="33612" title="Lifeboat (rescue)" label="lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="33796" end="33813" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139295" start="34526" end="34551" title="Vancouver Maritime Museum" label="Vancouver Maritime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075310" start="35322" end="35330" title="sailboat" label="sailboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q918830" start="35883" end="35891" title="Khatanga (village)" label="Khatanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190002" start="35991" end="36015" title="Cruising Club of America" label="Cruising Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="36742" end="36757" title="satellite image" label="satellite image"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="36878" end="36895" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q15046911" start="37274" end="37284" title="Pascal Lee" label="Pascal Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25035945" start="37311" end="37345" title="Northwest Passage Drive Expedition" label="Northwest Passage Drive Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354471" start="37356" end="37359" title="Haughton–Mars Project" label="HMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q217046" start="37380" end="37386" title="Humvee" label="Humvee"/>
<link wikidata="Q719707" start="37426" end="37435" title="Kugluktuk" label="Kugluktuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q719611" start="37439" end="37452" title="Cambridge Bay" label="Cambridge Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="37454" end="37461" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354471" start="37607" end="37628" title="Haughton–Mars Project" label="Haughton–Mars Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q186841" start="37655" end="37667" title="Devon Island" label="Devon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="37758" end="37762" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="37767" end="37771" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q990600" start="37844" end="37856" title="Resolute Bay" label="Resolute Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q606622" start="37934" end="37942" title="Resolute, Nunavut" label="Resolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="38505" end="38535" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="38861" end="38882" title="Long Island, New York" label="Long Island, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q485365" start="39585" end="39596" title="Bear Grylls" label="Bear Grylls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017702" start="39662" end="39672" title="Pond Inlet" label="Pond Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="39696" end="39717" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q251295" start="39723" end="39744" title="rigid inflatable boat" label="rigid inflatable boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="39804" end="39818" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753652" start="39914" end="39927" title="Sailing yacht" label="Sailing yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q79996" start="39995" end="40007" title="Nome, Alaska" label="Nome, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="40124" end="40130" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510928" start="40169" end="40179" title="Kane Basin" label="Kane Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892332" start="40198" end="40208" title="Peel Sound" label="Peel Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q185605" start="40255" end="40274" title="Antarctic Peninsula" label="Antarctic Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="40276" end="40285" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="40287" end="40303" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35086" start="40305" end="40318" title="South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands" label="South Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054124" start="40675" end="40688" title="Parry Channel" label="Parry Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974744" start="40793" end="40806" title="Amundsen Gulf" label="Amundsen Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q437310" start="40984" end="41001" title="Sir William Parry" label="Sir William Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q223314" start="41427" end="41434" title="Qaanaaq" label="Qaanaaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q276115" start="41466" end="41477" title="Grise Fiord" label="Grise Fiord"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="41847" end="41854" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q26087" start="42358" end="42364" title="Tromsø" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q80120" start="42377" end="42386" title="King Cove" label="King Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="42576" end="42600" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q26087" start="42604" end="42610" title="Tromsø" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q226" start="42717" end="42721" title="Nuuk" label="Nuuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="43013" end="43032" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276" start="43113" end="43125" title="bulk carrier" label="bulk carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q48969047" start="43191" end="43202" title="coking coal" label="coking coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187234" start="43208" end="43228" title="Port Metro Vancouver" label="Port Metro Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231231" start="43253" end="43265" title="Port of Pori" label="Port of Pori"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191348" start="43543" end="43559" title="Crystal Serenity" label="Crystal Serenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q123822980" start="44760" end="44770" title="Mark Agnew" label="Mark Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q85377" start="45007" end="45034" title="Canadian Arctic Archipelago" label="Canadian Arctic Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663988" start="45039" end="45054" title="internal waters" label="internal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="45076" end="45123" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q810247" start="45163" end="45172" title="baseline (sea)" label="baselines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112553" start="45263" end="45278" title="maritime nation" label="maritime nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380574" start="45336" end="45356" title="international strait" label="international strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q289218" start="45404" end="45419" title="transit passage" label="transit passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q85377" start="45844" end="45862" title="Arctic Archipelago" label="Arctic Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604978" start="45916" end="45937" title="Prudhoe Bay Oil Field" label="Prudhoe Bay Oil Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="46129" end="46141" title="supertankers" label="supertankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="46267" end="46283" title="U.S. Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q383520" start="46376" end="46396" title="Canadian Coast Guard" label="Canadian Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582493" start="46482" end="46503" title="1985 Polar Sea controversy" label="a diplomatic incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="47334" end="47351" title="nuclear submarine" label="nuclear submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723544" start="47536" end="47557" title="2006 Canadian federal election" label="2006 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="47584" end="47598" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="47812" end="47821" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076912" start="47907" end="47931" title="Joint Task Force (North)" label="Joint Task Force (North)"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="47950" end="47965" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="48141" end="48150" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="48386" end="48406" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029940" start="48747" end="48793" title="Canadian Defence and Foreign Affairs Institute" label="Canadian Defence and Foreign Affairs Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811869" start="48826" end="48860" title="United States Ambassador to Canada" label="United States Ambassador to Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q718335" start="48862" end="48875" title="Paul Cellucci" label="Paul Cellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018985" start="48939" end="48952" title="David H. Wilkins" label="David Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="48995" end="49015" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="49526" end="49538" title="Rear Admiral" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807392" start="49539" end="49552" title="Timothy McGee (USN)" label="Timothy McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q62730379" start="49766" end="49780" title="Morgan Ortagus" label="Morgan Ortagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="50576" end="50597" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q638056" start="50793" end="50825" title="Arctic Climate Impact Assessment" label="Arctic Climate Impact Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q464704" start="51783" end="51809" title="American Geophysical Union" label="American Geophysical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="52019" end="52027" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787503" start="52721" end="52739" title="Arctic Cooperative" label="Arctic Cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q719611" start="52847" end="52860" title="Cambridge Bay" label="Cambridge Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q719707" start="52862" end="52871" title="Kugluktuk" label="Kugluktuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q719585" start="52873" end="52883" title="Gjoa Haven" label="Gjoa Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q719605" start="52889" end="52897" title="Taloyoak" label="Taloyoak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440642" start="53061" end="53068" title="sealift" label="sealift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059084" start="53266" end="53305" title="Northern Transportation Company Limited" label="Northern Transportation Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013062" start="53318" end="53327" title="Hay River, Northwest Territories" label="Hay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q744553" start="53375" end="53384" title="Churchill, Manitoba" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="53537" end="53554" title="fibre-optic cable" label="fibre-optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058171" start="53811" end="53823" title="Nordic Orion" label="Nordic Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191348" start="53906" end="53922" title="Crystal Serenity" label="Crystal Serenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="54188" end="54205" title="fibre-optic cable" label="fibre-optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q110390878" start="54272" end="54287" title="Far North Fiber" label="Far North Fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="54478" end="54488" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="54667" end="54680" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="54805" end="54813" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174652" start="55070" end="55083" title="bowhead whale" label="bowhead whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787496" start="55252" end="55265" title="Arctic Bridge" label="Arctic Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516897" start="55268" end="55286" title="Arctic exploration" label="Arctic exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282014" start="55289" end="55329" title="Discovery of North-West Passage Act 1744" label="Discovery of North-West Passage Act 1744"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624178" start="55332" end="55358" title="List of Arctic expeditions" label="List of Arctic expeditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707256" start="55361" end="55379" title="Northern Sea Route" label="Northern Sea Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789793" start="55382" end="55418" title="Northwest Passage expedition of 1741" label="Northwest Passage expedition of 1741"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478777" start="55421" end="55455" title="Northwest Passage Territorial Park" label="Northwest Passage Territorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="55458" end="55470" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932718" start="55473" end="55488" title="Strait of Anián" label="Strait of Anián"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503926" start="55491" end="55523" title="Territorial claims in the Arctic" label="Territorial claims in the Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655" start="55899" end="55912" title="John Franklin" label="1845 Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="55917" end="55930" title="Roald Amundsen" label="1903 Amundsen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21216" wikidata="Q1227" url="?curid=21216" title="Nevada">
<text>Nevada ( ; ) is a landlocked state in the Western United States. It borders Oregon to the northwest, Idaho to the northeast, California to the west, Arizona to the southeast, and Utah to the east. Nevada is the seventh-most extensive, the 32nd-most populous, and the ninth-least densely populated U.S. state. Nearly three-quarters of Nevada&#x27;s population live in Clark County, which contains the Las Vegas–Paradise metropolitan area, including three of the state&#x27;s four largest incorporated cities. Nevada&#x27;s capital is Carson City. Las Vegas is the largest city in the state.

Nevada is officially known as the &quot;Silver State&quot; because of the importance of silver to its history and economy. It is also known as the &quot;Battle Born State&quot; because it achieved statehood during the Civil War (the words &quot;Battle Born&quot; also appear on its state flag); due to the presidency of Abraham Lincoln, the Union benefited immensely from the support of newly awarded statehood by the infusion of the monetary support of nearly $400 million in silver ore generated at the time by the Comstock Lode. It is also known as the &quot;Sagebrush State&quot;, for the native plant of the same name; and as the &quot;Sage-hen State&quot;. The state&#x27;s name means &quot;snowy&quot; in Spanish, referring to Nevada&#x27;s small overlap with the Sierra Nevada mountain range; however, the rest of Nevada is largely desert and semi-arid, much of it within the Great Basin. Areas south of the Great Basin are within the Mojave Desert, while Lake Tahoe and the Sierra Nevada lie on the western edge. In 2020, 80.1% of the state&#x27;s land was managed by various jurisdictions of the U.S. federal government, both civilian and military.

Native Americans of the Paiute, Shoshone, and Washoe tribes inhabit what is now Nevada. The first Europeans to explore the region were Spanish. They called the region &quot;Nevada&quot; (snowy) because of the snow which covered the mountains in winter, similar to the Sierra Nevada in Spain. The area formed from mostly Alta California and part of Nuevo México&#x27;s territory within the Viceroyalty of New Spain, which gained independence as Mexico in 1821. The United States annexed the area in 1848 after its victory in the Mexican–American War, and it was incorporated as part of the New Mexico and Utah Territory in 1850. The discovery of silver at the Comstock Lode in 1859 led to a population boom that became an impetus to the creation of Nevada Territory out of western Utah Territory in 1861. Nevada became the 36th state on October 31, 1864, as the second of two states added to the Union during the Civil War (the first being West Virginia).

Nevada is known for its libertarian laws. In 1940, with a population of just over 110,000 people, Nevada was by far the least-populated state, with less than half the population of the next least-populous state, Wyoming. However, legalized gambling and lenient marriage and divorce laws transformed Nevada into a major tourist destination in the 20th century. Nevada is the only U.S. state where prostitution is legal, though it is illegal in its most populated regionsClark County (Las Vegas), Washoe County (Reno) and Carson City (which, as an independent city, is not within the boundaries of any county). The tourism industry remains Nevada&#x27;s largest employer, with mining continuing as a substantial sector of the economy: Nevada is the fourth-largest producer of gold in the world. It is the driest state, and over time, and influenced by climate change, droughts in Nevada have been increasing in frequency and severity, putting a further strain on Nevada&#x27;s water security.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Nevada&quot; comes from the Spanish adjective (), meaning &quot;snow-covered&quot; or &quot;snowy&quot;. The state takes its name from the Nevada Territory, which in turn was named for the Sierra Nevada.

Nevadans pronounce the second syllable with the &quot;a&quot; of &quot;apple&quot; () while some people from outside of the state pronounce it with the &quot;a&quot; of &quot;palm&quot; (). Although the quality, but not the length, of the latter pronunciation is closer to the Spanish pronunciation (Spanish is open central , whereas American English varies from back to central ), it is not the pronunciation used by Nevadans. State Assemblyman Harry Mortenson proposed a bill to recognize the alternative pronunciation of Nevada, though the bill was not supported by most legislators and never received a vote. The Nevadan pronunciation is the one used by the state legislature. At one time, the state&#x27;s official tourism organization, TravelNevada, stylized the name of the state as &quot;Nevăda&quot;, with a breve over the &quot;a&quot; indicating the locally preferred pronunciation, which was also available as a license plate design until 2007.

==History==
=== Indigenous history ===
Before the arrival of Europeans, the earliest inhabitants were Indigenous tribes including the Goshute, Southern Paiute, Mohave, and Wašišiw (Washoe people).

===Before 1861===

Francisco Garcés was the first European in the area. Nevada was annexed as a part of the Spanish Empire in the northwestern territory of New Spain. Administratively, the area of Nevada was part of the Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas in the Viceroyalty of New Spain. Nevada became a part of Alta California (Upper California) province in 1804 when the Californias were split. With the Mexican War of Independence won in 1821, the province of Alta California became a territory (state) of Mexico, with a small population.

Jedediah Smith entered the Las Vegas Valley in 1827, Peter Skene Ogden traveled the Humboldt River in 1828, and in 1829 a merchant from Nuevo México named Antonio Armijo streamlined travel along the Old Spanish Trail. Chronicling Armijo&#x27;s route his scout Raphael Rivera was the first to name Las Vegas, in an 1830 report to governor José Antonio Chaves. Following the suggestions by Rivera of a spring, on the published expedition&#x27;s map, located in the Las Vegas area John C. Frémont set up camp in Las Vegas Springs in 1844. In 1847, Mormons established the State of Deseret, claiming all of Nevada within the Great Basin and the Colorado watershed. They built the first permanent settlement in what is now Nevada, called Mormon Station (now Genoa), in 1851. Additionally, in June 1855, William Bringhurst and 29 other Mormon missionaries built the first permanent structure, a 150-foot square adobe fort, northeast of downtown Las Vegas, converging on the Spanish and Mormon Roads. The fort remained under Salt Lake City&#x27;s control until the winter of 1858–1859, and the route remained largely under the control of Salt Lake City and Santa Fe tradespersons.

As such, these pioneers laid the foundation for the emergence of the initial settlements between the Sierra Nevadas and Mojave Desert and within the Las Vegas Valley. The enduring influence of New Mexico and Utah culture has since profoundly impacted Nevada&#x27;s identity, manifesting through New Mexican cuisine and Mormon foodways or New Mexican and Mormon folk musics, into the fabric of Nevada&#x27;s own cultural landscape.

As a result of the Mexican–American War and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Mexico permanently lost Alta California in 1848. The new areas acquired by the United States continued to be administered as territories. As part of the Mexican Cession (1848) and the subsequent California Gold Rush that used Emigrant Trails through the area, the state&#x27;s area evolved first as part of the Utah Territory and New Mexico Territory, then the Nevada Territory (March 2, 1861; named for the Sierra Nevada).
The first discovery of a major U.S. deposit of silver ore occurred in Comstock Lode under Virginia City, Nevada, in 1859.

===Separation from Utah Territory===
On March 2, 1861, the Nevada Territory separated from the Utah Territory and adopted its current name, shortened from &quot;The Sierra Nevada&quot; (Spanish for &quot;snow-covered mountain range&quot;). The 1861 southern boundary is commemorated by Nevada Historical Markers 57 and 58 in Lincoln and Nye counties.

===Statehood (1864)===
Eight days before the presidential election of 1864, Nevada became the 36th state in the Union, despite lacking the minimum 60,000 residents that Congress typically required a potential state to have in order to become a state. At the time, Nevada&#x27;s population was little more than 40,000. Governor Nye was frustrated that previous attempts to send the constitution via overland mail and by sea had failed by October 24, so on October 26 the full text was sent by telegraph at a cost of $4,303.27the most costly telegraph on file at the time for a single dispatch, . Finally, the response from Washington came on October 31, 1864: &quot;the pain is over, the child is born, Nevada this day was admitted into the Union&quot;. Statehood was rushed to the date of October 31 to help ensure Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s reelection on November8 and post-Civil War Republican dominance in Congress, as Nevada&#x27;s mining-based economy tied it to the more industrialized Union. As it turned out, however, Lincoln and the Republicans won the election handily and did not need Nevada&#x27;s help.

Nevada is one of only two states to significantly expand its borders after admission to the Union, with the other being Missouri, which acquired additional territory in 1837 due to the Platte Purchase. In 1866 another part of the western Utah Territory was added to Nevada in the eastern part of the state, setting the current eastern boundary. Nevada achieved its current southern boundaries on January 18, 1867, when it absorbed the portion of Pah-Ute County in the Arizona Territory west of the Colorado River, essentially all of present-day Nevada south of the 37th parallel. The transfer was prompted by the discovery of gold in the area, and officials thought Nevada would be better able to oversee the expected population boom. This area includes all of what is now Clark County and the southern-most portions of Esmeralda, Lincoln, and Nye counties.
Mining shaped Nevada&#x27;s economy for many years (see &quot;Silver mining in Nevada&quot;). When Mark Twain lived in Nevada during the period described in &quot;Roughing It&quot;, mining had led to an industry of speculation and immense wealth. Both mining and population temporarily declined in the late 19th century. However, the rich silver strike at Tonopah in 1900, followed by strikes in Goldfield and Rhyolite, created a second mining boom in Nevada and Nevada&#x27;s population.

====Gambling and labor====
Unregulated gambling was commonplace in the early Nevada mining towns but was outlawed in 1909 as part of a nationwide anti-gambling crusade. Because of subsequent declines in mining output and the decline of the agricultural sector during the Great Depression, Nevada again legalized gambling on March 19, 1931, with approval from the legislature. Governor Fred B. Balzar&#x27;s signature enacted the most liberal divorce laws in the country and open gambling. The reforms came just eight days after the federal government presented the $49million construction contract for Boulder Dam (now Hoover Dam).

====Nuclear testing====
The Nevada Test Site, northwest of the city of Las Vegas, was founded on January 11, 1951, for the testing of nuclear weapons. The site consists of about of the desert and mountainous terrain. Nuclear testing at the Nevada Test Site began with a nuclear bomb dropped on Frenchman Flat on January 27, 1951. The last atmospheric test was conducted on July 17, 1962, and the underground testing of weapons continued until September 23, 1992. The location is known for having the highest concentration of nuclear-detonated weapons in the U.S.

Over 80% of the state&#x27;s area is owned by the federal government. This is mainly because homesteads were not permitted in large enough sizes to be viable in the arid conditions that prevail throughout desert Nevada. Instead, early settlers would homestead land surrounding a water source, and then graze livestock on the adjacent public land, which is useless for agriculture without access to water (this pattern of ranching still prevails).

==== 2020s ====
The COVID-19 pandemic was confirmed in Nevada on March 5, 2020. Because of concerns about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), Nevada governor Steve Sisolak declared a state of emergency on March 12, 2020. Four days later, Nevada reported its first death. On March 17, 2020, Sisolak ordered the closure of non-essential businesses in the state to help prevent the spread of the coronavirus.

Various protests were held against Sisolak&#x27;s shutdown order beginning in April 2020. Nevada launched the first phase of its reopening on May 9, 2020. Restaurants, retailers, outdoor malls, and hair salons were among the businesses allowed to reopen, but with precautions in place, such as limiting occupancy to 50 percent. A second phase went into effect on May 29, 2020. It allowed for the reopening of state parks and businesses such as bars, gyms, and movie theaters. Casinos began reopening on June 4, 2020.

==Geography==


Nevada is almost entirely within the Basin and Range Province and is broken up by many north–south mountain ranges. Most of these ranges have endorheic valleys between them.

Much of the northern part of the state is within the Great Basin, a mild desert that experiences hot temperatures in the summer and cold temperatures in the winter. Occasionally, moisture from the Arizona Monsoon will cause summer thunderstorms; Pacific storms may blanket the area with snow. The state&#x27;s highest recorded temperature was in Laughlin (elevation of ) on June 29, 1994. The coldest recorded temperature was set in San Jacinto in 1972, in the northeastern portion of the state.

The Humboldt River crosses the state from east to west across the northern part of the state, draining into the Humboldt Sink near Lovelock. Several rivers drain from the Sierra Nevada eastward, including the Walker, Truckee, and Carson rivers. All of these rivers are endorheic basins, ending in Walker Lake, Pyramid Lake, and the Carson Sink, respectively. However, not all of Nevada is within the Great Basin. Tributaries of the Snake River drain the far north, while the Colorado River, which also forms much of the boundary with Arizona, drains much of southern Nevada.

The mountain ranges, some of which have peaks above , harbor lush forests high above desert plains, creating sky islands for endemic species. The valleys are often no lower in elevation than , while some in central Nevada are above .
The southern third of the state, where the Las Vegas area is situated, is within the Mojave Desert. The area receives less rain in the winter but is closer to the Arizona Monsoon in the summer. The terrain is also lower, mostly below , creating conditions for hot summer days and cool to chilly winter nights.

Nevada and California have by far the longest diagonal line (in respect to the cardinal directions) as a state boundary at just over . This line begins in Lake Tahoe nearly offshore (in the direction of the boundary), and continues to the Colorado River where the Nevada, California, and Arizona boundaries merge southwest of the Laughlin Bridge.

The largest mountain range in the southern portion of the state is the Spring Mountain Range, just west of Las Vegas. The state&#x27;s lowest point is along the Colorado River, south of Laughlin.

Nevada has 172 mountain summits with of prominence. Nevada ranks second, after Alaska, for the greatest number of mountains in the United States, followed by California, Montana, and Washington.

===Climate===
Nevada is the driest state in the United States. It is made up of mostly desert and semi-arid climate regions, and, with the exception of the Las Vegas Valley, the average summer diurnal temperature range approaches in much of the state. While winters in northern Nevada are long and fairly cold, the winter season in the southern part of the state tends to be of short duration and mild. Most parts of Nevada receive scarce precipitation during the year. The most rain that falls in the state falls on the east and northeast slopes of the Sierra Nevada.

The average annual rainfall per year is about ; the wettest parts get around . Nevada&#x27;s highest recorded temperature is at Laughlin on June 29, 1994, and the lowest recorded temperature is at San Jacinto on January 8, 1937. Nevada&#x27;s reading is the third highest statewide record high temperature of a U.S. state, just behind Arizona&#x27;s reading and California&#x27;s reading.

===Flora and fauna===

The vegetation of Nevada is diverse and differs by state area. Nevada contains six biotic zones: alpine, sub-alpine, ponderosa pine, pinion-juniper, sagebrush and creosotebush.

===Counties===


Nevada is divided into political jurisdictions designated as &quot;counties&quot;. Carson City is officially a consolidated municipality, meaning it legally functions as both a city and a county. As of 1919, there were 17 counties in the state, ranging from .

Lake County, one of the original nine counties formed in 1861, was renamed Roop County in 1862. Part of the county became Lassen County, California, in 1864, resolving border uncertainty. In 1883, Washoe County annexed the portion that remained in Nevada.

In 1969, Ormsby County was dissolved and the Consolidated Municipality of Carson City was created by the Legislature in its place coterminous with the old boundaries of Ormsby County.

Bullfrog County was formed in 1987 from part of Nye County. After the creation was declared unconstitutional, the county was abolished in 1989.

Humboldt County was designated as a county in 1856 by Utah Territorial Legislature and again in 1861 by the new Nevada Legislature.

Clark County is the most populous county in Nevada, accounting for nearly three-quarters of its residents. Las Vegas, Nevada&#x27;s most populous city, has been the county seat since the county was created in 1909 from a portion of Lincoln County, Nevada. Before that, it was a part of Arizona Territory. Clark County attracts numerous tourists: An estimated 44million people visited Clark County in 2014.

Washoe County is the second-most populous county of Nevada. Its county seat is Reno. Washoe County includes the Reno–Sparks metropolitan area.

Lyon County is the third most populous county. It was one of the nine original counties created in 1861. It was named after Nathaniel Lyon, the first Union General to be killed in the Civil War. Its current county seat is Yerington. Its first county seat was established at Dayton on November 29, 1861.

=== Settlements ===
==Parks and recreation areas==


===Recreation areas maintained by the federal government===
====Northern Nevada====
*Basin and Range National Monument 
*Black Rock Desert-High Rock Canyon Emigrant Trails National Conservation Area
* California National Historic Trail
* Great Basin National Park
* Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest
* Lake Tahoe Basin Management Unit
* Pony Express National Historic Trail
* Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge

====Southern Nevada====
* Ash Meadows National Wildlife Preserve
* Avi Kwa Ame National Monument
* Basin and Range National Monument
* Bootleg Canyon Mountain Bike Park
* Death Valley National Park
* Desert National Wildlife Refuge
* Gold Butte National Monument
* Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest
* Inyo National Forest
* Lake Mead National Recreation Area
* Moapa Valley National Wildlife Refuge
* Mount Charleston and the Mount Charleston Wilderness
* Old Spanish National Historic Trail
* Pahranagat National Wildlife Refuge
* Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area
* Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area
* Spring Mountains and the Spring Mountains National Recreation Area
* Tule Springs Fossil Beds National Monument

===Wilderness===

There are 68 designated wilderness areas in Nevada, protecting some under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service, U.S. Forest Service, and Bureau of Land Management.

===State parks===

The Nevada state parks comprise protected areas managed by the state of Nevada, including state parks, state historic sites, and state recreation areas. There are 24 state park units, including Van Sickle Bi-State Park which opened in July 2011 and is operated in partnership with the adjacent state of California.

==Demographics==
===Population===


The United States Census Bureau determined Nevada had a population of 3,104,614 at the 2020 U.S. census. In 2022, the estimated population of Nevada was 3,177,772, an increase of 73,158 residents (2.36%) since the 2020 census. Nevada had the highest percentage growth in population from 2017 to 2018. At the 2020 census, 6.0% of the state&#x27;s population were reported as under 5, 22.5% were under 18, and 16.1% were 65 or older. Females made up about 49.8% of the population. 19.1% of the population was reported as foreign-born.

Since the 2020 census, the population of Nevada had a natural increase of 2,374 (the net difference between 42,076 births and 39,702 deaths); and an increase due to net migration of 36,605 (of which 34,280 was due to domestic and 2,325 was due to international migration).

The center of population of Nevada is in southern Nye County. In this county, the unincorporated town of Pahrump, west of Las Vegas on the California state line, has grown very rapidly from 1980 to 2020. At the 2020 census, the town had 44,738 residents. Las Vegas grew from a gulch of 100 people in 1900 to 10,000 by 1950 to 100,000 by 1970, and was America&#x27;s fastest-growing city and metropolitan area from 1960 to 2000.

From about the 1940s until 2003, Nevada was the fastest-growing state in the U.S. percentage-wise. Between 1990 and 2000, Nevada&#x27;s population increased by 66%, while the nation&#x27;s population increased by 13%. More than two-thirds of the population live in Clark County, which is coextensive with the Las Vegas metropolitan area. Thus, in terms of population, Nevada is one of the most centralized states in the nation.

Henderson and North Las Vegas are among the top 20 fastest-growing U.S. cities with populations over 100,000. The rural community of Mesquite northeast of Las Vegas was an example of micropolitan growth in the 1990s and 2000s. Other desert towns like Indian Springs and Searchlight on the outskirts of Las Vegas have seen some growth as well.

Since 1950, the rate of population born in Nevada has never peaked above 27 percent, the lowest rate of all states. In 2012, only 25% of Nevadans were born in Nevada.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 7,618 homeless people in Nevada.

====Race and ethnicity====

According to the 2022 American Community Survey, 30.3% of Nevada&#x27;s population were of Hispanic or Latino origin (of any race): Mexican (22%), Cuban (1.5%), Salvadoran (1.5%), Puerto Rican (1%), and other Hispanic or Latino origin (4.3%). The largest European ancestry groups were: German (8.9%), English (8.1%), Irish (7.2%), and Italian (4.8%). The largest Asian ancestry groups in the state were Filipino (6.4%) and Chinese (1.9%).

In 1980, non-Hispanic whites made up 83.2% of the state&#x27;s population.

As of 2011, 63.6% of Nevada&#x27;s population younger than age1 were minorities. Las Vegas is a majority-minority city. According to the United States Census Bureau estimates, as of July 1, 2018, non-Hispanic Whites made up 48.7% of Nevada&#x27;s population.

In Douglas, Mineral, and Pershing counties, a plurality of residents are of Mexican ancestry. In Nye County and Humboldt County, residents are mostly of German ancestry; Washoe County has many Irish Americans. Americans of English descent form pluralities in Lincoln County, Churchill County, Lyon County, White Pine County, and Eureka County.

Asian Americans have lived in the state since at least the 1850s, when the California gold rush brought thousands of Chinese miners to Washoe County. They were followed by a few hundred Japanese farmworkers in the late 19th century. By the late 20th century, many immigrants from China, Japan, Korea, the Philippines, Bangladesh, India, and Vietnam came to the Las Vegas metropolitan area. The city now has a significant Asian American community, with a mostly Chinese and Taiwanese area known as &quot;Chinatown&quot; west of I-15 on Spring Mountain Road. Filipino Americans form the largest Asian American group in the state, with a population of more than 202,000. They comprise 59.8% of the Asian American population in Nevada and constitute about 6.4% of the entire state&#x27;s population.

Mining booms drew many Greek and Eastern European immigrants to Nevada. In the early twentieth century, Greeks, Slavs, Danes, Japanese, Italians, and Basques poured into Nevada. Chileans were found in the state as early as 1870. During the mid-1800s, a significant number of European immigrants, mainly from Ireland, England and Germany, arrived in the state with the intention of capitalizing on the thriving mining sector in the region.

Native American tribes in Nevada are the Northern and Southern Paiute, Western Shoshone, Goshute, Hualapai, Washoe, and Ute tribes.

Whites remain the largest racial or ethnic group in Nevada. Hispanics are the fastest growing ethnic group in Nevada. There is a growing Mexican and Central American population in Nevada. Many of Nevada&#x27;s Latino immigrants are from Mexico, Guatemala and El Salvador. Nevada also has a growing multiracial population.

The top countries of origin for immigrants in Nevada were Mexico (39.5 percent of immigrants), the Philippines (14.3 percent), El Salvador (5.2 percent), China (3.1 percent), and Cuba (3 percent).

The majority of people in Nevada are of white (European) ancestry. A small portion trace their ancestry to Basque people recruited as sheepherders. Hispanics in Nevada are mainly of Mexican and Cuban heritage. Latinos comprise about one-fourth of Nevada&#x27;s residents and are concentrated in the southeast in Nevada. African Americans live mainly in the Las Vegas and Reno area and constitute less than one-tenth of the population. Native Americans of the Paiute, Shoshone, and Washoe tribes live on several reservations in the state and make up a small fraction of Nevada&#x27;s population.

The most common ancestries in Nevada include Mexican, German, Irish, English, Italian and Asian.

Nevada is the third most diverse state in the country, behind only Hawaii and California.
;Birth data
&quot;Note: Births within the table do not add up, due to Hispanics being counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.&quot;

* Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one &quot;Hispanic&quot; group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.

A small percentage of Nevada&#x27;s population lives in rural areas. The culture of these places differs significantly from major metropolitan areas. People in these rural counties tend to be native Nevada residents, unlike in the Las Vegas and Reno areas, where the vast majority of the population was born in another state. The rural population is also less diverse in terms of race and ethnicity. Mining plays an important role in the economies of the rural counties, with tourism being less prominent. Ranching also has a long tradition in rural Nevada.

===Locations by per capita income===

===Religion===
Church attendance in Nevada is among the lowest of all U.S. states. In a 2009 Gallup poll only 30% of Nevadans said they attended church weekly or almost weekly, compared to 42% of all Americans (only four states were found to have a lower attendance rate than Nevada&#x27;s). In 2020, the Public Religion Research Institute determined 67% of the population were Christian, reflecting a 1% increase in religiosity from 2014&#x27;s separate Pew study.

Major religious affiliations of the people of Nevada were, according to the Pew Research Center in 2014: Protestant 35%, Irreligious 28%, Roman Catholic 25%, Latter-day Saints 4%, Jewish 2%, Hindu less than 1%, Buddhist 0.5% and Muslim around 0.2%. Parts of Nevada (in the eastern parts of the state) are situated in the Mormon Corridor.

The largest denominations by number of adherents in 2010 were the Roman Catholic Church with 451,070; The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 175,149; and the Southern Baptist Convention with 45,535; Buddhist congregations 14,727; Baháʼí Faith 1,723; and Muslim 1,700. The Jewish community is represented by The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute and Chabad. According to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6.2% of Nevadans are adherents, making it the sixth highest percentage state in the Union.

===Languages===

The most common non-English languages spoken in Nevada are Spanish, Tagalog and Chinese. Indigenous languages of Nevada include Northern Paiute, the Southern Paiute, Shoshone, and Washo.

The top seven languages spoken in Nevada according to the U.S. Census data are Spanish, Tagalog, Chinese, Vietnamese, Korean, Amharic, Arabic, and Thai.

=== Native American tribes ===
Historically what is now Nevada has been inhabited mainly by the Paiute, Shoshone, and Washoe.

The largest Native American tribes in Nevada according to the 2010 census are listed in the table below:
==Economy==



The economy of Nevada is tied to tourism (especially entertainment and gambling related), mining, and cattle ranching. Nevada&#x27;s industrial outputs are tourism, entertainment, mining, machinery, printing and publishing, food processing, and electric equipment. The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates Nevada&#x27;s total state product in 2018 was $170billion. The state&#x27;s per capita personal income in 2020 was $53,635, ranking 31st in the nation. Nevada&#x27;s state debt in 2012 was calculated to be $7.5billion, or $3,100 per taxpayer. As of May 2021, the state&#x27;s unemployment rate was 7.8%.
===Mining===

In portions of the state outside of the Las Vegas and Reno metropolitan areas mining plays a major economic role. By value, gold is by far the most important mineral mined. In 2022, of gold worth $7.3billion were mined in Nevada, and the state accounted for 4% of world gold production. Other minerals mined in Nevada include construction aggregates, copper, gypsum, diatomite and lithium. Despite its rich deposits, the cost of mining in Nevada is generally high, and output is very sensitive to world commodity prices.

===Cattle ranching===
Cattle ranching is a major economic activity in rural Nevada. Nevada&#x27;s agricultural outputs are cattle, hay, alfalfa, dairy products, onions, and potatoes. In 2020, there were an estimated 438,511 head of cattle and 71,699 head of sheep in Nevada. Most of these animals forage on rangeland in the summer, with supplemental feed in the winter. Calves are generally shipped to out-of-state feedlots in the fall to be fattened for the market. Over 90% of Nevada&#x27;s of cropland is used to grow hay, mostly alfalfa, for livestock feed.

===Largest employers===
The largest employers in the state, as of the first fiscal quarter of 2011, are the following, according to the Nevada Department of Employment, Training and Rehabilitation:

==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===
Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;California Zephyr&quot; train uses the Union Pacific&#x27;s original transcontinental railroad line in daily service from Chicago to Emeryville, California, serving Elko, Winnemucca, and Reno. Las Vegas has had no passenger train service since Amtrak&#x27;s Desert Wind was discontinued in 1997. Amtrak Thruway buses provide connecting service from Las Vegas to trains at Needles, California, Los Angeles, and Bakersfield, California; and from Stateline, Nevada, to Sacramento, California. There have been a number of proposals to re-introduce service to either Los Angeles or Southern California with the privately run Brightline West having begun construction in 2024.

The Union Pacific Railroad has some railroads in the north and south of Nevada. Greyhound Lines provide some bus service to the state.

Interstate 15 (I-15) passes through the southern tip of the state, serving Las Vegas and other communities. I-215 and I-515 also serve the Las Vegas metropolitan area. I-80 crosses through the northern part of Nevada, roughly following the path of the Humboldt River from Utah in the east and the Truckee River westward through Reno into California. It has a spur route, I-580. Nevada also is served by several U.S. highways: US6, US50, US93, US95 and US395. There are also 189 Nevada state routes. Many of Nevada&#x27;s counties have a system of county routes as well, though many are not signed or paved in rural areas. Nevada is one of a few states in the U.S. that do not have a continuous interstate highway linking its two major population centersthe road connection between the Las Vegas and Reno areas is a combination of several different Interstate and U.S. highways. The Interstate 11 proposed routing may eventually remedy this.

The state is one of just a few in the country to allow semi-trailer trucks with three trailerswhat might be called a &quot;road train&quot; in Australia. But American versions are usually smaller, in part because they must ascend and descend some fairly steep mountain passes.

RTC Transit is the public transit system in the Las Vegas metropolitan area. The agency is the largest transit agency in the state and operates a network of bus service across the Las Vegas Valley, including the use of The Deuce, double-decker buses, on the Las Vegas Strip and several outlying routes. RTC RIDE operates a system of local transit bus service throughout the Reno-Sparks metropolitan area. Other transit systems in the state include Carson City&#x27;s JAC. Most other counties in the state do not have public transportation at all.

Additionally, a monorail system provides public transportation in the Las Vegas area. The Las Vegas Monorail line services several casino properties and the Las Vegas Convention Center on the east side of the Las Vegas Strip, running near Paradise Road, with a possible future extension to Harry Reid International Airport. Several hotels also run their own monorail lines between each other, which are typically several blocks in length.

Harry Reid International Airport in Las Vegas is the busiest airport serving Nevada. The Reno-Tahoe International Airport (formerly known as the Reno Cannon International Airport) is the other major airport in the state.

===Energy===

Nevada has had a thriving solar energy sector. An independent study in 2013 concluded that solar users created a $36million net benefit. However, in December 2015, the Public Utility Commission let the state&#x27;s only power company, NV Energy, charge higher rates and fees to solar panel users, leading to an immediate collapse of rooftop solar panel use.

In December 1987, Congress amended the Nuclear Waste Policy Act to designate Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository as the only site to be characterized as a permanent repository for all of the nation&#x27;s highly radioactive waste.

=== Affordable housing ===
In 2018, the National Low Income Housing Coalition calculated the discrepancy between available affordable housing units and renters who earn below the poverty line. In Nevada, only 15 affordable rental homes are available per 100 extremely low income (ELI) households. The shortage extended to a deficit in supply of 71,358 affordable rental homes. This was the largest discrepancy of any state. The most notable catalyst for this shortage was the Great Recession and housing crisis of 2007 and 2008. Since then, housing prices have increased while demand has increased, and supply has struggled to match the increase in demand. In addition, low-income service workers were slowly being pushed out by an influx of tech professionals. In Nevada there is essentially a standard of six-figure income to affordably rent a single-family home. Considering the average salary in Nevada, $54,842 per year, this standard is on average, unaffordable. The disproportionate cost of housing compared to average salary has led to 112,872 renters to be paying more than half of their yearly income towards housing.

The definition of an affordable home is &quot;one that a household can obtain for 30 percent or less of its annual income&quot;. So, there is clearly a long way to go in order to close the gap between housing prices and relative income in the state. Renters are looking for solutions to still be able to live in the state in a way that their income can support. As a result, single adults are being forced to split rent with other renters or move residences to farther outside metro areas. One solution being offered is to increase the supply of higher income positions within the state to make things more affordable. However, this would require Nevadans to retrain in new jobs or careers.

==Education==
Education in Nevada is achieved through public and private elementary, middle, and high schools, as well as colleges and universities.

A May 2015 educational reform law expanded school choice options to 450,000 Nevada students who are at up to 185% of the federal poverty level. Education savings accounts (ESAs) are enabled by the new law to help pay the tuition for private schools. Alternatively, families &quot;can use funds in these accounts to also pay for textbooks and tutoring&quot;.

Approximately 86.9% of Nevada residents have attained at least a high school degree or equivalent, which is below the national average of 88.6%.

===Public school districts===

Public school districts in Nevada include:

* Carson City School District
* Churchill County School District
* Clark County School District, the fifth largest school district in the United States
* Douglas County School District
* Elko County School District
* Esmeralda County School District
* Eureka County School District
* Humboldt County School District
* Lander County School District
* Lincoln County School District
* Lyon County School District
* Mineral County School District
* Nye County School District
* Pershing County School District
* Storey County School District
* Washoe County School District
* White Pine County School District
===Colleges and universities===
* Nevada System of Higher Education
** University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV)
** University of Nevada, Reno (UNR)
** Nevada State University (NSU)
** Truckee Meadows Community College (TMCC)
** Great Basin College
** College of Southern Nevada (CSN)
** Western Nevada College (WNC)
* Sierra Nevada College
* Touro University Nevada
* Roseman University of Health Sciences

===Research institutes===

* Desert Research Institute

The Nevada Aerospace Hall of Fame provides educational resources and promotes the aerospace and aviation history of the state.

==Law and government==
===Government===


Under the Constitution of the State of Nevada, the powers of the Nevada government are divided among three separate departments: the executive consisting of the governor of Nevada and their cabinet along with the other elected constitutional officers; the legislative consisting of the Nevada Legislature, which includes the Assembly and the Senate; and the judicial consisting of the Supreme Court of Nevada and lower courts.

The governor is the chief magistrate of Nevada, the head of the executive department of the state&#x27;s government, and the commander-in-chief of the state&#x27;s military forces. The current governor is Joe Lombardo, a Republican. The executive branch also consists of an independently elected lieutenant governor, secretary of state, state treasurer, state controller, and attorney general who function as a check and balance on the power of the governor.

The Nevada Legislature is a bicameral body divided into an Assembly and Senate. Members of the Assembly serve two years, and members of the Senate serve four years. Both houses of the Nevada Legislature enacted term limits starting in 2010, with senators and assemblymen/women who are limited to a maximum of twelve years in each body (by appointment or election which is a lifetime limit)a provision of the constitution which was upheld by the Supreme Court of Nevada in a unanimous decision. Each session of the legislature meets for a constitutionally mandated 120 days in every odd-numbered year, or longer if the governor calls a special session.

On December 18, 2018, Nevada became the first in the United States with a female majority in its legislature. Women hold nine of the 21 seats in the Nevada Senate, and 23 of the 42 seats in the Nevada Assembly.

The Supreme Court of Nevada is the state supreme court and the head of the Nevada Judiciary. Original jurisdiction is divided between the district courts (with general jurisdiction), and justice courts and municipal courts (both of limited jurisdiction). Appeals from District Courts are made directly to the Nevada Supreme Court, which under a deflective model of jurisdiction, has the discretion to send cases to the Court of Appeals for final resolution.

Incorporated towns in Nevada, known as cities, are given the authority to legislate anything not prohibited by law. A recent movement has begun to permit home rule to incorporate Nevada cities to give them more flexibility and fewer restrictions from the Legislature. Town Boards for unincorporated towns are limited local governments created by either the local county commission, or by referendum, and form a purely advisory role and in no way diminish the responsibilities of the county commission that creates them.

====State agencies====
* Attorney General
* Department of Business &amp; Industry
* Department of Conservation &amp; Natural Resources
* Consumer Health Assistance
* Controller&#x27;s Office
* Department of Corrections
* Nevada Department of Cultural Affairs
* Nevada Commission on Economic Development
* Department of Education
* Nevada Secretary of State, Election Division
* Department of Employment, Training &amp; Rehabilitation
* Gaming Control Board
* Governor&#x27;s Office
* Nevada Film Office
* Department of Health and Human Services
* Department of Information Technology
* Department of Justice
* Lieutenant Governor
* Nevada Military Department
* Division of Minerals, Commission on Mineral Resources
* Department of Motor Vehicles
* Department of Personnel
* Advisory Council for Prosecuting Attorneys
* Public Employees Benefit Program
* Public Employees Retirement System
* Department of Public Safety
* Nevada Public Utilities Commission
* Department of Secretary of State
* Department of Taxation
* Commission on Tourism
* Department of Transportation
* Nevada State Treasurer
* Universities and Community Colleges of Nevada
* Nevada Office of Veterans&#x27; Services
* Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education
* Nevada Department of Wildlife
* Board of Museums and History
===Law===

In 1900, Nevada&#x27;s population was the smallest of all states and was shrinking, as the difficulties of living in a &quot;barren desert&quot; began to outweigh the lure of silver for many early settlers. Historian Lawrence Friedman has explained what happened next:
With the advent of air conditioning for summertime use and Southern Nevada&#x27;s mild winters, the fortunes of the state began to turn around, as it did for Arizona, making these two states the fastest growing in the Union.

====Prostitution====

Nevada is the only state where prostitution is legalin a licensed brothel in a county which has specifically voted to permit it. It is illegal in larger jurisdictions such as Clark County (which contains Las Vegas), Washoe County (which contains Reno), and the independent city of Carson City.

====Divorce====

Nevada&#x27;s early reputation as a &quot;divorce haven&quot; arose from the fact that before the no-fault divorce revolution in the 1970s, divorces were difficult to obtain in the United States. Already having legalized gambling and prostitution, Nevada continued the trend of boosting its profile by adopting one of the most liberal divorce statutes in the nation. This resulted in &quot;Williams v. North Carolina (1942)&quot;, , in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled North Carolina had to give &quot;full faith and credit&quot; to a Nevada divorce. The Court modified its decision in &quot;Williams v. North Carolina&quot; (1945), , by holding a state need not recognize a Nevada divorce unless one of the parties was domiciled there at the time the divorce was granted and the forum state was entitled to make its own determination.

As of 2009, Nevada&#x27;s divorce rate was above the national average.

====Taxes====

Nevada&#x27;s tax laws are intended to draw new residents and businesses to the state. Nevada has no personal income tax or corporate income tax. Since Nevada does not collect income data it cannot share such information with the federal government, the IRS.

The state sales tax (similar to VAT or GST) in Nevada is variable depending upon the county. The statewide tax rate is 6.85%, with five counties (Elko, Esmeralda, Eureka, Humboldt, and Mineral) charging this amount. Counties may impose additional rates via voter approval or through approval of the state legislature; therefore, the applicable sales tax varies by county from 6.85% to 8.375% (Clark County). Clark County, which includes Las Vegas, imposes four separate county option taxes in addition to the statewide rate: 0.25% for flood control, 0.50% for mass transit, 0.25% for infrastructure, and 0.25% for more law enforcement. In Washoe County, which includes Reno, the sales tax rate is 7.725%, due to county option rates for flood control, the ReTRAC train trench project, and mass transit, and an additional county rate approved under the Local Government Tax Act of 1991. The minimum Nevada sales tax rate changed on July 1, 2009.

The lodging tax rate in unincorporated Clark County, which includes the Las Vegas Strip, is 12%. Within the boundaries of the cities of Las Vegas and Henderson, the lodging tax rate is 13%.

Corporations such as Apple Inc. allegedly have set up investment companies and funds in Nevada to avoid paying taxes.

====LGBT rights====

In 2009, the Nevada Legislature passed a bill creating a domestic partnership registry which enables same-sex couples to enjoy the same rights as married couples. Due to the landmark decision in the case of &quot;Obergefell v. Hodges&quot;, 576 U.S. 644 (2015), same-sex marriage was outright legalized in the state.

====Incorporation====

Nevada provides a friendly environment for the formation of corporations, and many (especially California) businesses have incorporated in Nevada to take advantage of the benefits of the Nevada statute. Nevada corporations offer great flexibility to the board of directors and simplify or avoid many of the rules that are cumbersome to business managers in some other states. In addition, Nevada has no franchise tax, although it does require businesses to have a license for which the business has to pay the state.

====Financial institutions====

Similarly, many U.S. states have usury laws limiting the amount of interest a lender can charge, but federal law allows corporations to &quot;import&quot; these laws from their home state. Nevada has no cap on interest rates that may be agreed to in contracts.

====Alcohol and other drugs====

Nevada has very liberal alcohol laws. Bars are permitted to remain open 24hours, with no &quot;last call&quot;. Liquor stores, convenience stores and supermarkets may also sell alcohol 24hours per day and may sell beer, wine and spirits.

In 2016, Nevada voters approved Question2, which legalized the possession, transportation and cultivation of personal use amounts of marijuana for adults age 21 years and older, and authorized the creation of a regulated market for the sale of marijuana to adults age 21 years and older through state-licensed retail outlets. Nevada voters had previously approved medical marijuana in 2000, but rejected marijuana legalization in a similar referendum in 2006. Marijuana in all forms remains illegal under federal law.

Aside from cannabis legalization, non-alcohol drug laws are a notable exception to Nevada&#x27;s otherwise libertarian principles. It is notable for having the harshest penalties for drug offenders in the country. Nevada remains the only state to still use mandatory minimum sentencing guidelines for possession of drugs.

The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) reported, in their Behavioral Health Barometer for Nevada, published in 2014, changes to substance abuse patterns and addiction across the southwestern state. Between 2012 and 2013, adolescents in Nevada abused illicit substances at a slightly higher percentage than nationally. 10.2 percent of Nevada&#x27;s adolescents abused illicit drugs compared to 9.2 percent across the United States. Between 2009 and 2013, 11.7 percent of all adolescents in the state reported abusing illicit, intoxicating substances in the month prior to the survey; this represents 25,000 adolescents.

====Smoking====

Nevada voters enacted a smoking ban (&quot;The Nevada Clean Indoor Air Act&quot;) in November 2006 which became effective on December 8, 2006. It outlaws smoking in most workplaces and public places. Smoking is permitted in bars, but only if the bar serves no food, or the bar is inside a larger casino. Smoking is also permitted in casinos, certain hotel rooms, tobacco shops, and brothels. However, some businesses do not obey this law and the government tends not to enforce it. In 2011, smoking restrictions in Nevada were relaxed for certain places which allow only people 21 or older inside.

====Crime====

In 2006, the crime rate in Nevada was about 24% higher than the national average rate, though crime has since decreased. Property crimes accounted for about 85% of the total crime rate in Nevada, which was 21% higher than the national rate. The remaining 20.3% were violent crimes. A complete listing of crime data in the state for 2013 can be found here:

==Politics==


===State politics===

Due to heavy growth in the southern portion of the state, there is a noticeable divide between the politics of northern and southern Nevada. Historically, northern Nevada has been very Republican. The more rural counties of the north are among the most conservative regions of the state. Carson City, the state&#x27;s capital, is a Republican-leaning swing city/county. Washoe County, home to Reno, has historically been strongly Republican, but now has become a fairly balanced swing county, like the state as a whole. Clark County, home to Las Vegas, has been a stronghold for the Democratic Party since it was founded in 1909, having voted Republican only six times and once for a third-party candidate. Clark and Washoe counties have long dominated the state&#x27;s politics. Between them, they cast 87% of Nevada&#x27;s vote, and elect a substantial majority of the state legislature. The last Republican to carry Clark County was George H. W. Bush in 1988, and the last Republican to carry Washoe County was George W. Bush in 2004. The great majority of the state&#x27;s elected officials are from either Las Vegas or Reno. Donald Trump was able to carry Nevada with a statewide majority, despite losing both Clark and Washoe.

In 2014, Republican Adam Laxalt, despite losing both Clark and Washoe counties, was elected Attorney General. However, he had lost Clark County only by 5.6% and Washoe County by 1.4%, attributable to lower turnout in these counties.

===National politics===

Nevada has been won by the winner of nearly every presidential election since its first in 1864, only being carried by the defeated candidate eight times since statehood, most of which were before 1900. Since 1912 Nevada has been carried by the presidential victor the most out of any state (27 of 29 elections), the only exceptions being 1976 when it voted for Gerald Ford over Jimmy Carter and 2016 when the state was carried by Hillary Clinton over Donald Trump. This gives the state status as a political bellwether. It was one of only three states won by John F. Kennedy in the American West in the election of 1960, albeit narrowly.
The state&#x27;s U.S. Senators are Democrats Catherine Cortez Masto and Jacky Rosen. The Governorship is held by Joe Lombardo, a Republican.

===Elections===

Nevada is the only U.S. state to have a none of the above option available on its ballots. Officially called None of These Candidates, the option was first added to the ballot in 1975 and is used in all statewide elections, including president, US Senate and all state constitutional positions. In the event &quot;None of These Candidates&quot; receives a plurality of votes in the election, the candidate with the next-highest total is elected.

In a 2020 study, Nevada was ranked as the 23rd on the &quot;Cost of Voting Index&quot;, which is a measure of &quot;the ease of voting across the United States.&quot;

==Culture==
===Entertainment and tourism===

Resort areas like Las Vegas, Reno, Lake Tahoe, and Laughlin attract visitors from around the nation and world. In fiscal year 2022 Nevada casinos (not counting those with annual revenue under a million dollars) brought in billion in gaming revenue and another billion in non-gaming revenue.

Nevada has by far the most hotel rooms per capita in the United States. According to the American Hotel and Lodging Association, there were 187,301 rooms in 584 hotels (of 15 or more rooms). The state is ranked just below California, Texas, Florida, and New York in the total number of rooms, but those states have much larger populations. Nevada has one hotel room for every 14 residents, far above the national average of one hotel room per 67 residents.

Prostitution is legal in parts of Nevada in licensed brothels, but only counties with populations under 400,000 have the option to legalize it. Although prostitution is not a major part of the Nevada economy, employing roughly 300 women as independent contractors, it is a very visible endeavor. Of the 14 counties permitted to legalize prostitution under state law, eight have chosen to legalize brothels. State law prohibits prostitution in Clark County (which contains Las Vegas), and Washoe County (which contains Reno). However, prostitution is legal in Storey County, which is part of the Reno–Sparks metropolitan area.

===Sports===

The Las Vegas Valley is home to the Vegas Golden Knights of the National Hockey League who began to play in the 2017–18 NHL season at T-Mobile Arena on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise, the Las Vegas Raiders of the National Football League who began play at Allegiant Stadium in Paradise in 2020 after moving from Oakland, California, and the Las Vegas Aces of the WNBA who began playing in 2018 at Mandalay Bay Events Center after relocating from San Antonio. The Oakland Athletics of Major League Baseball plan to move to Las Vegas by 2027.

Nevada takes pride in college sports, most notably its college football. College teams in the state include the Nevada Wolf Pack (representing the University of Nevada, Reno) and the UNLV Rebels (representing the University of Nevada, Las Vegas), both in the Mountain West Conference (MW).

UNLV is most remembered for its men&#x27;s basketball program, which experienced its height of supremacy in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Coached by Jerry Tarkanian, the Runnin&#x27; Rebels became one of the most elite programs in the country. In 1990, UNLV won the Men&#x27;s DivisionI Championship by defeating Duke 103–73, which set tournament records for most points scored by a team and largest margin of victory in the national title game.

In 1991, UNLV finished the regular season undefeated, a feat that would not be matched in DivisionI men&#x27;s basketball for more than 20 years. Forward Larry Johnson won several awards, including the Naismith Award. UNLV reached the Final Four yet again, but lost their national semifinal against Duke 79–77. The Runnin&#x27; Rebels were the Associated Press pre-season No.1 back to back (1989–90, 1990–91). North Carolina is the only other team to accomplish that (2007–08, 2008–09).

The state&#x27;s involvement in major-college sports is not limited to its local schools. In the 21st century, the Las Vegas area has become a significant regional center for college basketball conference tournaments. The MW, West Coast Conference, and Western Athletic Conference all hold their men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s tournaments in the area, and the Pac-12 holds its men&#x27;s tournament there as well. The Big Sky Conference, after decades of holding its men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s conference tournaments at campus sites, began holding both tournaments in Reno in 2016.

Las Vegas has hosted several professional boxing matches, most recently at the MGM Grand Garden Arena with bouts such as Mike Tyson vs. Evander Holyfield, Evander Holyfield vs. Mike Tyson II, Oscar De La Hoya vs. Floyd Mayweather and Oscar De La Hoya vs. Manny Pacquiao and at the newer T-Mobile Arena with Canelo Álvarez vs. Amir Khan.

Along with significant rises in popularity in mixed martial arts (MMA), a number of fight leagues such as the UFC have taken interest in Las Vegas as a primary event location due to the number of suitable host venues. The Mandalay Bay Events Center and MGM Grand Garden Arena are among some of the more popular venues for fighting events such as MMA and have hosted several UFC and other MMA title fights. The city has held the most UFC events with 86 events.

The state is also home to the Las Vegas Motor Speedway, which hosts NASCAR&#x27;s Pennzoil 400 and South Point 400. Two venues in the immediate Las Vegas area host major annual events in rodeo. The Thomas &amp; Mack Center, built for UNLV men&#x27;s basketball, hosts the National Finals Rodeo. The PBR World Finals, operated by the bull riding-only Professional Bull Riders, was also held at the Thomas &amp; Mack Center before moving to T-Mobile Arena in 2016.

The state is also home to famous tennis player, Andre Agassi, and current baseball superstar Bryce Harper.

====List of teams====
=====Major professional teams=====

=====Minor professional teams=====

=====Amateur teams=====

=====College teams=====

==Military==

Several United States Navy ships have been named USS &quot;Nevada&quot; in honor of the state. They include:
* &quot;Nevada&quot; (1865 screw frigate) 
* USS &quot;Nevada&quot; (BM-8)
* USS &quot;Nevada&quot; (BB-36)
* USS &quot;Nevada&quot; (SSBN-733)

Area 51 is near Groom Lake, a dry salt lake bed. The much smaller Creech Air Force Base is in Indian Springs, Nevada; Hawthorne Army Depot in Hawthorne; the Tonopah Test Range near Tonopah; and Nellis AFB in the northeast part of the Las Vegas Valley. Naval Air Station Fallon in Fallon; NSAWC, (pronounced &quot;EN-SOCK&quot;) in western Nevada. NSAWC consolidated three Command Centers into a single Command Structure under a flag officer on July 11, 1996. The Naval Strike Warfare Center based at NAS Fallon since 1984, was joined with the Navy Fighter Weapons School (TOPGUN) and the Carrier Airborne Early Warning Weapons School, which both moved from NAS Miramar as a result of a Base Realignment and Closure decision in 1993 which transferred that installation back to the Marine Corps as MCAS Miramar. The Seahawk Weapon School was added in 1998 to provide tactical training for Navy helicopters.

These bases host a number of activities including the Joint Unmanned Aerial Systems Center of Excellence, the Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center, Nevada Test and Training Range, Red Flag, the U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds, the United States Air Force Warfare Center, the United States Air Force Weapons School, and the United States Navy Fighter Weapons School.

==See also==

* Index of Nevada-related articles
* Outline of Nevadaorganized list of topics about Nevada
* List of people from Nevada

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Annotated list of searchable databases produced by Nevada state agencies and compiled by the Government Documents Roundtable of the American Library Association.
* State Tourism website
* Nevada State Library and Archives
* Energy Profile for Nevada
* USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Nevada
* US Census Bureau
* 1875 County Map at Texas Tech Southwest Collection
* County Maps of Nevada Full color maps. List of cities, towns and county seats
* Nevada State Facts from USDA
* Forgotten NevadaGhost Towns and Mining Camps of Nevada
* Nevada&#x27;s Historical Markers
* Nevada State Seal
* Online Nevada Encyclopedia, Nevada Humanities
* Nevada Corporation Headquarters</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="0" end="6" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="29" end="34" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="42" end="49" title="Western United States" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="50" end="63" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="76" end="82" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="101" end="106" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="125" end="135" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="149" end="156" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="179" end="183" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="211" end="233" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="seventh-most extensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="239" end="257" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="32nd-most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q280788" start="267" end="296" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population density" label="ninth-least densely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="367" end="379" title="Clark County, Nevada" label="Clark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="400" end="436" title="Las Vegas–Paradise, NV MSA" label="Las Vegas–Paradise metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q40881" start="533" end="544" title="Carson City, Nevada" label="Carson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="546" end="555" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="809" end="818" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q752562" start="869" end="883" title="Flag of Nevada" label="its state flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241091" start="897" end="907" title="Presidency of Abraham Lincoln" label="presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="911" end="926" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122817" start="1108" end="1121" title="Comstock Lode" label="Comstock Lode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="1153" end="1162" title="Sagebrush" label="Sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q814693" start="1232" end="1240" title="Sage grouse" label="Sage-hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="1362" end="1375" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="1431" end="1437" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="1442" end="1451" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q966943" start="1475" end="1486" title="Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="1534" end="1547" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="1555" end="1565" title="Lake Tahoe" label="Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1697" end="1720" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1751" end="1767" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q510023" start="1775" end="1781" title="Paiute" label="Paiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="1783" end="1791" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456583" start="1797" end="1803" title="Washoe people" label="Washoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q26955" start="2019" end="2041" title="Sierra Nevada (Spain)" label="Sierra Nevada in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="2071" end="2086" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="2099" end="2111" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="2140" end="2164" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="2279" end="2299" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="2340" end="2350" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q128026" start="2355" end="2369" title="Utah Territory" label="Utah Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122817" start="2410" end="2423" title="Comstock Lode" label="Comstock Lode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580241" start="2499" end="2515" title="Nevada Territory" label="Nevada Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="2690" end="2703" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="2731" end="2742" title="libertarian" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600998" start="2765" end="2775" title="List of U.S. states by historical population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="2919" end="2926" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519717" start="2947" end="2955" title="Gambling in the United States" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17542970" start="2960" end="2993" title="Marriage law" label="lenient marriage and divorce laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977253" start="3103" end="3115" title="Prostitution in Nevada" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q484340" start="3202" end="3215" title="Washoe County, Nevada" label="Washoe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3557" end="3571" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="3573" end="3580" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973735" start="3682" end="3696" title="water security" label="water security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580241" start="3867" end="3883" title="Nevada Territory" label="Nevada Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="3917" end="3930" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4136" end="4143" title="Vowel#Articulation" label="quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="4157" end="4163" title="Vowel length" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493584" start="4244" end="4256" title="Open central unrounded vowel" label="open central"/>
<link wikidata="Q431471" start="4296" end="4300" title="Open back unrounded vowel" label="back"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348590" start="4379" end="4394" title="Harry Mortenson" label="Harry Mortenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q911277" start="4750" end="4755" title="breve" label="breve"/>
<link wikidata="Q487795" start="5025" end="5032" title="Goshute" label="Goshute"/>
<link wikidata="Q12635135" start="5034" end="5049" title="Southern Paiute people" label="Southern Paiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q921253" start="5051" end="5057" title="Mohave people" label="Mohave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456583" start="5072" end="5085" title="Washoe people" label="Washoe people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622310" start="5108" end="5124" title="Francisco Garcés" label="Francisco Garcés"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="5197" end="5211" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="5245" end="5254" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622232" start="5309" end="5355" title="Provincias Internas" label="Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="5413" end="5428" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="5470" end="5485" title="the Californias" label="the Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="5507" end="5534" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q465232" start="5644" end="5658" title="Jedediah Smith" label="Jedediah Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="5671" end="5687" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q117443" start="5697" end="5714" title="Peter Skene Ogden" label="Peter Skene Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361278" start="5728" end="5742" title="Humboldt River" label="Humboldt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="5780" end="5792" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776423" start="5799" end="5813" title="Antonio Armijo" label="Antonio Armijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467414" start="5843" end="5860" title="Old Spanish Trail (trade route)" label="Old Spanish Trail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5874" end="5893" title="Old Spanish Trail (trade route)#Armijo Route" label="Armijo&amp;#x27;s route"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294006" start="5904" end="5918" title="Raphael Rivera" label="Raphael Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291409" start="5982" end="6001" title="José Antonio Chaves" label="José Antonio Chaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="6122" end="6137" title="John C. Frémont" label="John C. Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492640" start="6153" end="6170" title="Las Vegas Springs" label="Las Vegas Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150921" start="6213" end="6229" title="State of Deseret" label="State of Deseret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459757" start="6377" end="6391" title="Genoa, Nevada" label="Mormon Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816781" start="6549" end="6559" title="Old Las Vegas Mormon Fort State Historic Park" label="adobe fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q24061905" start="6624" end="6635" title="Mormon Road" label="Mormon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="6662" end="6676" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="6794" end="6802" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="6920" end="6933" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="6939" end="6952" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="7012" end="7022" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="7027" end="7031" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="7114" end="7133" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="New Mexican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105044417" start="7138" end="7153" title="Mormon foodways" label="Mormon foodways"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="7157" end="7168" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912671" start="7173" end="7190" title="Mormon folk music" label="Mormon folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="7270" end="7290" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="7299" end="7326" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="7481" end="7496" title="Mexican Cession" label="Mexican Cession"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="7523" end="7543" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989796" start="7554" end="7568" title="Emigrant Trail" label="Emigrant Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112375" start="7592" end="7617" title="Territorial evolution of Nevada" label="state&amp;#x27;s area evolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q128026" start="7639" end="7653" title="Utah Territory" label="Utah Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="7658" end="7678" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580241" start="7689" end="7705" title="Nevada Territory" label="Nevada Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="7736" end="7749" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="7799" end="7809" title="silver ore" label="silver ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122817" start="7822" end="7835" title="Comstock Lode" label="Comstock Lode"/>
<link wikidata="Q987262" start="7842" end="7863" title="Virginia City, Nevada" label="Virginia City, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003443" start="8161" end="8186" title="Nevada Historical Markers" label="Nevada Historical Markers"/>
<link wikidata="Q698908" start="8272" end="8301" title="1864 United States presidential election" label="presidential election of 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="8396" end="8404" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="9042" end="9057" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="9108" end="9118" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="9215" end="9220" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="9460" end="9468" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112748" start="9525" end="9540" title="Platte Purchase" label="Platte Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124488" start="9786" end="9800" title="Pah-Ute County, Arizona" label="Pah-Ute County"/>
<link wikidata="Q670002" start="9808" end="9825" title="Arizona Territory" label="Arizona Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186318" start="9905" end="9918" title="37th parallel north" label="37th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="10113" end="10125" title="Clark County, Nevada" label="Clark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071438" start="10260" end="10283" title="Silver mining in Nevada" label="Silver mining in Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="10297" end="10307" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576767" start="10361" end="10372" title="Roughing It" label="Roughing It"/>
<link wikidata="Q988827" start="10554" end="10561" title="Tonopah, Nevada" label="Tonopah"/>
<link wikidata="Q930361" start="10594" end="10603" title="Goldfield, Nevada" label="Goldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889901" start="10608" end="10616" title="Rhyolite, Nevada" label="Rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="10727" end="10735" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="10959" end="10975" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q881029" start="11073" end="11087" title="Fred B. Balzar" label="Fred B. Balzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172822" start="11307" end="11317" title="Hoover Dam" label="Hoover Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="11349" end="11365" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="11455" end="11470" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="11538" end="11550" title="Nuclear test" label="Nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434915" start="11615" end="11629" title="Frenchman Flat" label="Frenchman Flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="11978" end="11988" title="Homestead Acts" label="homesteads"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="12306" end="12314" title="ranching" label="ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="12353" end="12370" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="12439" end="12463" title="coronavirus disease 2019" label="coronavirus disease 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185594" start="12492" end="12505" title="Steve Sisolak" label="Steve Sisolak"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="12517" end="12535" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511985" start="13150" end="13161" title="List of Nevada state parks" label="state parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="13312" end="13336" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="13417" end="13426" title="Endorheic basin" label="endorheic"/>
<link wikidata="Q966943" start="13503" end="13514" title="Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q470090" start="13647" end="13662" title="Arizona Monsoon" label="Arizona Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q594154" start="13796" end="13804" title="Laughlin, Nevada" label="Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361278" start="13951" end="13965" title="Humboldt River" label="Humboldt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940398" start="14059" end="14072" title="Humboldt Sink" label="Humboldt Sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q652027" start="14078" end="14086" title="Lovelock, Nevada" label="Lovelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565400" start="14156" end="14162" title="Walker River" label="Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142338" start="14164" end="14171" title="Truckee River" label="Truckee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146846" start="14177" end="14183" title="Carson River" label="Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="14216" end="14231" title="endorheic basin" label="endorheic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q175554" start="14244" end="14255" title="Walker Lake (Nevada)" label="Walker Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q761535" start="14257" end="14269" title="Pyramid Lake (Nevada)" label="Pyramid Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046961" start="14279" end="14290" title="Carson Sink" label="Carson Sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="14379" end="14390" title="Snake River" label="Snake River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="14422" end="14436" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="14481" end="14488" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584931" start="14632" end="14642" title="sky island" label="sky island"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="14842" end="14855" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="15123" end="15127" title="Line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="15179" end="15187" title="Border" label="boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="15223" end="15233" title="Lake Tahoe" label="Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="15307" end="15321" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088333" start="15487" end="15508" title="Spring Mountains" label="Spring Mountain Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="15965" end="15981" title="Las Vegas Valley (landform)" label="Las Vegas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="16002" end="16027" title="diurnal temperature range" label="diurnal temperature range"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="16363" end="16376" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q594154" start="16507" end="16515" title="Laughlin, Nevada" label="Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478609" start="16576" end="16587" title="San Jacinto, Nevada" label="San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q126285699" start="16875" end="16886" title="biotic zone" label="biotic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582662" start="16889" end="16895" title="Alpine vegetation" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="16897" end="16907" title="sub-alpine" label="sub-alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227718" start="16909" end="16923" title="ponderosa pine forest" label="ponderosa pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196583" start="16925" end="16939" title="pinyon-juniper woodland" label="pinion-juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="16941" end="16950" title="sagebrush" label="sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q965954" start="16955" end="16967" title="creosotebush" label="creosotebush"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="17054" end="17062" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366350" start="17248" end="17259" title="Lake County, Nevada" label="Lake County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366350" start="17323" end="17334" title="Roop County, Nevada" label="Roop County"/>
<link wikidata="Q156340" start="17370" end="17395" title="Lassen County, California" label="Lassen County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q40881" start="17550" end="17590" title="Consolidated Municipality of Carson City" label="Consolidated Municipality of Carson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996884" start="17690" end="17705" title="Bullfrog County, Nevada" label="Bullfrog County"/>
<link wikidata="Q124655789" start="17889" end="17917" title="Utah Territorial Legislature" label="Utah Territorial Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="18133" end="18144" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q484335" start="18200" end="18222" title="Lincoln County, Nevada" label="Lincoln County, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="18454" end="18458" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313458" start="18487" end="18516" title="Reno–Sparks metropolitan area" label="Reno–Sparks metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q517116" start="18643" end="18657" title="Nathaniel Lyon" label="Nathaniel Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="18703" end="18712" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q985297" start="18741" end="18750" title="Yerington, Nevada" label="Yerington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020984" start="18793" end="18799" title="Dayton, Nevada" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710562" start="18961" end="18994" title="Basin and Range National Monument" label="Basin and Range National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921716" start="18997" end="19074" title="Black Rock Desert-High Rock Canyon Emigrant Trails National Conservation Area" label="Black Rock Desert-High Rock Canyon Emigrant Trails National Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026956" start="19077" end="19111" title="California National Historic Trail" label="California National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137657" start="19114" end="19139" title="Great Basin National Park" label="Great Basin National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940240" start="19142" end="19174" title="Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest" label="Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705186" start="19177" end="19209" title="Lake Tahoe Basin Management Unit" label="Lake Tahoe Basin Management Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q859130" start="19212" end="19248" title="Pony Express National Historic Trail" label="Pony Express National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493532" start="19251" end="19283" title="Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge" label="Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q724643" start="19311" end="19349" title="Ash Meadows National Wildlife Preserve" label="Ash Meadows National Wildlife Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q117210134" start="19352" end="19381" title="Avi Kwa Ame National Monument" label="Avi Kwa Ame National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710562" start="19384" end="19417" title="Basin and Range National Monument" label="Basin and Range National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943992" start="19420" end="19453" title="Bootleg Canyon Mountain Bike Park" label="Bootleg Canyon Mountain Bike Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q242111" start="19456" end="19482" title="Death Valley National Park" label="Death Valley National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263981" start="19485" end="19516" title="Desert National Wildlife Refuge" label="Desert National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065774" start="19519" end="19547" title="Gold Butte National Monument" label="Gold Butte National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940240" start="19550" end="19582" title="Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest" label="Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671852" start="19585" end="19605" title="Inyo National Forest" label="Inyo National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476864" start="19608" end="19642" title="Lake Mead National Recreation Area" label="Lake Mead National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886445" start="19645" end="19682" title="Moapa Valley National Wildlife Refuge" label="Moapa Valley National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q978970" start="19685" end="19701" title="Mount Charleston" label="Mount Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920111" start="19710" end="19737" title="Mount Charleston Wilderness" label="Mount Charleston Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467414" start="19740" end="19775" title="Old Spanish National Historic Trail" label="Old Spanish National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124587" start="19778" end="19813" title="Pahranagat National Wildlife Refuge" label="Pahranagat National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143382" start="19816" end="19858" title="Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area" label="Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541047" start="19861" end="19900" title="Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area" label="Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088333" start="19903" end="19919" title="Spring Mountains" label="Spring Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705277" start="19928" end="19969" title="Spring Mountains National Recreation Area" label="Spring Mountains National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712585" start="19972" end="20014" title="Tule Springs Fossil Beds National Monument" label="Tule Springs Fossil Beds National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="20058" end="20074" title="wilderness areas" label="wilderness areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="20132" end="20153" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="20155" end="20174" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="20180" end="20205" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="20259" end="20273" title="protected area" label="protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761072" start="20317" end="20327" title="state park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081138" start="20336" end="20349" title="historic site" label="historic site"/>
<link wikidata="Q338112" start="20362" end="20377" title="recreation area" label="recreation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913659" start="20421" end="20445" title="Van Sickle Bi-State Park" label="Van Sickle Bi-State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="20530" end="20540" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="20583" end="20610" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="20666" end="20682" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="20798" end="20804" title="United States census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="21391" end="21411" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q484418" start="21437" end="21447" title="Nye County, Nevada" label="Nye County"/>
<link wikidata="Q985486" start="21492" end="21499" title="Pahrump, Nevada" label="Pahrump"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="22125" end="22152" title="Las Vegas–Paradise, NV MSA" label="Las Vegas metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49267" start="22245" end="22254" title="Henderson, Nevada" label="Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q143782" start="22259" end="22274" title="North Las Vegas, Nevada" label="North Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q991218" start="22378" end="22386" title="Mesquite, Nevada" label="Mesquite"/>
<link wikidata="Q938100" start="22496" end="22510" title="Indian Springs, Nevada" label="Indian Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q177756" start="22515" end="22526" title="Searchlight, Nevada" label="Searchlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="22770" end="22773" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="22786" end="22819" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="22851" end="22859" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="22929" end="22954" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="22998" end="23016" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="23039" end="23046" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="23054" end="23059" title="Cuban Americans" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406487" start="23068" end="23078" title="Salvadoran Americans" label="Salvadoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258666" start="23087" end="23099" title="Stateside Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="23193" end="23199" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="23208" end="23215" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="23224" end="23229" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="23242" end="23249" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="23310" end="23318" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="23330" end="23337" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q105102828" start="23519" end="23536" title="majority-minority" label="majority-minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q484398" start="23686" end="23693" title="Douglas County, Nevada" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q203022" start="23695" end="23702" title="Mineral County, Nevada" label="Mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q484342" start="23708" end="23716" title="Pershing County, Nevada" label="Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q484418" start="23780" end="23790" title="Nye County, Nevada" label="Nye County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495376" start="23795" end="23810" title="Humboldt County, Nevada" label="Humboldt County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484340" start="23853" end="23866" title="Washoe County, Nevada" label="Washoe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484335" start="23942" end="23956" title="Lincoln County, Nevada" label="Lincoln County"/>
<link wikidata="Q111220" start="23958" end="23974" title="Churchill County, Nevada" label="Churchill County"/>
<link wikidata="Q835104" start="23976" end="23987" title="Lyon County, Nevada" label="Lyon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495398" start="23989" end="24006" title="White Pine County, Nevada" label="White Pine County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484381" start="24012" end="24025" title="Eureka County, Nevada" label="Eureka County"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="24103" end="24123" title="California gold rush" label="California gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="24214" end="24222" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="24333" end="24344" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="24346" end="24356" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="24369" end="24376" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44614" start="24501" end="24510" title="Taiwanese American" label="Taiwanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q992507" start="24531" end="24540" title="Chinatown, Las Vegas" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="24585" end="24603" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="24929" end="24935" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="24937" end="24942" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="24944" end="24949" title="Danes" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="24951" end="24959" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="24961" end="24969" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950537" start="24975" end="24982" title="Basque Americans in Nevada" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416717" start="25003" end="25011" title="Chilean Americans" label="Chileans"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="25133" end="25140" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="25142" end="25149" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="25154" end="25161" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642162" start="25306" end="25314" title="Northern Paiute" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12635135" start="25319" end="25334" title="Southern Paiute" label="Southern Paiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565472" start="25336" end="25352" title="Western Shoshone" label="Western Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q487795" start="25354" end="25361" title="Goshute" label="Goshute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936651" start="25363" end="25371" title="Hualapai" label="Hualapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456583" start="25373" end="25379" title="Washoe people" label="Washoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253290" start="25385" end="25388" title="Ute people" label="Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="25779" end="25785" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="25820" end="25831" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="25848" end="25859" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="25875" end="25880" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="25900" end="25904" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="26912" end="26926" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188412" start="27661" end="27678" title="Church attendance" label="Church attendance"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="27739" end="27745" title="Gallup (company)" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="28218" end="28228" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="28234" end="28245" title="Irreligion" label="Irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="28251" end="28265" title="Catholic Church in the United States" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722948" start="28271" end="28288" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Nevada" label="Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="28293" end="28299" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="28304" end="28309" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="28324" end="28332" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="28342" end="28348" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186241" start="28434" end="28449" title="Mormon Corridor" label="Mormon Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="28518" end="28539" title="Catholic Church in the United States" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722948" start="28554" end="28601" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Nevada" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="28624" end="28651" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="28665" end="28687" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist congregations"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="28696" end="28708" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="28720" end="28726" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122749" start="28777" end="28807" title="Rohr Jewish Learning Institute" label="Rohr Jewish Learning Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="28812" end="28818" title="Chabad" label="Chabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="29050" end="29057" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="29059" end="29066" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="29071" end="29078" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157809" start="29080" end="29110" title="Native American languages of Nevada" label="Indigenous languages of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="29258" end="29265" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="29267" end="29274" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="29276" end="29283" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="29285" end="29295" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="29297" end="29303" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="29305" end="29312" title="Amharic language" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="29314" end="29320" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="29326" end="29330" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="29963" end="29989" title="List of U.S. states by GDP per capita (nominal)" label="per capita personal income"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364870" start="31034" end="31043" title="rangeland" label="rangeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400937" start="31142" end="31149" title="feedlot" label="feedlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="31248" end="31251" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="31529" end="31535" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q373845" start="31549" end="31566" title="California Zephyr" label="California Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="31618" end="31643" title="transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q499178" start="31682" end="31704" title="Emeryville, California" label="Emeryville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q945084" start="31714" end="31718" title="Elko, Nevada" label="Elko"/>
<link wikidata="Q983426" start="31720" end="31730" title="Winnemucca, Nevada" label="Winnemucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264059" start="31807" end="31818" title="Desert Wind" label="Desert Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="31845" end="31859" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q846591" start="31921" end="31940" title="Needles, California" label="Needles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="31959" end="31982" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020993" start="31993" end="32010" title="Stateline, Nevada" label="Stateline, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="32015" end="32037" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="32111" end="32122" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="32126" end="32145" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263134" start="32169" end="32184" title="Brightline West" label="Brightline West"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="32225" end="32247" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="32301" end="32316" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q886183" start="32357" end="32370" title="Interstate 15 in Nevada" label="Interstate 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q886249" start="32465" end="32470" title="Interstate 215 (Nevada)" label="I-215"/>
<link wikidata="Q830483" start="32475" end="32480" title="Interstate 515" label="I-515"/>
<link wikidata="Q818979" start="32525" end="32529" title="Interstate 80 in Nevada" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q369432" start="32728" end="32733" title="Interstate 580 (Nevada)" label="I-580"/>
<link wikidata="Q892801" start="32783" end="32786" title="U.S. Route 6 in Nevada" label="US6"/>
<link wikidata="Q453223" start="32788" end="32792" title="U.S. Route 50 in Nevada" label="US50"/>
<link wikidata="Q892773" start="32794" end="32798" title="U.S. Route 93 in Nevada" label="US93"/>
<link wikidata="Q892793" start="32800" end="32804" title="U.S. Route 95 in Nevada" label="US95"/>
<link wikidata="Q892718" start="32809" end="32814" title="U.S. Route 395 in Nevada" label="US395"/>
<link wikidata="Q98695262" start="32835" end="32854" title="List of state routes in Nevada" label="Nevada state routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="33051" end="33069" title="interstate highway" label="interstate highway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33239" end="33252" title="Interstate 11" label="Interstate 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="33354" end="33372" title="semi-trailer truck" label="semi-trailer truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q58878" start="33422" end="33432" title="road train" label="road train"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277817" start="33577" end="33588" title="RTC Transit" label="RTC Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="33757" end="33773" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410808" start="33796" end="33805" title="The Deuce (transit bus service)" label="The Deuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q854585" start="33807" end="33824" title="double-decker bus" label="double-decker bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="33835" end="33850" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q187934" start="34141" end="34149" title="monorail" label="monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q935072" start="34215" end="34233" title="Las Vegas Monorail" label="Las Vegas Monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383660" start="34282" end="34309" title="Las Vegas Convention Center" label="Las Vegas Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q853886" start="34415" end="34447" title="Harry Reid International Airport" label="Harry Reid International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q597139" start="34654" end="34686" title="Reno-Tahoe International Airport" label="Reno-Tahoe International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556799" start="34827" end="34846" title="Solar power in Nevada" label="solar energy sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961658" start="35036" end="35045" title="NV Energy" label="NV Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142173" start="35237" end="35276" title="Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository" label="Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042614" start="35369" end="35393" title="highly radioactive waste" label="highly radioactive waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q54828837" start="35436" end="35473" title="National Low Income Housing Coalition" label="National Low Income Housing Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="35872" end="35887" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="36242" end="36260" title="Single-family detached home" label="single-family home"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045077" start="36278" end="36292" title="List of U.S. states and territories by median wage and mean wage" label="average salary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689034" start="36607" end="36646" title="Affordable housing" label="30 percent or less of its annual income"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="37290" end="37300" title="elementary school" label="elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="37302" end="37308" title="middle school" label="middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038092" start="37314" end="37326" title="High school (North America)" label="high schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="37488" end="37509" title="federal poverty level" label="federal poverty level"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060802" start="37949" end="37976" title="Carson City School District" label="Carson City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082435" start="37979" end="38011" title="Churchill County School District" label="Churchill County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261591" start="38014" end="38042" title="Clark County School District" label="Clark County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643090" start="38048" end="38061" title="List of the largest school districts in the United States by enrollment" label="fifth largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999468" start="38164" end="38196" title="Esmeralda County School District" label="Esmeralda County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940310" start="38231" end="38262" title="Humboldt County School District" label="Humboldt County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709630" start="38330" end="38357" title="Lyon County School District" label="Lyon County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q15379185" start="38393" end="38419" title="Nye County School District" label="Nye County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963934" start="38422" end="38453" title="Pershing County School District" label="Pershing County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972616" start="38488" end="38517" title="Washoe County School District" label="Washoe County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q60765566" start="38520" end="38553" title="White Pine County School District" label="White Pine County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003622" start="38588" end="38621" title="Nevada System of Higher Education" label="Nevada System of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302311" start="38625" end="38656" title="University of Nevada, Las Vegas" label="University of Nevada, Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185955" start="38667" end="38693" title="University of Nevada, Reno" label="University of Nevada, Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658675" start="38703" end="38726" title="Nevada State University" label="Nevada State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847197" start="38736" end="38769" title="Truckee Meadows Community College" label="Truckee Meadows Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598715" start="38780" end="38799" title="Great Basin College" label="Great Basin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146840" start="38803" end="38829" title="College of Southern Nevada" label="College of Southern Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988100" start="38839" end="38861" title="Western Nevada College" label="Western Nevada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129091" start="38870" end="38891" title="Sierra Nevada College" label="Sierra Nevada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829364" start="38894" end="38917" title="Touro University Nevada" label="Touro University Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368264" start="38920" end="38957" title="Roseman University of Health Sciences" label="Roseman University of Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264004" start="38988" end="39013" title="Desert Research Institute" label="Desert Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164212" start="39195" end="39230" title="Constitution of the State of Nevada" label="Constitution of the State of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589268" start="39250" end="39267" title="Nevada government" label="Nevada government"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="39292" end="39312" title="separation of powers" label="separate departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="39318" end="39327" title="executive branch" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q878598" start="39346" end="39364" title="governor of Nevada" label="governor of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747182" start="39441" end="39452" title="List of U.S. state legislatures" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555619" start="39471" end="39489" title="Nevada Legislature" label="Nevada Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494527" start="39510" end="39518" title="Nevada Assembly" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494534" start="39527" end="39533" title="Nevada Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="39543" end="39551" title="judicial branch" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q932112" start="39570" end="39593" title="Supreme Court of Nevada" label="Supreme Court of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096992" start="39633" end="39649" title="chief magistrate" label="chief magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="39764" end="39769" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003462" start="39777" end="39792" title="Nevada National Guard" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033703" start="39818" end="39830" title="Joe Lombardo" label="Joe Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191529" start="39909" end="39928" title="Lieutenant Governor of Nevada" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444381" start="39930" end="39948" title="Secretary of State of Nevada" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948016" start="39950" end="39965" title="Nevada State Treasurer" label="state treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908466" start="39967" end="39983" title="Nevada State Controller" label="state controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q15110599" start="39989" end="40005" title="Nevada Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="40101" end="40110" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603882" start="40973" end="40992" title="state supreme court" label="state supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743447" start="41013" end="41029" title="Nevada Judiciary" label="Nevada Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107977" start="41076" end="41091" title="Nevada District Courts" label="district courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842700" start="41357" end="41373" title="Nevada Court of Appeals" label="Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283961" start="41397" end="41414" title="Incorporated town" label="Incorporated town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="41551" end="41560" title="home rule" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885250" start="41681" end="41701" title="Unincorporated towns in Nevada" label="unincorporated towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q15110599" start="41943" end="41959" title="Nevada Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003407" start="42002" end="42052" title="Nevada Department of Conservation and Natural Resources" label="Department of Conservation &amp;amp; Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003410" start="42111" end="42136" title="Nevada Department of Corrections" label="Department of Corrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003411" start="42139" end="42176" title="Nevada Department of Cultural Affairs" label="Nevada Department of Cultural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003414" start="42223" end="42246" title="Nevada Department of Education" label="Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003434" start="42354" end="42374" title="Nevada Gaming Control Board" label="Gaming Control Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191529" start="42528" end="42547" title="Nevada Lieutenant Governor" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003462" start="42550" end="42576" title="Nevada National Guard" label="Nevada Military Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920922" start="42635" end="42663" title="Nevada Department of Motor Vehicles" label="Department of Motor Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003420" start="42809" end="42836" title="Nevada Department of Public Safety" label="Department of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003474" start="42839" end="42873" title="Nevada Public Utilities Commission" label="Nevada Public Utilities Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q886390" start="42960" end="42988" title="Nevada Department of Transportation" label="Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948016" start="42991" end="43013" title="Nevada State Treasurer" label="Nevada State Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987978" start="43107" end="43157" title="Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education" label="Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003423" start="43160" end="43189" title="Nevada Department of Wildlife" label="Nevada Department of Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504347" start="43449" end="43466" title="Lawrence Friedman" label="Lawrence Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="43520" end="43536" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="43659" end="43666" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="43780" end="43792" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="43815" end="43822" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q484340" start="43965" end="43978" title="Washoe County, Nevada" label="Washoe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q40881" start="44030" end="44041" title="Carson City, Nevada" label="Carson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042775" start="44159" end="44175" title="no-fault divorce" label="no-fault divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021125" start="44451" end="44484" title="Williams v. North Carolina (1942)" label="Williams v. North Carolina (1942)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="44507" end="44525" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="44532" end="44546" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508034" start="44565" end="44586" title="Full Faith and Credit Clause" label="full faith and credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170591" start="45088" end="45107" title="personal income tax" label="personal income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="45111" end="45131" title="corporate income tax" label="corporate income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="45241" end="45244" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="IRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="45257" end="45266" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664476" start="45724" end="45734" title="option tax" label="option tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="46404" end="46414" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3555619" start="46536" end="46554" title="Nevada Legislature" label="Nevada Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866992" start="46736" end="46756" title="Obergefell v. Hodges" label="Obergefell v. Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972978" start="47067" end="47085" title="Nevada corporation" label="Nevada corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634818" start="47267" end="47280" title="franchise tax" label="franchise tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="47447" end="47452" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="47481" end="47489" title="interest" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="47733" end="47740" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309238" start="47804" end="47813" title="Last call (bar term)" label="last call"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632011" start="47821" end="47833" title="Liquor store" label="Liquor store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="47836" end="47853" title="convenience store" label="convenience store"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212990" start="47980" end="47989" title="Nevada Question 2 (2016)" label="Question2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="48081" end="48090" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="48312" end="48329" title="medical marijuana" label="medical marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374310" start="48724" end="48752" title="mandatory sentencing" label="mandatory minimum sentencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632057" start="48794" end="48851" title="SAMHSA" label="Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q330344" start="50086" end="50096" title="crime rate" label="crime rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q857984" start="50194" end="50209" title="Property crimes" label="Property crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520311" start="50339" end="50352" title="violent crime" label="violent crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="50652" end="50662" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="51403" end="51420" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="51481" end="51495" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739734" start="51721" end="51732" title="Adam Laxalt" label="Adam Laxalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15110599" start="51793" end="51809" title="Nevada Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="52299" end="52303" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="52322" end="52333" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="52339" end="52351" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="52356" end="52360" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="52391" end="52406" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="52412" end="52424" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884227" start="52469" end="52479" title="bellwether" label="bellwether"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="52520" end="52535" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="52539" end="52556" title="Western United States" label="the American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="52576" end="52580" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052604" start="52644" end="52666" title="Catherine Cortez Masto" label="Catherine Cortez Masto"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825033" start="52671" end="52682" title="Jacky Rosen" label="Jacky Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033703" start="52712" end="52724" title="Joe Lombardo" label="Joe Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345115" start="52798" end="52815" title="none of the above" label="none of the above"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091919" start="52867" end="52891" title="None of These Candidates" label="None of These Candidates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="53114" end="53123" title="Plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q594154" start="53469" end="53477" title="Laughlin, Nevada" label="Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977253" start="54168" end="54208" title="Prostitution in Nevada" label="Prostitution is legal in parts of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313458" start="54763" end="54792" title="Reno–Sparks metropolitan area" label="Reno–Sparks metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="54845" end="54865" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="54873" end="54895" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q28721200" start="54921" end="54939" title="2017–18 NHL season" label="2017–18 NHL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338973" start="54943" end="54957" title="T-Mobile Arena" label="T-Mobile Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q984542" start="54984" end="54992" title="Paradise, Nevada" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="54998" end="55015" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Las Vegas Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="55023" end="55047" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q27768421" start="55066" end="55083" title="Allegiant Stadium" label="Allegiant Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098329" start="55110" end="55141" title="Oakland Raiders relocation to Las Vegas" label="moving from Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q42333021" start="55151" end="55165" title="Las Vegas Aces" label="Las Vegas Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="55173" end="55177" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888848" start="55207" end="55233" title="Mandalay Bay Events Center" label="Mandalay Bay Events Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="55256" end="55267" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="55273" end="55290" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="55294" end="55315" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569661" start="55464" end="55480" title="Nevada Wolf Pack" label="Nevada Wolf Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421770" start="55535" end="55546" title="UNLV Rebels" label="UNLV Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786588" start="55611" end="55635" title="Mountain West Conference" label="Mountain West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071838" start="55671" end="55704" title="UNLV Runnin&amp;#x27; Rebels basketball" label="its men&amp;#x27;s basketball program"/>
<link wikidata="Q336104" start="55794" end="55809" title="Jerry Tarkanian" label="Jerry Tarkanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585736" start="55898" end="55902" title="1989–90 UNLV Runnin&amp;#x27; Rebels basketball team" label="UNLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585641" start="55958" end="55962" title="1989–90 Duke Blue Devils men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586624" start="56095" end="56099" title="1990–91 UNLV Runnin&amp;#x27; Rebels basketball team" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246051" start="56218" end="56236" title="2013–14 Wichita State Shockers men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="more than 20 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q463635" start="56246" end="56259" title="Larry Johnson (basketball, born 1969)" label="Larry Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666769" start="56294" end="56308" title="Naismith College Player of the Year" label="Naismith Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971828" start="56391" end="56395" title="1990–91 Duke Blue Devils men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653492" start="56436" end="56452" title="AP Poll" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412061" start="56502" end="56516" title="North Carolina Tar Heels men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q204186" start="56806" end="56827" title="West Coast Conference" label="West Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q984286" start="56833" end="56860" title="Western Athletic Conference" label="Western Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q859280" start="56995" end="57013" title="Big Sky Conference" label="Big Sky Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="57190" end="57209" title="professional boxing" label="professional boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q717472" start="57240" end="57262" title="MGM Grand Garden Arena" label="MGM Grand Garden Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861808" start="57282" end="57314" title="Mike Tyson vs. Evander Holyfield" label="Mike Tyson vs. Evander Holyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887012" start="57316" end="57351" title="Evander Holyfield vs. Mike Tyson II" label="Evander Holyfield vs. Mike Tyson II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025486" start="57353" end="57390" title="Oscar De La Hoya vs. Floyd Mayweather" label="Oscar De La Hoya vs. Floyd Mayweather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105944" start="57395" end="57430" title="Oscar De La Hoya vs. Manny Pacquiao" label="Oscar De La Hoya vs. Manny Pacquiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338973" start="57448" end="57462" title="T-Mobile Arena" label="T-Mobile Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022673" start="57468" end="57496" title="Canelo Álvarez vs. Amir Khan" label="Canelo Álvarez vs. Amir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="57545" end="57563" title="mixed martial arts" label="mixed martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="57609" end="57612" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="UFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888848" start="57721" end="57747" title="Mandalay Bay Events Center" label="Mandalay Bay Events Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q717472" start="57752" end="57774" title="MGM Grand Garden Arena" label="MGM Grand Garden Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523618" start="57990" end="58014" title="Las Vegas Motor Speedway" label="Las Vegas Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="58028" end="58034" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q82614" start="58042" end="58054" title="Pennzoil 400 (Las Vegas)" label="Pennzoil 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q48829622" start="58059" end="58074" title="South Point 400" label="South Point 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="58147" end="58152" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q686525" start="58158" end="58182" title="Thomas &amp;amp; Mack Center" label="Thomas &amp;amp; Mack Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972670" start="58232" end="58253" title="National Finals Rodeo" label="National Finals Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617040" start="58310" end="58334" title="Professional Bull Riders" label="Professional Bull Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="58472" end="58484" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524302" start="58517" end="58529" title="Bryce Harper" label="Bryce Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="58698" end="58716" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365395" start="58739" end="58761" title="USS Nevada" label="USS &amp;quot;Nevada&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872203" start="58801" end="58840" title="Neshaminy (screw frigate)" label="&amp;quot;Nevada&amp;quot; (1865 screw frigate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130145" start="58844" end="58873" title="USS Nevada (BM-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nevada&amp;quot; (BM-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328905" start="58876" end="58906" title="USS Nevada (BB-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nevada&amp;quot; (BB-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q508531" start="58909" end="58942" title="USS Nevada (SSBN-733)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nevada&amp;quot; (SSBN-733)"/>
<link wikidata="Q177397" start="58944" end="58951" title="Area 51" label="Area 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q177397" start="58960" end="58970" title="Groom Lake" label="Groom Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658047" start="59010" end="59031" title="Creech Air Force Base" label="Creech Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q938100" start="59038" end="59060" title="Indian Springs, Nevada" label="Indian Springs, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685562" start="59062" end="59082" title="Hawthorne Army Depot" label="Hawthorne Army Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776138" start="59086" end="59095" title="Hawthorne, Nevada" label="Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442240" start="59101" end="59119" title="Tonopah Test Range" label="Tonopah Test Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q988827" start="59125" end="59132" title="Tonopah, Nevada" label="Tonopah"/>
<link wikidata="Q735912" start="59138" end="59148" title="Nellis AFB" label="Nellis AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="59178" end="59194" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017348" start="59196" end="59220" title="Naval Air Station Fallon" label="Naval Air Station Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q985524" start="59224" end="59230" title="Fallon, Nevada" label="Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187624" start="59516" end="59522" title="TOPGUN" label="TOPGUN"/>
<link wikidata="Q117231120" start="59532" end="59577" title="Carrier Airborne Early Warning Weapons School" label="Carrier Airborne Early Warning Weapons School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269473" start="59904" end="59954" title="Joint Unmanned Aerial Systems Center of Excellence" label="Joint Unmanned Aerial Systems Center of Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15888096" start="59960" end="59995" title="Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center" label="Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756372" start="59997" end="60027" title="Nevada Test and Training Range" label="Nevada Test and Training Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q387359" start="60029" end="60037" title="Red Flag (USAF)" label="Red Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q919615" start="60043" end="60070" title="U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds" label="U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11285159" start="60076" end="60114" title="United States Air Force Warfare Center" label="United States Air Force Warfare Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550725" start="60120" end="60158" title="United States Air Force Weapons School" label="United States Air Force Weapons School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187624" start="60168" end="60209" title="United States Navy Fighter Weapons School" label="United States Navy Fighter Weapons School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018487" start="60228" end="60260" title="Index of Nevada-related articles" label="Index of Nevada-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112374" start="60263" end="60280" title="Outline of Nevada" label="Outline of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632628" start="60320" end="60346" title="List of people from Nevada" label="List of people from Nevada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21217" wikidata="Q49297" url="?curid=21217" title="Native Americans in the United States">
<text>Native Americans (also called American Indians, First Americans, or Indigenous Americans) are the Indigenous peoples of the United States, particularly of the lower 48 states and Alaska. They may also include any Americans whose origins lie in any of the indigenous peoples of North or South America. The United States Census Bureau publishes data about &quot;American Indians and Alaska Natives&quot;, whom it defines as anyone &quot;having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America ... and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment&quot;. The census does not, however, enumerate &quot;Native Americans&quot; as such, noting that the latter term can encompass a broader set of groups, e.g. Native Hawaiians, which it tabulates separately. 

The European colonization of the Americas from 1492 resulted in a precipitous decline in the size of the Native American population because of newly introduced diseases, including weaponized diseases and biological warfare by colonizers, wars, ethnic cleansing, and enslavement. Numerous scholars have classified elements of the colonization process as comprising genocide against Native Americans. As part of a policy of settler colonialism, European settlers continued to wage war and perpetrated massacres against Native American peoples, removed them from their ancestral lands, and subjected them to one-sided government treaties and discriminatory government policies. Into the 20th century, these policies focused on forced assimilation.

When the United States was established, Native American tribes were considered semi-independent nations, because they generally lived in communities which were separate from communities of white settlers. The federal government signed treaties at a government-to-government level until the Indian Appropriations Act of 1871 ended recognition of independent Native nations, and started treating them as &quot;domestic dependent nations&quot; subject to applicable federal laws. This law did preserve rights and privileges, including a large degree of tribal sovereignty. For this reason, many Native American reservations are still independent of state law and the actions of tribal citizens on these reservations are subject only to tribal courts and federal law. The Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 granted US citizenship to all Native Americans born in the US who had not yet obtained it. This emptied the &quot;Indians not taxed&quot; category established by the United States Constitution, allowed Natives to vote in elections, and extended the Fourteenth Amendment protections granted to people &quot;subject to the jurisdiction&quot; of the United States. However, some states continued to deny Native Americans voting rights for decades. Titles II through VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 comprise the Indian Civil Rights Act, which applies to Native American tribes and makes many but not all of the guarantees of the U.S. Bill of Rights applicable within the tribes.

Since the 1960s, Native American self-determination movements have resulted in positive changes to the lives of many Native Americans, though there are still many contemporary issues faced by them. Today, there are over five million Native Americans in the US, about 80% of whom live outside reservations. As of 2020, the states with the highest percentage of Native Americans are Alaska, Oklahoma, Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Texas. 
==Background==

Beginning toward the end of the 15th century, the migration of Europeans to the Americas led to centuries of population, cultural, and agricultural transfer and adjustment between Old and New World societies, a process known as the Columbian exchange. Because most Native American groups had preserved their histories by means of oral traditions and artwork, the first written accounts of the contact were provided by Europeans.

Ethnographers classify the Indigenous peoples of North America into ten geographical regions which are inhabited by groups of people who share certain cultural traits, called cultural areas. The ten cultural areas are:
* Arctic, including Aleut, Inuit, and Yupik peoples
* Subarctic
* Northeastern Woodlands
* Southeastern Woodlands
* Great Plains
* Great Basin
* Northwest Plateau
* Northwest Coast
* California
* Southwest (Oasisamerica)

At the time of the first contact, the Indigenous cultures were different from those of the proto-industrial and mostly Christian immigrants. Some Northeastern and Southwestern cultures, in particular, were matrilineal and they were organized and operated on a more collective basis than the culture which Europeans were familiar with. Most Indigenous American tribes treated their hunting grounds and agricultural lands as land that could be used by their entire tribe. Europeans had developed concepts of individual property rights with respect to land that were extremely different. The differences in cultures, as well as the shifting alliances among different nations during periods of warfare, caused extensive political tension, ethnic violence, and social disruption.

Native Americans suffered high fatality rates from contact with European diseases that were new to them, and to which they had not acquired immunity. Smallpox epidemics are thought to have caused the greatest loss of life for Indigenous populations. &quot;The decline of native American populations was rapid and severe, probably the greatest demographic disaster ever. Old World diseases were the primary killer. In many regions, particularly the tropical lowlands, populations fell by 90 percent or more in the first century after the contact.&quot;

Estimates of pre-Columbian population of the United States vary from 4 to 18 million. Jeffrey Ostler writes: &quot;Most Indigenous communities were eventually afflicted by a variety of diseases, but in many cases this happened long after Europeans first arrived. When severe epidemics did hit, it was often less because Native bodies lack immunity than because European colonialism disrupted Native Communities and damaged their resources, making them more vulnerable to pathogens.&quot;

After the thirteen British colonies revolted against Great Britain and established the United States, President George Washington and Secretary of War Henry Knox conceived the idea of &quot;civilizing&quot; Native Americans in preparation for their assimilation as U.S. citizens. Assimilation, whether it was voluntary, as it was with the Choctaw, or forced, was consistently maintained as a matter of policy by consecutive American administrations. 

During the 19th century, the ideology known as manifest destiny became integral to the American nationalist movement. Westward expansion of European American populations after the American Revolution resulted in increasing pressure on Native Americans and their lands, warfare, and rising tensions. In 1830, the U.S. Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, authorizing the federal government to relocate Native Americans from their homelands within established states to lands west of the Mississippi River, in order to accommodate continued European American expansion. This resulted in what amounted to the ethnic cleansing or genocide of many tribes, who were subjected to brutal forced marches. The most infamous of these came to be known as the Trail of Tears.

Contemporary Native Americans have a unique relationship with the United States because they may be members of nations, tribes, or bands that have sovereignty and treaty rights upon which federal Indian law and a federal Indian trust relationship are based. Cultural activism since the late 1960s has increased the participation of Indigenous peoples in American politics. It has also led to expanded efforts to teach and preserve Indigenous languages for younger generations, and to establish a more robust cultural infrastructure: Native Americans have founded independent newspapers and online media outlets, including First Nations Experience, the first Native American television channel; established Native American studies programs, tribal schools universities, museums, and language programs. Literature is at the growing forefront of American Indian studies in many genres, with the notable exception of fiction—some traditional American Indians experience fictional narratives as insulting when they conflict with traditional oral tribal narratives.

The terms used to refer to Native Americans have at times been controversial. The ways Native Americans refer to themselves vary by region and generation, with many older Native Americans self-identifying as &quot;Indians&quot; or &quot;American Indians&quot;, while younger Native Americans often identify as &quot;Indigenous&quot; or &quot;Aboriginal&quot;. The term &quot;Native American&quot; has not traditionally included Native Hawaiians or certain Alaskan Natives, such as Aleut, Yup&#x27;ik, or Inuit peoples. By comparison, the Indigenous peoples of Canada are generally known as First Nations, Inuit and Métis (FNIM).

==History==

The history of Native Americans in the United States began before the founding of the U.S., tens of thousands of years ago with the settlement of the Americas by the Paleo-Indians. The Eurasian migration to the Americas occurred over millennia via Beringia, a land bridge between Siberia and Alaska, as early humans spread southward and eastward, forming distinct cultures and societies. Archaeological evidence suggests these migrations began 60,000 years ago and continued until around 12,000 years ago. Some may have arrived even before this time fishing in kayaks along what is known as the &quot;Kelp Highway&quot;. The early inhabitants by land were classified as Paleo-Indians, who spread throughout the Americas, diversifying into numerous culturally distinct nations. Major Paleo-Indian cultures included the Clovis and Folsom traditions, identified through unique spear points and large-game hunting methods, especially during the Lithic stage.

Around 8000 BCE, as the climate stabilized, new cultural periods like the Archaic stage arose, during which hunter-gatherer communities developed complex societies across North America. The Mound Builders created large earthworks, such as at Watson Brake and Poverty Point, which date to 3500 BCE and 2200 BCE, respectively, indicating early social and organizational complexity. By 1000 BCE, Native societies in the Woodland period developed advanced social structures and trade networks, with the Hopewell tradition connecting the Eastern Woodlands to the Great Lakes and the Gulf of Mexico. This period led to the Mississippian culture, with large urban centers like Cahokia—a city with complex mounds and a population exceeding 20,000 by 1250 CE.

From the 15th century onward, European contact drastically reshaped the Americas. Explorers and settlers introduced diseases, causing massive Indigenous population declines, and engaged in violent conflicts with Native groups. By the 19th century, westward U.S. expansion, rationalized by Manifest destiny, pressured tribes into forced relocations like the Trail of Tears, which decimated communities and redefined Native territories. Despite resistance in events like the Sioux Uprising and Battle of Little Bighorn, Native American lands continued to be reduced through policies like the Indian Removal Act of 1830 and later the Dawes Act, which undermined communal landholding.
A justification for the policy of conquest and subjugation of the Indigenous people emanated from the stereotyped perceptions of Native Americans as &quot;merciless Indian savages&quot; (as described in the United States Declaration of Independence). Sam Wolfson in &quot;The Guardian&quot; writes, &quot;The declaration&#x27;s passage has often been cited as an encapsulation of the dehumanizing attitude toward Indigenous Americans that the US was founded on.&quot;

Native American nations on the plains in the west continued armed conflicts with the U.S. throughout the 19th century, through what were called generally Indian Wars. Notable conflicts in this period include the Dakota War, Great Sioux War, Snake War, Colorado War, and Texas-Indian Wars. Expressing the frontier anti-Indian sentiment, Theodore Roosevelt believed the Indians were destined to vanish under the pressure of white civilization, stating in an 1886 lecture:


One of the last and most notable events during the Indian wars was the Wounded Knee Massacre in 1890. In the years leading up to it the U.S. government had continued to seize Lakota lands. A Ghost Dance ritual on the Northern Lakota reservation at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, led to the U.S. Army&#x27;s attempt to subdue the Lakota. The dance was part of a religious movement founded by the Northern Paiute spiritual leader Wovoka that told of the return of the Messiah to relieve the suffering of Native Americans and promised that if they would live righteous lives and perform the Ghost Dance properly, the European American colonists would vanish, the bison would return, and the living and the dead would be reunited in an Edenic world. On December 29 at Wounded Knee, gunfire erupted, and U.S. soldiers killed up to 300 Indians, mostly old men, women, and children.

Days after the massacre, the author L. Frank Baum wrote:
In the 20th century, Native Americans served in significant numbers during World War II, marking a turning point for Indigenous visibility and involvement in broader American society. Post-war, Native activism grew, with movements such as the American Indian Movement (AIM) drawing attention to Indigenous rights. Landmark legislation like the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975 recognized tribal autonomy, leading to the establishment of Native-run schools and economic initiatives. Tribal sovereignty has continued to evolve, with legal victories and federal acknowledgments supporting cultural revitalization.

By the 21st century, Native Americans had achieved increased control over tribal lands and resources, although many communities continue to grapple with the legacy of displacement and economic challenges. Urban migration has also grown, with over 70% of Native Americans residing in cities by 2012, navigating issues of cultural preservation and discrimination. Continuing legal and social efforts address these concerns, building on centuries of resilience and adaptation that characterize Indigenous history across the Americas.

==Demographics==


According to the 2020 census, the U.S. population was 331.4 million. Of this, 3.7 million people, or 1.1 percent, reported American Indian or Alaska Native ancestry alone. In addition, 5.9 million people (1.8 percent), reported American Indian or Alaska Native in combination with one or more other races.

The definition of American Indian or Alaska Native used in the 2010 census was as follows:

According to Office of Management and Budget, &quot;American Indian or Alaska Native&quot; refers to a person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America (including Central America) and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment.

Despite generally referring to groups indigenous to the continental US and Alaska, this demographic as defined by the US Census Bureau includes all Indigenous people of the Americas, including Mesoamerican peoples such as the Maya, as well as Canadian and South American natives. In 2022, 634,503 Indigenous people in the United States identified with Central American Indigenous groups, 875,183 identified with the Indigenous people of Mexico, and 47,518 identified with Canadian First Nations. Of the 3.2 million Americans who identified as American Indian or Alaska Native alone in 2022, around 45% are of Hispanic or Latino ethnicity, with this number growing as increasing numbers of Indigenous people from Latin American countries immigrate to the US and more Latinos self-identify with indigenous heritage. Of groups Indigenous to the United States, the largest self-reported tribes are Cherokee (1,449,888), Navajo (434,910), Choctaw (295,373), Blackfeet (288,255), Sioux (220,739), and Apache (191,823). 205,954 respondents specified an Alaska Native identity. 

Native Hawaiians are counted separately from Native Americans by the census, being classified as Pacific Islanders. According to 2022 estimates, 714,847 Americans reported Native Hawaiian ancestry. 

The 2010 census permitted respondents to self-identify as being of one or more races. Self-identification dates from the census of 1960; prior to that the race of the respondent was determined by the opinion of the census taker. The option to select more than one race was introduced in 2000. If American Indian or Alaska Native was selected, the form requested the individual provide the name of the &quot;enrolled or principal tribe&quot;.

===Population since 1880===
Censuses counted around 346,000 Native Americans in 1880 (including 33,000 in Alaska and 82,000 in Oklahoma, back then known as Indian Territory), around 274,000 in 1890 (including 25,500 in Alaska and 64,500 in Oklahoma), 362,500 in 1930 and 366,500 in 1940, including those on and off reservations in the 48 states and Alaska. Native American population rebounded sharply from 1950, when they numbered 377,273; it reached 551,669 in 1960, 827,268 in 1970, with an annual growth rate of 5%, four times the national average. Total spending on Native Americans averaged $38 million a year in the late 1920s, dropping to a low of $23 million in 1933, and returning to $38 million in 1940. The Office of Indian Affairs counted more American Indians than the Census Bureau until 1930:

American Indians and Alaska Natives as percentage of the total population between 1880 and 2020:

Absolute numbers of American Indians and Alaska Natives between 1880 and 2020 (since 1890 according to the Census Bureau):

===Population distribution===
78% of Native Americans live outside a reservation. Full-blood individuals are more likely to live on a reservation than mixed-blood individuals. The Navajo, with 286,000 full-blood individuals, is the largest tribe if only full-blood individuals are counted; the Navajo are the tribe with the highest proportion of full-blood individuals, 86.3%. The Cherokee have a different history; it is the largest tribe, with 819,000 individuals, and it has 284,000 full-blood individuals.

====Urban migration====
As of 2012, 70% of Native Americans live in urban areas, up from 45% in 1970 and 8% in 1940. Urban areas with significant Native American populations include Minneapolis, Denver, Phoenix, Tucson, Chicago, Oklahoma City, Houston, New York City, and Los Angeles. Many live in poverty. Racism, unemployment, drugs and gangs are common problems which Indian social service organizations such as the Little Earth housing complex in Minneapolis attempt to address.

===Population by tribal grouping===
Below are numbers for U.S. citizens self-identifying to selected tribal groupings, according to the 2010 U.S. census.

==Tribal sovereignty==

There are 573 federally recognized tribal governments and 326 Indian reservations in the United States. These tribes possess the right to form their own governments, to enforce laws (both civil and criminal) within their lands, to tax, to establish requirements for membership, to license and regulate activities, to zone, and to exclude persons from tribal territories. Limitations on tribal powers of self-government include the same limitations applicable to states; for example, neither tribes nor states have the power to make war, engage in foreign relations, or coin money (this includes paper currency). In addition, there are a number of tribes that are recognized by individual states, but not by the federal government. The rights and benefits associated with state recognition vary from state to state.

Many Native Americans and advocates of Native American rights point out that the U.S. federal government&#x27;s claim to recognize the &quot;sovereignty&quot; of Native American peoples falls short, given that the United States wishes to govern Native American peoples and treat them as subject to U.S. law. Such advocates contend that full respect for Native American sovereignty would require the U.S. government to deal with Native American peoples in the same manner as any other sovereign nation, handling matters related to relations with Native Americans through the Secretary of State, rather than the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The Bureau of Indian Affairs reports on its website that its &quot;responsibility is the administration and management of of land held in trust by the United States for American Indians, Indian tribes, and Alaska Natives&quot;. Many Native Americans and advocates of Native American rights believe that it is condescending for such lands to be considered &quot;held in trust&quot; and regulated in any fashion by any entity other than their own tribes.

Some tribal groups have been unable to document the cultural continuity required for federal recognition. To achieve federal recognition and its benefits, tribes must prove continuous existence since 1900. The federal government has maintained this requirement, in part because through participation on councils and committees, federally recognized tribes have been adamant about groups&#x27; satisfying the same requirements as they did. The Muwekma Ohlone of the San Francisco Bay Area are pursuing litigation in the federal court system to establish recognition. Many of the smaller eastern tribes, long considered remnants of extinct peoples, have been trying to gain official recognition of their tribal status. Several tribes in Virginia and North Carolina have gained state recognition. Federal recognition confers some benefits, including the right to label arts and crafts as Native American and permission to apply for grants that are specifically reserved for Native Americans. But gaining federal recognition as a tribe is extremely difficult; to be established as a tribal group, members have to submit extensive genealogical proof of tribal descent and continuity of the tribe as a culture.
In July 2000, the Washington State Republican Party adopted a resolution recommending that the federal and legislative branches of the U.S. government terminate tribal governments. In 2007, a group of Democratic Party congressmen and congresswomen introduced a bill in the U.S. House of Representatives to terminate Federal recognition of the Cherokee Nation. This was related to their voting to exclude Cherokee Freedmen as members of the tribe unless they had a Cherokee ancestor on the Dawes Rolls, although all Cherokee Freedmen and their descendants had been members since 1866.

As of 2004, various Native Americans are wary of attempts by others to gain control of their reservation lands for natural resources, such as coal and uranium in the West.

The State of Maine is the only State House Legislature that allows Representatives from Indian Tribes. The three nonvoting members represent the Penobscot Nation, Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, and Passamaquoddy Tribe. These representatives can sponsor any legislation regarding American Indian affairs or co-sponsor any pending State of Maine legislation. Maine is unique regarding Indigenous leadership representation.

In the state of Virginia, Native Americans face a unique problem. Until 2017 Virginia previously had no federally recognized tribes but the state had recognized eight. This is related historically to the greater impact of disease and warfare on the Virginia Indian populations, as well as their intermarriage with Europeans and Africans. Some people confused ancestry with culture, but groups of Virginia Indians maintained their cultural continuity. Most of their early reservations were ended under the pressure of early European settlement.

Some historians also note the problems of Virginia Indians in establishing documented continuity of identity, due to the work of Walter Ashby Plecker (1912–1946). As registrar of the state&#x27;s Bureau of Vital Statistics, he applied his own interpretation of the one-drop rule, enacted in law in 1924 as the state&#x27;s Racial Integrity Act. It recognized only two races: &quot;white&quot; and &quot;colored&quot;.

Plecker, a segregationist, believed that the state&#x27;s Native Americans had been &quot;mongrelized&quot; by intermarriage with African Americans; to him, ancestry determined identity, rather than culture. He thought that some people of partial black ancestry were trying to &quot;pass&quot; as Native Americans. Plecker thought that anyone with any African heritage had to be classified as colored, regardless of appearance, amount of European or Native American ancestry, and cultural/community identification. Plecker pressured local governments into reclassifying all Native Americans in the state as &quot;colored&quot; and gave them lists of family surnames to examine for reclassification based on his interpretation of data and the law. This led to the state&#x27;s destruction of accurate records related to families and communities who identified as Native American (as in church records and daily life). By his actions, sometimes different members of the same family were split by being classified as &quot;white&quot; or &quot;colored&quot;. He did not allow people to enter their primary identification as Native American in state records. In 2009, the Senate Indian Affairs Committee endorsed a bill that would grant federal recognition to tribes in Virginia.

, the largest groups in the United States by population were Navajo, Cherokee, Choctaw, Sioux, Ojibwe, Apache, Blackfeet, Iroquois, and Pueblo. In 2000, eight of ten Americans with Native American ancestry were of mixed ancestry. It is estimated that by 2100 that figure will rise to nine out of ten.

==Civil rights movement==

The civil rights movement was a very significant moment for the rights of Native Americans and other people of color. Native Americans faced racism and prejudice for hundreds of years, and this increased after the American Civil War. Native Americans, like African Americans, were subjected to the Jim Crow Laws and segregation in the Deep South especially after they were made citizens through the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924. As a body of law, Jim Crow institutionalized economic, educational, and social disadvantages for Native Americans, and other people of color living in the south. Native American identity was especially targeted by a system that only wanted to recognize white or colored, and the government began to question the legitimacy of some tribes because they had intermarried with African Americans. Native Americans were also discriminated and discouraged from voting in the southern and western states.

In the south segregation was a major problem for Native Americans seeking education, but the NAACP&#x27;s legal strategy would later change this. Movements such as Brown v. Board of Education was a major victory for the Civil Rights Movement headed by the NAACP, and inspired Native Americans to start participating in the Civil Rights Movement. Martin Luther King Jr. began assisting Native Americans in the south in the late 1950s after they reached out to him. At that time the remaining Creek in Alabama were trying to completely desegregate schools in their area. In this case, light-complexioned Native children were allowed to ride school buses to previously all white schools, while dark-skinned Native children from the same band were barred from riding the same buses. Tribal leaders, upon hearing of King&#x27;s desegregation campaign in Birmingham, Alabama, contacted him for assistance. He promptly responded and, through his intervention, the problem was quickly resolved. King would later make trips to Arizona visiting Native Americans on reservations, and in churches encouraging them to be involved in the Civil Rights Movement. In King&#x27;s book &quot;Why We Can&#x27;t Wait&quot; he writes:

Our nation was born in genocide when it embraced the doctrine that the original American, the Indian, was an inferior race. Even before there were large numbers of Negroes on our shores, the scar of racial hatred had already disfigured colonial society. From the sixteenth century forward, blood flowed in battles over racial supremacy. We are perhaps the only nation which tried as a matter of national policy to wipe out its Indigenous population. Moreover, we elevated that tragic experience into a noble crusade. Indeed, even today we have not permitted ourselves to reject or to feel remorse for this shameful episode. Our literature, our films, our drama, our folklore all exalt it.

Native Americans would then actively participate and support the NAACP, and the civil rights movement. The National Indian Youth Council (NIYC) would soon rise in 1961 to fight for Native American rights during the Civil Rights Movement, and were strong King supporters. During the 1963 March on Washington there was a sizable Native American contingent, including many from South Dakota, and many from the Navajo nation. Native Americans also participated the Poor People&#x27;s Campaign in 1968. The NIYC were very active supporters of the Poor People&#x27;s Campaign unlike the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI); the NIYC and other Native organizations met with King in March 1968 but the NCAI disagreed on how to approach the anti-poverty campaign; the NCAI decided against participating in the march. The NCAI wished to pursue their battles in the courts and with Congress, unlike the NIYC. The NAACP also inspired the creation of the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) which was patterned after the NAACP&#x27;s Legal Defense and Education Fund. Furthermore, the NAACP continued to organize to stop mass incarceration and end the criminalization of Native Americans and other communities of people of color. The following is an excerpt from a statement from Mel Thom on May 1, 1968, during a meeting with Secretary of State Dean Rusk: (It was written by members of the Workshop on American Indian Affairs and the NIYC)

==Contemporary issues==

Native American struggles amid poverty to maintain life on the reservation or in larger society have resulted in a variety of health issues, some related to nutrition and health practices. The community suffers a vulnerability to and disproportionately high rate of alcoholism:

Recent studies also point to rising rates of stroke, heart disease, and diabetes in the Native American population.

===Societal discrimination and racism===


Native Americans have been subjected to discrimination for centuries. In response to being labeled &quot;merciless Indian savages&quot; in the Declaration of Independence, Simon Moya-Smith, culture editor at &quot;Indian Country Today&quot;, states, &quot;Any holiday that would refer to my people in such a repugnant, racist manner is certainly not worth celebrating. [July Fourth] is a day we celebrate our resiliency, our culture, our languages, our children and we mourn the millions — literally millions — of indigenous people who have died as a consequence of American imperialism.&quot;

In a study conducted in 2006–2007, non-Native Americans admitted they rarely encountered Native Americans in their daily lives. This is largely due to the number of Native Americans having dwindled since white settler colonialism, while those who survived were forcibly moved into reservations; both of these factors were referenced by Adolf Hitler in 1928 when he admiringly stated the US had &quot;gunned down the millions of Redskins to a few hundred thousand, and now keep the modest remnant under observation in a cage&quot;. While sympathetic toward Native Americans and expressing regret over the past, most people had only a vague understanding of the problems facing Native Americans today. For their part, Native Americans told researchers that they believed they continued to face prejudice, mistreatment, and inequality in the broader society.

====Affirmative action issues====
Federal contractors and subcontractors, such as businesses and educational institutions, are legally required to adopt equal opportunity employment and affirmative action measures intended to prevent discrimination against employees or applicants for employment on the basis of &quot;color, religion, sex, or national origin&quot;. For this purpose, a Native American is defined as &quot;A person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America (including Central America), and who maintains a tribal affiliation or community attachment&quot;. The passing of the Indian Relocation Act saw a 56% increase in Native American city dwellers over 40 years. The Native American urban poverty rate exceeds that of reservation poverty rates due to discrimination in hiring processes. However, self-reporting is permitted: &quot;Educational institutions and other recipients should allow students and staff to self-identify their race and ethnicity unless self-identification is not practicable or feasible.&quot;

Self-reporting opens the door to &quot;box checking&quot; by people who, despite not having a substantial relationship to Native American culture, innocently or fraudulently check the box for Native American.

The difficulties that Native Americans face in the workforce, for example, a lack of promotions and wrongful terminations are attributed to racial stereotypes and implicit biases. Native American business owners are seldom offered auxiliary resources that are crucial for entrepreneurial success.

===Sexual violence as a tool for settler colonialism===
Throughout history, settler colonialism has remained a violent and destructive tool to displace and exterminate Native American peoples. The use of sexual violence to perpetuate this is very common. Musocgee Creek law professor Sarah Deer highlights the high number of Native women who still experience this violence: &quot;Since 1999 a variety of reports and studies have come to the same conclusion- namely, that Native women in particular suffer the highest rate of per capita rape in the United States.&quot; The continued acts of sexual violence against Native women have been perpetuated by colonization and the actions of colonizers. Native women through time have been portrayed as extremely sexual which only enforces sexual violence. Deer explains, &quot;Dispossession and relocation of indigenous peoples on this continent both necessitated and precipitated a highly gendered and sexualized dynamic in which Native women&#x27;s bodies became commodities- bought and sold for the purposes of sexual gratification (or profit), invariably transporting them far away from their homes.&quot;

===Native American mascots in sports===


American Indian activists in the United States and Canada have criticized the use of Native American mascots in sports, as perpetuating stereotypes. This is considered cultural appropriation.
There has been a steady decline in the number of secondary school and college teams using such names, images, and mascots. Some tribal team names have been approved by the tribe in question, such as the Seminole Council of Florida approving use of their name for the teams of Florida State University. The NCAA allows the use even though the NCAA &quot;continues to believe the stereotyping of Native Americans is wrong.&quot;

Among professional teams, the NBA&#x27;s Golden State Warriors discontinued use of Native American-themed logos in 1971. The NFL&#x27;s Washington Commanders, formerly the Washington Redskins, changed their name in 2020, as the term is considered to be a racial slur.

MLB&#x27;s Cleveland Guardians were formerly known as the Cleveland Indians. Their use of a caricature called Chief Wahoo faced protest for decades. Starting in 2019, Chief Wahoo ceased to be a logo for Cleveland Indians, though Chief Wahoo merchandise could still be sold in the Cleveland-area. On December 13, 2020, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that Cleveland would be officially changing their name. On November 19, 2021, the team officially became the Cleveland Guardians.

===Historical depictions in art===
Native Americans have been depicted by American artists in various ways at different periods. A number of 19th- and 20th-century United States and Canadian painters, often motivated by a desire to document and preserve Native culture, specialized in Native American subjects. Among the most prominent of these were Elbridge Ayer Burbank, George Catlin, Seth Eastman, Paul Kane, W. Langdon Kihn, Charles Bird King, Joseph Henry Sharp, and John Mix Stanley.

In the 20th century, early portrayals of Native Americans in movies and television roles were first performed by European Americans dressed in mock traditional attire. Examples included &quot;The Last of the Mohicans&quot; (1920), &quot;Hawkeye and the Last of the Mohicans&quot; (1957), and &quot;F Troop&quot; (1965–1967). In later decades, Native American actors such as Jay Silverheels in &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot; television series (1949–1957) came to prominence. The roles of Native Americans were limited and not reflective of Native American culture. By the 1970s some Native American film roles began to show more complexity, such as those in &quot;Little Big Man&quot; (1970), &quot;Billy Jack&quot; (1971), and &quot;The Outlaw Josey Wales&quot; (1976), which depicted Native Americans in minor supporting roles.

For years, Native people on American television were relegated to secondary, subordinate roles. During the years of the series &quot;Bonanza&quot; (1959–1973), no major or secondary Native characters appeared on a consistent basis. The series &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot; (1949–1957), &quot;Cheyenne&quot; (1955–1963), and &quot;Law of the Plainsman&quot; (1959–1963) had Native characters who were essentially aides to the central white characters. This continued in such series as &quot;How the West Was Won&quot;. These programs resembled the &quot;sympathetic&quot; yet contradictory film &quot;Dances With Wolves&quot; of 1990, in which, according to Ella Shohat and Robert Stam, the narrative choice was to relate the Lakota story as told through a Euro-American voice, for wider impact among a general audience.
Like the 1992 remake of &quot;The Last of the Mohicans&quot; and &quot;&quot; (1993), &quot;Dances with Wolves&quot; employed a number of Native American actors, and made an effort to portray Indigenous languages. In 1996, Plains Cree actor Michael Greyeyes would play renowned Native American warrior Crazy Horse in the 1996 television film &quot;Crazy Horse&quot;, and would also later play renowned Sioux chief Sitting Bull in the 2017 movie &quot;Woman Walks Ahead&quot;.

The 1998 film &quot;Smoke Signals&quot;, which was set on the Coeur D&#x27;Alene Reservation and discussed hardships of present-day American Indian families living on reservations, featured numerous Native American actors as well. The film was the first feature film to be produced and directed by Native Americans, and was also the first feature to include an exclusive Native American cast. At the annual Sundance Film Festival, &quot;Smoke Signals&quot; would win the Audience Award and its producer Chris Eyre, an enrolled member of the Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma, would win the Filmmaker&#x27;s Trophy. In 2009, &quot;We Shall Remain&quot; (2009), a television documentary by Ric Burns and part of the &quot;American Experience&quot; series, presented a five-episode series &quot;from a Native American perspective&quot;. It represented &quot;an unprecedented collaboration between Native and non-Native filmmakers and involves Native advisors and scholars at all levels of the project&quot;. The five episodes explore the impact of King Philip&#x27;s War on the northeastern tribes, the &quot;Native American confederacy&quot; of Tecumseh&#x27;s War, the U.S.-forced relocation of Southeastern tribes known as the Trail of Tears, the pursuit and capture of Geronimo and the Apache Wars, and concludes with the Wounded Knee incident, participation by the American Indian Movement, and the increasing resurgence of modern Native cultures since.

===Differences in terminology===
The most common of the modern terms to refer to Indigenous peoples of the United States are &quot;Indians&quot;, &quot;American Indians&quot;, and &quot;Native Americans&quot;. Up to the early to mid 18th century, the term &quot;Americans&quot; was not applied to people of European heritage in North America. Instead it was equivalent to the term &quot;Indians&quot;. As people of European heritage began using the term &quot;Americans&quot; to refer instead to themselves, the word &quot;Indians&quot; became historically the most often employed term.

The term &quot;Indians&quot;, long laden with racist stereotypes, began to be widely replaced in the 1960s with the term &quot;Native Americans&quot;, which recognized the Indigeneity of the people who first made the Americas home. But as the term &quot;Native Americans&quot; became popular, the American Indian Movement saw pejorative connotations in the term &quot;native&quot; and reappropriated the term &quot;Indian&quot;, seeing it as witness to the history of violence against the many nations that lived in the Americas before European arrival.

The term &quot;Native American&quot; was introduced in the United States in preference to the older term &quot;Indian&quot; to distinguish the Indigenous peoples of the Americas from the people of India. It may have been coined by Mohican Sachem John Wannuaucon Quinney, in an 1852 address to the US Congress where he argued against proposed resettlement.

The term &quot;Amerindian&quot;, a portmanteau of &quot;American Indian&quot;, was coined in 1902 by the American Anthropological Association. However, it has been controversial since its creation. It was immediately rejected by some leading members of the Association, and, while adopted by many, it was never universally accepted. While never popular in Indigenous communities themselves, it remains a preferred term among some anthropologists, notably in some parts of Canada and the English-speaking Caribbean.

During World War II, draft boards typically classified American Indians from Virginia as Negroes.

In 1995, a plurality of Indigenous Americans, however, preferred the term &quot;American Indian&quot; and many tribes include the word Indian in their formal title.

Criticism of the neologism &quot;Native American&quot; comes from diverse sources. Russell Means, an Oglala Lakota activist, opposed the term &quot;Native American&quot; because he believed it was imposed by the government without the consent of Native people.

A 1995 U.S. Census Bureau survey found that more Native Americans in the United States preferred &quot;American Indian&quot; to &quot;Native American&quot;. Most American Indians are comfortable with &quot;Indian&quot;, &quot;American Indian&quot;, and &quot;Native American&quot;. That term is reflected in the name chosen for the National Museum of the American Indian, which opened in 2004 on the Mall in Washington, D.C..

Other commonly used terms are &quot;First Americans&quot;, &quot;First Nations&quot;, and &quot;Native Peoples&quot;.

===Colonial ecological violence===
Colonial ecological violence, defined by sociologist J. M. Bacon as the result of eco-social disruptions that &quot;generate colonial ecological violence, a unique form of violence perpetrated by the settler-colonial state, private industry, and settler-colonial culture as a whole.&quot; The relocation and displacement of Native peoples is a result of the colonizer mindset that land is a commodity. By removing these communities from their Native land, settlers are preventing the ways of life and the use of culture-affirming resources. Gilio-Whitaker, highlights some of the ways in which these practices are reinforced, with the concept of environmental deprivation – &quot;historical processes of land and resource dispossession calculated to bring about the destruction of Indigenous lives and cultures.&quot; The reason these lands are so important to Native populations is because, “Since a strong component of many Indigenous cultures is a robust relationship to place, it serves to reason that forced removals, settler resource appropriation, and the ecological damage perpetuated by US settle colonial society contribute to significant &quot;conflict&quot; between &quot;traditional cultural values&quot; and &quot;those of majority culture&quot;.

====Colonial ecological violence in the Pacific Northwest====
The Karuk tribe in Klamath, California are one of the many victims to colonial ecological violence. One of the major ways of life to the Karuk tribe is the use of fires to maintain and regulate their environment. Sociologist Kari Marie Norgaard goes into detail about how colonialism disrupted these ways of life. These fires were also used to correct travel routes and optimized hunting, which is a major part of Karuk life. In 1905, the Klamath National Forest was established which prevented the burning of fires on Karuk land- &quot;Fire exclusion, then, has simultaneously produced indigenous exclusion, erasure, and replacement.&quot; Norgaard explains that this land is one of the most economically wealthy spots due to the establishment of the forest, which only further demonstrates the ways in which settler-colonialism enables and continues to negatively impact the land that Indigenous people live(d) on.

====Colonial ecological violence in the Great Lakes region of North America====
The Potawatomi tribe had long occupied the Great Lakes region of Northern America, up until they were displaced and spread out around the US. They had previously lived on 30 million acres of land, building cultural, familial, and other-than-human relationships for generations. (Whyte, 2016) Citizen Potawatomi environmental philosopher Kyle Powys Whyte highlights the ways in which this displacement has had violent and detrimental impacts on the tribe. “The consequences of capitalist economics, such as deforestation, water pollution, the clearing of land for large scale agriculture and urbanization, generate immediate disruptions on ecosystems &quot;rapidly&quot; rendering them very different from what they were like before, undermining Indigenous knowledge systems and Indigenous peoples&#x27; capacity to cultivate landscapes and adjust to environmental change.”

====Colonial ecological violence in the Northeast====
The Miami tribe, which now occupies Oklahoma, once resided in Oxford, Ohio, where Miami University now is placed. Historian Jeffrey Ostler provides insight into the forced movement of the Miami tribe off their land. In 1818, the tribe agreed to give up a large amount of land to U.S. officials (enough to create twenty-two Indiana counties. It was not until 1826 that Lewis Cass informed them and nearby Potawatomi, &quot;You must remove or perish.&quot; This plan did not work, but the officials persisted and eventually the Miami tribe would be forced off their land in 1846. Miami University has a land acknowledgement document and a center dedicated to working with the Miami tribe of Oklahoma, though this is the only tribe from the original Miami tribe that is accredited by the U.S. government.

===Gambling industry===

Because Indian reservations have tribal sovereignty, states have limited ability to forbid gambling there, as codified by the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988. Tribes run casinos, bingo halls, and other gambling operations, and as of 2011, there were 460 such operations run by 240 tribes, with a total annual revenue of $27 billion.

===Financial services===
Numerous tribes around the country have entered the financial services market including the Otoe-Missouria, Tunica-Biloxi, and the Rosebud Sioux. Because of the challenges involved in starting a financial services business from scratch, many tribes hire outside consultants and vendors to help them launch these businesses and manage the regulatory issues involved.
Similar to the tribal sovereignty debates that occurred when tribes first entered the gaming industry, the tribes, states, and federal government are currently in disagreement regarding who possesses the authority to regulate these e-commerce business entities.

===Crime on reservations===
Prosecution of serious crime, historically endemic on reservations, was required by the 1885 Major Crimes Act, 18 U.S.C. §§1153, 3242, and court decisions to be investigated by the federal government, usually the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and prosecuted by United States Attorneys of the United States federal judicial district in which the reservation lies.

A December 13, 2009 &quot;New York Times&quot; article about growing gang violence on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation estimated that there were 39 gangs with 5,000 members on that reservation alone. Navajo country recently reported 225 gangs in its territory.

As of 2012, a high incidence of rape continued to impact Native American women and Alaskan native women. According to the Department of Justice, 1 in 3 Native women have suffered rape or attempted rape, more than twice the national rate. About 46 percent of Native American women have been raped, beaten, or stalked by an intimate partner, according to a 2010 study by the Centers for Disease Control. According to Professor N. Bruce Duthu, &quot;More than 80 percent of Indian victims identify their attacker as non-Indian&quot;.

===Barriers to economic development===
Today, other than tribes successfully running casinos, many tribes struggle, as they are often located on reservations isolated from the main economic centers of the country. The estimated 2.1 million Native Americans are the most impoverished of all ethnic groups. According to the 2000 census, an estimated 400,000 Native Americans reside on reservation land. While some tribes have had success with gaming, only 40% of the 562 federally recognized tribes operate casinos. According to a 2007 survey by the U.S. Small Business Administration, only 1% of Native Americans own and operate a business.

The barriers to economic development on Native American reservations have been identified by Joseph Kalt and Stephen Cornell of the Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development at Harvard University, in their report: &quot;What Can Tribes Do? Strategies and Institutions in American Indian Economic Development&quot; (2008), are summarized as follows:
* Lack of access to capital
* Lack of human capital (education, skills, technical expertise) and the means to develop it
* Reservations lack effective planning
* Reservations are poor in natural resources
* Reservations have natural resources but lack sufficient control over them
* Reservations are disadvantaged by their distance from markets and the high costs of transportation
* Tribes cannot persuade investors to locate on reservations because of intense competition from non-Native American communities
* The Bureau of Indian Affairs is inept, corrupt or uninterested in reservation development
* Tribal politicians and bureaucrats are inept or corrupt
* On-reservation factionalism destroys stability in tribal decisions
* The instability of tribal government keeps outsiders from investing. The lack of international recognition Native American tribal sovereignty weakens their political-economic legitimacy. (Many tribes adopted constitutions by the 1934 Indian Reorganization Act model, with two-year terms for elected positions of chief and council members deemed too short by the authors for getting things done)
* Entrepreneurial skills and experience are scarce
A major barrier to development is the lack of entrepreneurial knowledge and experience within Indian reservations. &quot;A general lack of education and experience about business is a significant challenge to prospective entrepreneurs&quot;, was the report on Native American entrepreneurship by the Northwest Area Foundation in 2004. &quot;Native American communities that lack entrepreneurial traditions and recent experiences typically do not provide the support that entrepreneurs need to thrive. Consequently, experiential entrepreneurship education needs to be embedded into school curriculum and after-school and other community activities. This would allow students to learn the essential elements of entrepreneurship from a young age and encourage them to apply these elements throughout life&quot;.

===Discourse in Native American economic development===
Some scholars argue that the existing theories and practices of economic development are not suitable for Native American communities—given the lifestyle, economic, and cultural differences, as well as the unique history of Native American-U.S. relations. Little economic development research has been conducted on Native American communities. The federal government fails to consider place-based issues of American Indian poverty by generalizing the demographic. In addition, the concept of economic development threatens to upend the multidimensionality of Native American culture. The dominance of federal government involvement in Indigenous developmental activities perpetuates and exacerbates the salvage paradigm.

===Land ownership challenges===
Native land owned by individual Native Americans sometimes cannot be developed because of fractionalization. Fractionalization occurs when a landowner dies, and their land is inherited by their children, but not subdivided. This means that one parcel might be owned by 50 different individuals. A majority of those holding interest must agree to any proposal to develop the land, and establishing this consent is time-consuming, cumbersome, and sometimes impossible.

Another landownership issue on reservations is checkerboarding, where tribal land is interspersed with land owned by the federal government on behalf of Natives, individually owned plots, and land owned by non-Native individuals. This prevents Tribal governments from securing plots of land large enough for economic development or agricultural uses. Because reservation land is owned &quot;in trust&quot; by the federal government, individuals living on reservations cannot build equity in their homes. This bars Native Americans from getting loans, as there is nothing that a bank can collect if the loan is not paid. Past efforts to encourage land ownership (such as the Dawes Act) resulted in a net loss of Tribal land. After they were familiarized with their smallholder status, Native American landowners were lifted of trust restrictions and their land would get transferred back to them, contingent on a transactional fee to the federal government. The transfer fee discouraged Native American land ownership, with 65% of tribal-owned land being sold to non-Native Americans by the 1920s. Activists against property rights point to historical evidence of communal ownership of land and resources by tribes. They claim that because of this history, property rights are foreign to Natives and have no place in the modern reservation system. Those in favor of property rights cite examples of tribes negotiating with colonial communities or other tribes about fishing and hunting rights in an area. Land ownership was also a challenge because of the different definitions of land that the Natives and the Europeans had. Most Native American tribes thought of property rights more as &quot;borrowing&quot; the land, while those from Europe thought of land as individual property.

===Land ownership and bureaucratic challenges in historical context===
State-level efforts such as the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act were attempts to contain tribal land in Native American hands. However, more bureaucratic decisions only expanded the bureaucracy. The knowledge disconnect between the decision-making bureaucracy and Native American stakeholders resulted in ineffective development efforts.

Traditional Native American entrepreneurship does not prioritize profit maximization; rather, business transactions must align with Native American social and cultural values. In response to Indigenous business philosophy, the federal government created policies that aimed to formalize their business practices, which undermined the Native American status quo. Additionally, legal disputes interfered with tribal land leasing, which were settled with the verdict against tribal sovereignty.

Often, bureaucratic overseers of development are far removed from Native American communities and lack the knowledge and understanding to develop plans or make resource allocation decisions. The top-down heavy involvement in developmental operations, does not mitigate incentives for bureaucrats to act in their self-interest. Such instances include reports that exaggerate results.

===Geographic poverty===
While Native American urban poverty is attributed to hiring and workplace discrimination in a heterogeneous setting, reservation and trust land poverty rates are endogenous to deserted opportunities in isolated regions.

===Trauma===

====Historical trauma====
Historical trauma is described as collective emotional and psychological damage throughout a person&#x27;s lifetime and across multiple generations. Examples of historical trauma can be seen through the Wounded Knee Massacre of 1890, where over 200 unarmed Lakota were killed, and the Dawes Allotment Act of 1887, when Native Americans lost four-fifths of their land.

====Impacts of intergenerational trauma====
Native American youth have higher rates of substance and alcohol use deaths than the general population. Many Native Americans can trace the beginning of their substance and alcohol use to a traumatic event related to their offender&#x27;s own substance use. A person&#x27;s substance use can be described as a defense mechanism against the user&#x27;s emotions and trauma. For Native Americans, alcoholism is a symptom of trauma passed from generation to generation and influenced by oppressive behaviors and policies by the dominant European-American society. Boarding schools were made to &quot;Kill the Indian, Save the man&quot;. Shame among Native Americans can be attributed to the hundreds of years of oppression and annihilation.

===Food insecurity===

Studies are being conducted which show Native Americans often experience higher rates of food insecurity than other racial groups in the United States. The studies do not focus on the overall picture of Native American households, however, and tend to focus rather on smaller sample sizes in the available research. In a study that evaluated the level of food insecurity among Indigenous Americans, White, Black, Hispanic, and Asian: it was reported that over the 10-year span of 2000–2010, Indigenous people were reported to be one of the highest at-risk groups from a lack of access to adequate food, reporting anywhere from 20% to 30% of households suffering from this type of insecurity. There are many reasons that contribute to the issue, but overall, the biggest lie in high food costs on or near reservations, lack of access to well-paying jobs, and predisposition to health issues relating to obesity and mental health.

==Society, language, and culture==


The culture of Pre-Columbian North America is usually defined by the concept of the culture area, namely a geographical region where shared cultural traits occur. The northwest culture area, for example, shared common traits such as salmon fishing, woodworking, and large villages or towns and a hierarchical social structure. Ethnographers generally classify the Indigenous peoples of North America into ten cultural areas based on geographical region.

Though cultural features, language, clothing, and customs vary enormously from one tribe to another, there are certain elements which are encountered frequently and shared by many tribes. Early European American scholars described the Native Americans as having a society dominated by clans.

European colonization of the Americas had a major impact on Native American cultures through what is known as the Columbian exchange, also known as the &quot;Columbian interchange&quot;, which was the widespread transfer of plants, animals, culture, human populations, technology, and ideas between the Americas and Eurasia (the Old World) in the 15th and 16th centuries, following Christopher Columbus&#x27;s 1492 voyage. The Columbian exchange generally had a destructive impact on Native American cultures through disease, and a &#x27;clash of cultures&#x27;, whereby European values of private land ownership, the family, and division of labor, led to conflict, appropriation of traditional communal lands and changed how the Indigenous tribes practiced slavery.
The impact of the Columbian exchange was not entirely negative, however. For example, the re-introduction of the horse to North America allowed the Plains Indians to revolutionize their ways of life by making hunting, trading, and warfare far more effective, and to greatly improve their ability to transport possessions and move their settlements.

The Great Plains tribes were still hunting the bison when they first encountered the Europeans. The Spanish reintroduction of the horse to North America in the 17th century and Native Americans&#x27; learning to use them greatly altered the Native Americans&#x27; cultures, including changing the way in which they hunted large game. Horses became such a valuable, central element of Native lives that they were counted as a measure of wealth by many tribes.

In the early years, as Native peoples encountered European explorers and settlers and engaged in trade, they exchanged food, crafts, and furs for blankets, iron and steel implements, horses, trinkets, firearms, and alcoholic beverages.

===Ethno-linguistic classification===


The Na-Dené, Algic, and Uto-Aztecan families are the largest in terms of the number of languages. Uto-Aztecan has the most speakers (1.95 million) if the languages in Mexico are considered (mostly due to 1.5 million speakers of Nahuatl); Na-Dené comes in second with approximately 200,000 speakers (nearly 180,000 of these are speakers of Navajo), and Algic in third with about 180,000 speakers (mainly Cree and Ojibwe). Na-Dené and Algic have the widest geographic distributions: Algic currently spans from northeastern Canada across much of the continent down to northeastern Mexico (due to later migrations of the Kickapoo) with two outliers in California (Yurok and Wiyot); Na-Dené spans from Alaska and western Canada through Washington, Oregon, and California to the U.S. Southwest and northern Mexico (with one outlier in the Plains). Several families consist of only 2 or 3 languages. Demonstrating genetic relationships has proved difficult due to the great linguistic diversity present in North America. Two large (super-) family proposals, Penutian and Hokan have potential. However, even after decades of research, a large number of families remain.

Words used in English have been derived from Native American languages.

====Language education====


To counteract a shift to English, some Native American tribes have initiated language immersion schools for children, where an Indigenous American language is the medium of instruction. For example, the Cherokee Nation initiated a 10-year language preservation plan that involved raising new fluent speakers of the Cherokee language from childhood on up through school immersion programs as well as a collaborative community effort to continue to use the language at home. This plan was part of an ambitious goal that, in 50 years, will result in 80% or more of the Cherokee people being fluent in the language. The Cherokee Preservation Foundation has invested $3 million in opening schools, training teachers, and developing curricula for language education, as well as initiating community gatherings where the language can be actively used. Formed in 2006, the Kituwah Preservation &amp; Education Program (KPEP) on the Qualla Boundary focuses on language immersion programs for children from birth to fifth grade, developing cultural resources for the general public and community language programs to foster the Cherokee language among adults.

There is also a Cherokee language immersion school in Tahlequah, Oklahoma, that educates students from pre-school through eighth grade. Because Oklahoma&#x27;s official language is English, Cherokee immersion students are hindered when taking state-mandated tests because they have little competence in English. The Department of Education of Oklahoma said that in 2012 state tests: 11% of the school&#x27;s sixth-graders showed proficiency in math, and 25% showed proficiency in reading; 31% of the seventh-graders showed proficiency in math, and 87% showed proficiency in reading; 50% of the eighth-graders showed proficiency in math, and 78% showed proficiency in reading. The Oklahoma Department of Education listed the charter school as a Targeted Intervention school, meaning the school was identified as a low-performing school but has not so that it was a Priority School. Ultimately, the school made a C, or a 2.33 grade point average on the state&#x27;s A-F report card system. The report card shows the school getting an F in mathematics achievement and mathematics growth, a C in social studies achievement, a D in reading achievement, and an A in reading growth and student attendance. &quot;The C we made is tremendous&quot;, said school principal Holly Davis, &quot;[t]here is no English instruction in our school&#x27;s younger grades, and we gave them this test in English.&quot; She said she had anticipated the low grade because it was the school&#x27;s first year as a state-funded charter school, and many students had difficulty with English. Eighth graders who graduate from the Tahlequah immersion school are fluent speakers of the language, and they usually go on to attend Sequoyah High School where classes are taught in both English and Cherokee.

===Indigenous foodways===

Historical diets of Native Americans differed dramatically from region to region. Different peoples might have relied more heavily on agriculture, horticulture, hunting, fishing, or gathering wild plants and fungi. Tribes developed diets best suited to their environments.

Iñupiat, Yupiit, Unangan, and fellow Alaska Natives fished, hunted, and harvested wild plants, but did not rely on agriculture. Coastal peoples relied more heavily on sea mammals, fish, and fish eggs, while inland peoples hunted caribou and moose. Alaskan Natives prepared and preserved dried and smoked meat and fish.
Pacific Northwest tribes crafted seafaring dugout canoes long for fishing.
In the Eastern Woodlands, early peoples independently invented agricultural and by 1800 BCE developed the crops of the Eastern Agricultural Complex, which include squash (&quot;Cucurbita pepo ssp. ovifera&quot;), sunflower (&quot;Helianthus annuus var. macrocarpus&quot;), goosefoot (&quot;Chenopodium berlandieri&quot;), and marsh elder (&quot;Iva annua var. macrocarpa&quot;).

The Sonoran Desert region including parts of Arizona and California, part of a region known as Aridoamerica, relied heavily on the tepary bean (&quot;Phaseolus acutifolius&quot;) as a staple crop. This and other desert crops, mesquite bead pods, &quot;tunas&quot; (prickly pear fruit), cholla buds, saguaro cactus fruit, and acorns are being actively promoted today by Tohono O&#x27;odham Community Action. In the Southwest, some communities developed irrigation techniques while others, such as the Hopi dry-farmed. They filled storehouses with grain as protection against the area&#x27;s frequent droughts.
Maize or corn, first cultivated in what is now Mexico was traded north into Aridoamerica and Oasisamerica, southwest. From there, maize cultivation spread throughout the Great Plains and Eastern Woodlands by 200 CE. Native farmers practiced polycropping maize, beans, and squash; these crops are known as the Three Sisters. The beans would replace the nitrogen, which the maize leached from the ground, as well as using corn stalks for support for climbing. The deficiencies of a diet heavily dependent on maize were mitigated by the common practice among Native Americans of converting maize kernels into hominy in a process called Nixtamalization.

The agriculture gender roles of the Native Americans varied from region to region. In the Southwest area, men prepared the soil with hoes. The women were in charge of planting, weeding, and harvesting the crops. In most other regions, the women were in charge of most agriculture, including clearing the land. Clearing the land was an immense chore since the Native Americans rotated fields.

Europeans in the eastern part of the continent observed that Native Americans cleared large areas for cropland. Their fields in New England sometimes covered hundreds of acres. Colonists in Virginia noted thousands of acres under cultivation by Native Americans.
Early farmers commonly used tools such as the hoe, maul, and dibber. The hoe was the main tool used to till the land and prepare it for planting; then it was used for weeding. The first versions were made out of wood and stone. When the settlers brought iron, Native Americans switched to iron hoes and hatchets. The dibber was a digging stick, used to plant the seed. Once the plants were harvested, women prepared the produce for eating. They used the maul to grind the corn into a mash. It was cooked and eaten that way or baked as cornbread.

===Religion===

Native American religious practices, beliefs, and philosophies differ widely across tribes. These spiritualities, practices, beliefs, and philosophies may accompany adherence to another faith or can represent a person&#x27;s primary religious, faith, spiritual or philosophical identity. Much Native American spirituality exists in a tribal-cultural continuum, and as such cannot be easily separated from tribal identity itself.

Cultural spiritual, philosophical, and faith ways differ from tribe to tribe and person to person. Some tribes include the use of sacred leaves and herbs such as tobacco, sweetgrass or sage. Many Plains tribes have sweatlodge ceremonies, though the specifics of the ceremony vary among tribes. Fasting, singing and prayer in the ancient languages of their people, and sometimes drumming are common.
The Midewiwin Lodge is a medicine society inspired by the oral history and prophesies of the Ojibwa (Chippewa) and related tribes.

Another significant religious body among Native peoples is known as the Native American Church. It is a syncretistic church incorporating elements of Native spiritual practice from a number of different tribes as well as symbolic elements from Christianity. Its main rite is the peyote ceremony. Prior to 1890, traditional religious beliefs included Wakan Tanka. In the American Southwest, especially New Mexico, a syncretism between the Catholicism brought by Spanish missionaries and the native religion is common; the religious drums, chants, and dances of the Pueblo people are regularly part of Masses at Santa Fe&#x27;s Saint Francis Cathedral. Native American-Catholic syncretism is also found elsewhere in the United States. (e.g., the National Kateri Tekakwitha Shrine in Fonda, New York, and the National Shrine of the North American Martyrs in Auriesville, New York). Some Native American tribes who practice Christianity, including the Lumbee, organized denominations, such as the Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church.

The eagle feather law (Title 50 Part 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations) stipulates that only individuals of certifiable Native American ancestry enrolled in a federally recognized tribe are legally authorized to obtain eagle feathers for religious or spiritual use. The law does not allow Native Americans to give eagle feathers to non-Native Americans.

===Gender roles===

Gender roles are differentiated in many Native American tribes. Many Natives have retained traditional expectations of sexuality and gender and continue to do so in contemporary life despite continued and on-going colonial pressures.

Whether a particular tribe is predominantly matrilineal or patrilineal, often both sexes have some degree of decision-making power within the tribe. Many Nations, such as the Haudenosaunee Five Nations and the Southeast Muskogean tribes, have matrilineal or Clan Mother systems, in which property and hereditary leadership are controlled by and passed through the maternal lines. In these Nations, the children are considered to belong to the mother&#x27;s clan. In Cherokee culture, women own the family property. When traditional young women marry, their husbands may join them in their mother&#x27;s household.

Matrilineal structures enable young women to have assistance in childbirth and rearing and protect them in case of conflicts between the couple. If a couple separates or the man dies, the woman has her family to assist her. In matrilineal cultures the mother&#x27;s brothers are usually the leading male figures in her children&#x27;s lives; fathers have no standing in their wife and children&#x27;s clan, as they still belong to their own mother&#x27;s clan. Hereditary clan chief positions pass through the mother&#x27;s line and chiefs have historically been selected on the recommendations of women elders, who could also disapprove of a chief.
In the patrilineal tribes, such as the Omaha, Osage, Ponca, and Lakota, hereditary leadership passes through the male line, and children are considered to belong to the father and his clan. In patrilineal tribes, if a woman marries a non-Native, she is no longer considered part of the tribe, and her children are considered to share the ethnicity and culture of their father.

In patriarchal tribes, gender roles tend to be rigid. Men have historically hunted, traded and made war while, as life-givers, women have primary responsibility for the survival and welfare of the families (and future of the tribe). Women usually gather and cultivate plants, use plants and herbs to treat illnesses, care for the young and the elderly, make all the clothing and instruments, and process and cure meat and skins from the game. Some mothers use cradleboards to carry an infant while working or traveling. In matriarchal and egalitarian nations, the gender roles are usually not so clear-cut and are even less so in the modern era.

At least several dozen tribes allowed polygyny to sisters, with procedural and economic limits.

Lakota, Dakota, and Nakota girls are encouraged to learn to ride, hunt and fight. Though fighting in war has mostly been left to the boys and men, occasionally women have fought as well, both in battles and in defense of the home, especially if the tribe was severely threatened.

===Modern education===
 90% of Native American school-aged children attend public schools operated by school districts. Tribally-operated schools under contracts/grants with the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) and direct BIE-operated schools take about 8% of Native American students, including students who live in very rural remote areas.

In 1978, 215,000 (78%) of Native Americans attended school district-operated public schools, 47,000 (17%) attended schools directly operated by the BIA, 2,500 (1%) attended tribal or other schools that contracted with the BIA, and the remaining 9,000 (3%) attended missionary schools for Native American children or other private schools.

===Sports===
Native American leisure time led to competitive individual and team sports. Jim Thorpe, Lewis Tewanima, Joe Hipp, Notah Begay III, Chris Wondolowski, Jacoby Ellsbury, Joba Chamberlain, Kyle Lohse, Sam Bradford, Jack Brisco, Tommy Morrison, Billy Mills, Angel Goodrich, Shoni Schimmel, and Kyrie Irving are well known professional athletes.
====Team sports====
Native American ball sports, sometimes referred to as lacrosse, stickball, or baggataway, were often used to settle disputes, rather than going to war, as a civil way to settle potential conflict. The Choctaw called it &quot;isitoboli&quot; (&quot;Little Brother of War&quot;); the Onondaga name was &quot;dehuntshigwa&#x27;es&quot; (&quot;men hit a rounded object&quot;). There are three basic versions, classified as Great Lakes, Iroquoian, and Southern.

The game is played with one or two rackets or sticks and one ball. The object of the game is to land the ball in the opposing team&#x27;s goal (either a single post or net) to score and to prevent the opposing team from scoring on your goal. The game involves as few as 20 or as many as 300 players with no height or weight restrictions and no protective gear. The goals could be from around apart to about ; in lacrosse the field is .

====Individual sports====
Chunkey was a game that consisted of a stone-shaped disk that was about 1–2 inches in diameter. The disk was thrown down a corridor so that it could roll past the players at great speed. The disk would roll down the corridor, and players would throw wooden shafts at the moving disk. The object of the game was to strike the disk or prevent your opponents from hitting it.
====U.S. Olympics====
Jim Thorpe, a Sauk and Fox Native American, was an all-around athlete playing football and baseball in the early 20th century. Future President Dwight Eisenhower injured his knee while trying to tackle the young Thorpe. In a 1961 speech, Eisenhower recalled Thorpe: &quot;Here and there, there are some people who are supremely endowed. My memory goes back to Jim Thorpe. He never practiced in his life, and he could do anything better than any other football player I ever saw.&quot;

In the 1912 Olympics, Thorpe could run the 100-yard dash in 10 seconds flat, the 220 in 21.8 seconds, the 440 in 51.8 seconds, the 880 in 1:57, the mile in 4:35, the 120-yard high hurdles in 15 seconds, and the 220-yard low hurdles in 24 seconds. He could long jump 23 ft 6 in and high-jump 6 ft 5 in. He could pole vault , put the shot , throw the javelin , and throw the discus . Thorpe entered the U.S. Olympic trials for the pentathlon and the decathlon.

Louis Tewanima, Hopi people, was an American two-time Olympic distance runner and silver medalist in the 10,000-meter run in 1912. He ran for the Carlisle Indian School where he was a teammate of Jim Thorpe. His silver medal in 1912 remained the best U.S. achievement in this event until another Indian, Billy Mills, won the gold medal in 1964. Tewanima also competed at the 1908 Olympics, where he finished in ninth place in the marathon.[1]

Ellison Brown, of the Narragansett people from Rhode Island, better known as &quot;Tarzan&quot; Brown, won two Boston Marathons (1936, 1939) and competed on the United States Olympic team in the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin, Germany, but did not finish due to injury. He qualified for the 1940 Olympic Games in Helsinki, Finland, but the games were canceled due to the outbreak of World War II.

Billy Mills, a Lakota and USMC officer, won the gold medal in the 10,000-meter run at the 1964 Tokyo Olympics. He was the only American ever to win the Olympic gold in this event. An unknown before the Olympics, Mills finished second in the U.S. Olympic trials.

Billy Kidd, part Abenaki from Vermont, became the first American male to medal in alpine skiing in the Olympics, taking silver at age 20 in the slalom in the 1964 Winter Olympics at Innsbruck, Austria. Six years later at the 1970 World Championships, Kidd won the gold medal in the combined event and took the bronze medal in the slalom.

Ashton Locklear (Lumbee), an uneven bars specialist was an alternate for the 2016 Summer Olympics U.S. gymnastics team, the Final Five. In 2016, Kyrie Irving (Sioux) also helped Team USA win the gold medal at the 2016 Summer Olympics. With the win, he became just the fourth member of Team USA to capture the NBA championship and an Olympic gold medal in the same year, joining LeBron James, Michael Jordan, and Scottie Pippen.

===Literature===

Native American literature, composed of both oral literature and written literature, has a long history. Relevantly, it is considered a series of literatures reflecting the varied traditions and histories of different tribes. Modern authors cover a wide range of genres and include Tommy Orange, Joy Harjo, Louise Erdrich, Stephen Graham Jones, Rebecca Roanhorse, Tommy Pico, and many more.

===Music===

Traditional Native American music is almost entirely monophonic, but there are notable exceptions. Native American music often includes drumming or the playing of rattles or other percussion instruments but little other instrumentation. Flutes and whistles made of wood, cane, or bone are also played, generally by individuals, but in former times also by large ensembles (as noted by Spanish conquistador de Soto). The tuning of modern flutes is typically pentatonic.

Performers with Native American parentage have occasionally appeared in American popular music such as Rita Coolidge, Wayne Newton, Gene Clark, Blackfoot, and Redbone (members are also of Mexican descent). Some, such as John Trudell, have used music to comment on life in Native America. Other musicians such as R. Carlos Nakai, Joanne Shenandoah and Robert &quot;Tree&quot; Cody integrate traditional sounds with modern sounds in instrumental recordings, whereas the music by artist Charles Littleleaf is derived from ancestral heritage as well as nature. A variety of small and medium-sized recording companies offer an abundance of recent music by Native American performers young and old, ranging from pow-wow drum music to hard-driving rock-and-roll and rap. In the International world of ballet dancing Maria Tallchief was considered America&#x27;s first major prima ballerina, and was the first person of Native American descent to hold the rank. along with her sister Marjorie Tallchief both became star ballerinas.

The most widely practiced public musical form among Native Americans in the United States is that of the pow-wow. At pow-wows, such as the annual Gathering of Nations in Albuquerque, New Mexico, members of drum groups sit in a circle around a large drum. Drum groups play in unison while they sing in a native language and dancers in colorful regalia dance clockwise around the drum groups in the center. Familiar pow-wow songs include honor songs, intertribal songs, crow-hops, sneak-up songs, grass-dances, two-steps, welcome songs, going-home songs, and war songs. Most Indigenous communities in the United States also maintain traditional songs and ceremonies, some of which are shared and practiced exclusively within the community.

===Art===
The Iroquois, living around the Great Lakes and extending east and north, used strings or belts called &quot;wampum&quot; that served a dual function: the knots and beaded designs mnemonically chronicled tribal stories and legends, and further served as a medium of exchange and a unit of measure. The keepers of the articles were seen as tribal dignitaries.

Pueblo peoples crafted impressive items associated with their religious ceremonies. &quot;Kachina&quot; dancers wore elaborately painted and decorated masks as they ritually impersonated various ancestral spirits. Pueblo people are particularly noted for their traditional high-quality pottery, often with geometric designs and floral, animal and bird motifs. Sculpture was not highly developed, but carved stone and wood fetishes were made for religious use. Superior weaving, embroidered decorations, and rich dyes characterized the textile arts. Both turquoise and shell jewelry were created, as were formalized pictorial arts.

Navajo spirituality focused on the maintenance of a harmonious relationship with the spirit world, often achieved by ceremonial acts, usually incorporating sandpainting. For the Navajo, the sand painting is not merely a representational object, but a dynamic spiritual entity with a life of its own, which helped the patient at the center of the ceremony re-establish a connection with the life force. These vivid, intricate, and colorful sand creations were erased at the end of the healing ceremony.

It has been estimated that the Native American arts and crafts industry brings in more than a billion USD in gross sales annually, nationwide.

Native American art comprises a major category in the world art collection. Native American contributions include pottery, paintings, jewellery, weavings, sculpture, basketry, and carvings. Franklin Gritts was a Cherokee artist who taught students from many tribes at Haskell Institute (now Haskell Indian Nations University) in the 1940s, the &quot;Golden Age&quot; of Native American painters. The integrity of certain Native American artworks is protected by the Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990, which prohibits the representation of art as Native American when it is not the product of an enrolled Native American artist. Attorney Gail Sheffield and others claim that this law has had &quot;the unintended consequence of sanctioning discrimination against Native Americans whose tribal affiliation was not officially recognized&quot;. Native artists such as Jeanne Rorex Bridges (Echota Cherokee) who was not enrolled ran the risk of fines or imprisonment if they continued to sell their art while affirming their Indian heritage.

==Interracial relations==
Interracial relations between Native Americans, Europeans, and Africans is a complex issue that has been mostly neglected with &quot;few in-depth studies on interracial relationships&quot;.

===Assimilation===
European impact was immediate, widespread, and profound already during the early years of colonization and the creation of the countries which currently exist in the Americas. Europeans living among Native Americans were often called &quot;white indians&quot;. They &quot;lived in native communities for years, learned native languages fluently, attended native councils, and often fought alongside their native companions&quot;.

Early contact was often charged with tension and emotion, but also had moments of friendship, cooperation, and intimacy. Marriages took place in English, French, Russian and Spanish colonies between Native Americans and Europeans though Native American women were also the victims of rape.

There was fear on both sides, as the different peoples realized how different their societies were. Many whites regarded Native people as &quot;savages&quot; because the Native people were not Protestant or Roman Catholic and therefore the Native people were not considered to be human beings. The Native American author, Andrew J. Blackbird, wrote in his &quot;History of the Ottawa and Chippewa Indians of Michigan&quot; (1897), that white settlers introduced some immoralities into Native American tribes. Many Native Americans suffered because the Europeans introduced alcohol. Many Native people do not break down alcohol in the same way as people of Eurasian background. Many Native people were learning what their body could tolerate of this new substance and died as a result of imbibing too much.

Blackbird wrote:


The U.S. government had two purposes when making land agreements with Native Americans: to open up more land for white settlement, and to &quot;ease tensions&quot; (in other words assimilate Native people to Eurasian social ways) between whites and Native Americans by forcing the Native Americans to use the land in the same way as did the whites—for subsistence farms. The government used a variety of strategies to achieve these goals; many treaties required Native Americans to become farmers in order to keep their land. Government officials often did not translate the documents which Native Americans were forced to sign, and native chiefs often had little or no idea what they were signing.
For a Native American man to marry a white woman, he had to get consent of her parents, as long as &quot;he can prove to support her as a white woman in a good home&quot;. In the early 19th century, the Shawnee Tecumseh and blonde hair, blue-eyed Rebecca Galloway had an interracial affair. In the late 19th century, three European American middle-class women teachers at Hampton Institute married Native American men whom they had met as students.

As European American women started working independently at missions and Indian schools in the western states, there were more opportunities for their meeting and developing relationships with Native American men. For instance, Charles Eastman, a man of European and Lakota origin whose father sent both his sons to Dartmouth College, got his medical degree at Boston University and returned to the West to practice. He married Elaine Goodale, whom he met in South Dakota. He was the grandson of Seth Eastman, a military officer from Maine, and a chief&#x27;s daughter. Goodale was a young European American teacher from Massachusetts and a reformer, who was appointed as the U.S. superintendent of Native American education for the reservations in the Dakota Territory. They had six children together.

===European enslavement===
The majority of Native American tribes did practice some form of slavery before the European introduction of African slavery into North America, but none exploited slave labor on a large scale. Most Native American tribes did not barter captives in the pre-colonial era, although they sometimes exchanged enslaved individuals with other tribes in peace gestures or in exchange for their own members. When Europeans arrived as colonists in North America, Native Americans changed their practice of slavery dramatically. Native Americans began selling war captives to Europeans rather than integrating them into their own societies as they had done before. As the demand for labor in the West Indies grew with the cultivation of sugar cane, Europeans enslaved Native Americans for the Thirteen Colonies, and some were exported to the &quot;sugar islands&quot;. The British settlers, especially those in the southern colonies, purchased or captured Native Americans to use as forced labor in cultivating tobacco, rice, and indigo. Accurate records of the numbers enslaved do not exist because vital statistics and census reports were at best infrequent. Scholars estimate tens to hundreds of thousands of Native Americans may have been enslaved by the Europeans, being sold by Native Americans themselves or Europeans.

In Colonial America, slavery soon became racialized, with those enslaved by the institution consisting of ethnic groups (non-Christian Native Americans and Africans) who were foreign to the Christian, European colonists. The House of Burgesses define the terms of slavery in Virginia in 1705:

The slave trade of Native Americans lasted only until around 1750. It gave rise to a series of devastating wars among the tribes, including the Yamasee War. The Indian Wars of the early 18th century, combined with the increasing importation of African slaves, effectively ended the Native American slave trade by 1750. Colonists found that Native American slaves could easily escape, as they knew the country. The wars cost the lives of numerous colonial slave traders and disrupted their early societies. The remaining Native American groups banded together to face the Europeans from a position of strength. Many surviving Native American peoples of the southeast strengthened their loose coalitions of language groups and joined confederacies such as the Choctaw, the Creek, and the Catawba for protection. Even after the Indian Slave Trade ended in 1750, the enslavement of Native Americans continued (mostly through kidnappings) in the west and in the Southern states. Both Native American and African enslaved women suffered rape and sexual harassment by male slaveholders and other white men.

===Native American and African relations===
African- and Native- Americans have interacted for centuries. The earliest record of Native American and African contact occurred in April 1502, when Spanish colonists transported the first Africans to Hispaniola to serve as slaves.
Sometimes Native Americans resented the presence of African Americans. The &quot;Catawaba tribe in 1752 showed great anger and bitter resentment when an African American came among them as a trader&quot;. To gain favor with Europeans, the Cherokee exhibited the strongest color prejudice of all Native Americans. Because of European fears of a unified revolt of Native Americans and African Americans, the colonists tried to encourage hostility between the ethnic groups: &quot;Whites sought to convince Native Americans that African Americans worked against their best interests.&quot; In 1751, South Carolina law stated:

In addition, in 1758 the governor of South Carolina James Glen wrote:

Europeans considered both races inferior and made efforts to make both Native Americans and Africans enemies. Native Americans were rewarded if they returned escaped slaves, and African Americans were rewarded for fighting in the late 19th-century Indian Wars.

According to the National Park Service, &quot;Native Americans, during the transitional period of Africans becoming the primary race enslaved, were enslaved at the same time and shared a common experience of enslavement. They worked together, lived together in communal quarters, produced collective recipes for food, shared herbal remedies, myths and legends, and in the end they intermarried.&quot; Because of a shortage of men due to warfare, many tribes encouraged marriage between the two groups, to create stronger, healthier children from the unions.

In the 18th century, many Native American women married freed or runaway African men due to a decrease in the population of men in Native American villages. Records show that many Native American women bought African men but, unknown to the European sellers, the women freed and married the men into their tribe. When African men married or had children by a Native American woman, their children were born free, because the mother was free (according to the principle of &quot;partus sequitur ventrem&quot;, which the colonists incorporated into law).

While numerous tribes used captive enemies as servants and slaves, they also often adopted younger captives into their tribes to replace members who had died. In the Southeast, a few Native American tribes began to adopt a slavery system similar to that of the American colonists, buying African American slaves, especially the Cherokee, Choctaw, and Creek. Though less than 3% of Native Americans owned slaves, divisions grew among the Native Americans over slavery. Among the Cherokee, records show that slaveholders in the tribe were largely the children of European men who had shown their children the economics of slavery. As European colonists took slaves into frontier areas, there were more opportunities for relationships between African and Native American peoples.

==Race, ethnicity, and citizenship==



Native American identity is determined by the tribal community that the individual or group is seeking to identify with. While it is common for non-Natives to consider it a racial or ethnic identity, it is considered by Native Americans in the United States to be a political identity, based on citizenship and immediate family relationships. As culture can vary widely between the 574 extant federally recognized tribes in the United States, the idea of a single unified &quot;Native American&quot; racial identity is a European construct that does not have an equivalent in tribal thought.

In the 2010 Census, nearly 3 million people indicated that their &quot;race&quot; was Native American (including Alaska Native). Of these, more than 27% specifically indicated &quot;Cherokee&quot; as their ethnic origin. Many of the First Families of Virginia claim descent from Pocahontas or some other &quot;Indian princess&quot;. This phenomenon has been dubbed the &quot;Cherokee Syndrome&quot;. Across the US, numerous individuals cultivate an opportunistic ethnic identity as Native American, sometimes through Cherokee heritage groups or Indian Wedding Blessings.

Some tribes (particularly some in the Eastern United States) are primarily made up of individuals with an unambiguous Native American identity, despite having a large number of mixed-race citizens with prominent non-Native ancestry. More than 75% of those enrolled in the Cherokee Nation have less than one-quarter Cherokee blood, and the former Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, Bill John Baker, is 1/32 Cherokee, amounting to about 3%.

Historically, numerous Native Americans assimilated into colonial and later American society, e.g. through adopting English and converting to Christianity. In many cases, this process occurred through forced assimilation of children sent off to American Indian boarding schools far from their families. Those who could eventually pass for white gained the advantage of white privilege, yet often paid for it with the loss of community connections. With the enforcement of blood quantum laws, Indian blood could be diluted over generations through intermarrying with non-Native populations, as well as intermarrying with members of tribes that also required high blood-quantum, solely from one tribe. &quot;Kill the Indian, save the man&quot; was a mantra of nineteenth-century U.S. assimilation policies.

Native Americans are more likely than any other racial group to practice interracial or intertribal marriage among the different tribes and non-Natives, resulting in an ever-declining proportion of Indigenous blood among those who claim a Native American identity (tribes often count only the Indian blood from their own tribal background in the enrollment process, disregarding intertribal heritages). Some tribes disenroll those with low blood quantum. Disenrollment has become a contentious issue in Native American reservation politics.

===Tribal enrollment===
Requirements for tribal citizenship vary by tribe, but are generally based on who one&#x27;s parents and grandparents are, as known and documented by community members and tribal records. Among the tribal nations, qualification for enrolling those who were not logged at birth by their parents may be based upon a required percentage of Native American &quot;blood&quot; (or the &quot;blood quantum&quot;) of an individual, or upon documented lineal descent from an ancestor on a specific census or register.

Tribal rules regarding the recognition of members who have heritage from multiple tribes also vary, but most do not allow citizenship in multiple tribes at once. For those that do, usually citizens consider one of their citizenships primary, and their other heritage to be &quot;descent&quot;. Federally recognized tribes do not accept genetic ethnicity percentages results as appropriate evidence of Native American identity, as they cannot indicate specific tribe, or even whether or not someone is Native American. Unless requested for a paternity test, they do not advise applicants to submit such things.

To receive tribal services, a Native American must be a citizen of (or enrolled in) a federally recognized tribe. While each tribal government makes its own rules for the eligibility of citizens, the federal government has its own qualifications for federally-funded services. Federal scholarships for Native Americans require the student to be enrolled in a federally recognized tribe &quot;and&quot; to be of at least one-quarter Native American blood quantum, as attested to by a Certificate of Degree of Indian Blood (CDIB) card issued by the federal government.

Tribal membership conflicts have led to a number of legal disputes, court cases, and the formation of activist groups. One example of this is the Cherokee Freedmen. The Cherokee Nation requires documented direct genealogical descent from a Cherokee person listed in the early 1906 Dawes Rolls. The Freedmen are descendants of African Americans once enslaved by the Cherokees, who were granted, by federal treaty, citizenship in the historic Cherokee Nation as freedmen after the Civil War. The modern Cherokee Nation, in the early 1980s, passed a law to require that all members must prove descent from a Cherokee Native American (not Cherokee Freedmen) listed on the Dawes Rolls, resulting in the exclusion of some individuals and families who had been active in Cherokee culture for years.

===Increased self-identification===
Since the 2000 census, people may identify as being of more than one race. Since the 1960s, the number of people claiming Native American ancestry has grown significantly and, by the 2000 census, the number had more than doubled. Sociologists attribute this dramatic change to &quot;ethnic shifting&quot; or &quot;ethnic shopping&quot;; they believe that it reflects a willingness of people to question their birth identities and adopt new ethnicities which they find more compatible.

The author Jack Hitt writes:

Journalist Mary Annette Pember (Ojibwe) writes that non-Natives identifying with Native American identity may be a result of a person&#x27;s increased interest in genealogy, the romanticization of what they believe the cultures to be, and family lore of Native American ancestors in the distant past. However, there are different issues if a person wants to pursue enrollment as a citizen of a tribal nation. Different tribes have different requirements for citizenship. Often those who live as non-Natives, yet claim distant heritage, say they are simply reluctant to enroll, arguing that it is a method of control initiated by the federal government. However, it is the tribes that set their own enrollment criteria, and &quot;the various enrollment requirements are often a hurdle that ethnic shoppers are unable to clear.&quot; Says Grayson Noley, (Choctaw), of the University of Oklahoma, &quot;If you have to search for proof of your heritage, it probably isn&#x27;t there.&quot; In other cases, there are some individuals who are 100% Native American but, if all of their recent ancestors are from different tribes, blood quantum laws could result in them not meeting the citizenship criteria for any one of those individual tribes. Pember concludes:

===Admixture and genetics===
Intertribal marriage is historically common among many Native American tribes, both prior to European contact and in the present. Historically, tribal conflicts might result in the eventual adoption of, or marriages with, captives taken in warfare, with former foes becoming full members of the community. Individuals often have ancestry from more than one tribe, and this became increasingly common after so many tribes lost family members to colonial invasions bringing disease, war and massacres. Bands or entire tribes were often reduced to very small numbers, and at times split or merged to form stronger communities in reaction to these pressures.

Tribes with long trading histories with Europeans show a higher rate of European admixture, reflecting admixture events between Native American women and European men.

The Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism has also said that haplogroup testing is not a valid means of determining Native American ancestry, and that the concept of using genetic testing to determine who is or is not Native American threatens tribal sovereignty. Author of &quot;Native American DNA: Tribal Belonging and the False Promise of Genetic Science&quot;, Kim TallBear (Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate), agrees, stating that not only is there no DNA test that can indicate a tribe, but &quot;there is no DNA-test to prove you&#x27;re Native American.&quot; Tallbear writes in &quot;Native American DNA&quot; that while a DNA test may bring up some markers associated with some Indigenous or Asian populations, the science in these cases is problematic, as Indigenous identity is not about one distant (and possibly nonexistent) ancestor, but rather political citizenship, culture, kinship, and daily, lived experience as part of an Indigenous community. She adds that a person, &quot;… could have up to two Native American grandparents and show no sign of Native American ancestry. For example, a genetic male could have a maternal grandfather (from whom he did not inherit his Y chromosome) and a paternal grandmother (from whom he did not inherit his mtDNA) who were descended from Native American founders, but mtDNA and Y-chromosome analyses would not detect them.&quot;

Given all these factors, DNA testing is not sufficient to qualify a person for specific tribal membership, as the ethnicity admixture tests cannot distinguish among Native American tribes. They cannot even reliably indicate Native American ancestry:

&quot;Native American markers&quot; are not found solely among Native Americans. While they occur more frequently among Native Americans, they are also found in people in other parts of the world.

The only use of DNA testing by legitimate tribes is that some, such as the Meskwaki, may use DNA for paternity tests, or similar confirmation that an applicant who was not enrolled at birth is the biological child of an enrolled tribal member. It is solely about confirming or ruling out biological paternity, and has no relationship to race or ethnicity.

====African American admixtures====
DNA testing and research has provided some data about the extent of Native American ancestry among African Americans, which varies in the general population. Based on the work of geneticists, Harvard University historian Henry Louis Gates, Jr. hosted a popular, and at times controversial, PBS series, &quot;African American Lives&quot;, in which geneticists said DNA evidence shows that Native American ancestry is far less common among African Americans than previously believed. Their conclusions were that while almost all African Americans are racially mixed, and many have family stories of Native heritage, usually these stories turn out to be inaccurate, with only 5 percent of African American people showing more than 2 percent Native American ancestry.

Gates summarized these statistics to mean that, &quot;If you have 2 percent Native American ancestry, you had one such ancestor on your family tree five to nine generations back (150 to 270 years ago).&quot; Their findings also concluded that the most common &quot;non-Black&quot; mix among African Americans is English and Scots-Irish. Some critics thought the PBS series did not sufficiently explain the limitations of DNA testing for assessment of heritage. Another study, published in the &quot;American Journal of Human Genetics&quot;, also indicated that, despite how common these family stories are, relatively few African Americans who have these stories actually turned out to have detectable Native American ancestry. A study reported in the &quot;American Journal of Human Genetics&quot; stated, &quot;We analyzed the European genetic contribution to 10 populations of African descent in the United States (Maywood, Illinois; Detroit; New York; Philadelphia; Pittsburgh; Baltimore; Charleston, South Carolina; New Orleans; and Houston) ... mtDNA haplogroups analysis shows no evidence of a significant maternal Amerindian contribution to any of the 10 populations.&quot; Despite this, some still insist that most African Americans have at least some Native American heritage.

An autosomal study from 2019 found small but detectable amounts of Native American ancestry among African-Americans, ranging from an average of 1.2% in the West South Central region, to 1.9% on the West Coast. The median amount of Native ancestry in African-Americans was found to be 1% nationwide.

==== White and Hispanic admixtures ====
An autosomal DNA study published in 2019 found evidence of minimal Native American ancestry among non-Hispanic White Americans, ranging from an average of 0.18% in the Mid-Atlantic region to 0.93% in the Pacific region. However, the majority of White Americans were found to have no detectable Native American ancestry, with the median amount of European ancestry being 99.8% in White participants.

Hispanic Americans, on the other hand, were found to have a large and varying amount of Native American ancestry, with a median of 38% nationwide. This ancestry was the highest among Hispanics from the West South Central Region (Texas and Oklahoma) at 43.2%, and the West Coast, at 42.6%, reflecting the predominant Mexican-American population in these regions. Hispanics from the Mid-Atlantic, on the other hand, averaged only 11.1% Native American ancestry, reflecting the predominant Puerto Rican and Dominican-American populations among Hispanics from that region. 

====DNA====

The genetic history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas primarily focuses on human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups and human mitochondrial DNA haplogroups. &quot;Y-DNA&quot; is passed solely along the patrilineal line, from father to son, while &quot;mtDNA&quot; is passed down the matrilineal line, from mother to offspring of both sexes. Neither recombines, and thus Y-DNA and mtDNA change only by chance mutation at each generation with no intermixture between parents&#x27; genetic material. Autosomal &quot;atDNA&quot; markers are also used, but differ from mtDNA or Y-DNA in that they overlap significantly. Autosomal DNA is generally used to measure the average continent-of-ancestry genetic admixture in the entire human genome and related isolated populations. Within mtDNA, genetic scientists have found specific nucleotide sequences that they have classified as &quot;Native American markers&quot; because the sequences are understood to have been inherited through the generations of genetic females within populations first found in the &quot;New World&quot;. There are five primary Native American mtDNA haplogroups in which there are clusters of closely linked markers inherited together. All five haplogroups have been identified by researchers as &quot;prehistoric Native North American samples&quot;, and it is commonly asserted that the majority of living Native Americans possess one of the common five mtDNA haplogroup markers.

The genetic pattern indicates Indigenous Americans experienced two very distinctive genetic episodes; first with the initial-peopling of the Americas, and secondly with European colonization of the Americas. The former is the determinant factor for the number of gene lineages, zygosity mutations and founding haplotypes present in today&#x27;s Indigenous American populations.

The most popular theory is that human settlement of the Americas occurred in stages from the Bering sea coast line, with an initial 15,000 to 20,000-year layover on Beringia for the small founding population. The micro-satellite diversity and distributions of the Y lineage specific to South America indicates that certain Amerindian populations have been isolated since the initial colonization of the region. The Na-Dené, Inuit and Indigenous Alaskan populations exhibit haplogroup Q-M242 (Y-DNA) mutations, however, that are distinct from other Indigenous Amerindians, and that have various mtDNA and atDNA mutations. This suggests that the paleo-Indian migrants into the northern extremes of North America and Greenland were descended from a later, independent migrant population.

Genetic analyses of HLA I and HLA II genes as well as HLA-A, -B, and -DRB1 gene frequencies links the Ainu people of northern Japan and southeastern Russia to some Indigenous peoples of the Americas, especially to populations on the Pacific Northwest Coast such as Tlingit. Scientists suggest that the main ancestor of the Ainu and of some Native American groups can be traced back to Paleolithic groups in Southern Siberia.

==See also==

* List of historical Indian reservations in the United States
* List of Indian massacres in North America
* List of Indian reservations in the United States
* List of Native American firsts
* List of Native Americans of the United States (notable Native Americans)
* Racism against Native Americans in the United States
* List of U.S. communities with Native-American majority populations

==References==
==External links==

* Official website of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, part of the US Department of the Interior
* Official website of the National Congress of American Indians
* American Indian Records from the National Archives and Records Administration
* Official website of the National Museum of the American Indian, part of the Smithsonian Institution
* National Indian Law Library of the Native American Rights Fund – a law library of federal Indian and tribal law</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="0" end="16" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="30" end="46" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="48" end="63" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="First Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="68" end="88" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Indigenous Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="98" end="116" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="124" end="137" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="159" end="174" title="Contiguous United States" label="lower 48 states"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="179" end="185" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="305" end="332" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="381" end="395" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="584" end="590" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="730" end="746" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="785" end="822" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638531" start="847" end="912" title="Population history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="precipitous decline in the size of the Native American population"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979955" start="924" end="949" title="Native American disease and epidemics" label="newly introduced diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="1019" end="1023" title="American Indian Wars" label="wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="1025" end="1041" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539244" start="1047" end="1058" title="Slavery among Native Americans in the United States" label="enslavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q108733451" start="1145" end="1153" title="Native American genocide in the United States" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q716815" start="1203" end="1222" title="settler colonialism" label="settler colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="1323" end="1330" title="Indian removal" label="removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012358" start="1347" end="1362" title="ancestral lands" label="ancestral lands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1386" end="1415" title="List of United States treaties#U.S.–Native American treaties" label="one-sided government treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242854" start="1512" end="1524" title="Cultural assimilation of Native Americans" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1817" end="1850" title="Indian Appropriations Act#1871 Act" label="Indian Appropriations Act of 1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770058" start="2077" end="2095" title="Tribal sovereignty in the United States" label="tribal sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q548645" start="2295" end="2317" title="Indian Citizenship Act" label="Indian Citizenship Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="2492" end="2518" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="2575" end="2595" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254248" start="2727" end="2757" title="Native American voting rights" label="Native Americans voting rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094483" start="2800" end="2824" title="Civil Rights Act of 1968" label="Civil Rights Act of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="2955" end="2974" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="U.S. Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979971" start="3023" end="3057" title="Native American self-determination" label="Native American self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987619" start="3169" end="3202" title="Contemporary Native American issues in the United States" label="contemporary issues faced by them"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="3387" end="3393" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="3395" end="3403" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="3405" end="3412" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3414" end="3424" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="3426" end="3436" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="3442" end="3447" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="3516" end="3554" title="migration of Europeans to the Americas" label="migration of Europeans to the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="3646" end="3649" title="Old World" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="3654" end="3663" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q767253" start="3698" end="3716" title="Columbian exchange" label="Columbian exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="3768" end="3783" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="their histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="3796" end="3810" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q695827" start="3829" end="3893" title="Protohistory" label="first written accounts of the contact were provided by Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="3896" end="3909" title="Ethnography" label="Ethnographers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3923" end="3958" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas#North America" label="Indigenous peoples of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="4047" end="4055" title="cultural" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="4117" end="4123" title="Alaska Natives" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="4135" end="4140" title="Aleut" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="4142" end="4147" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37014" start="4153" end="4166" title="Yupik peoples" label="Yupik peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q568060" start="4169" end="4178" title="Indigenous peoples of the Subarctic" label="Subarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q841334" start="4181" end="4203" title="Indigenous peoples of the Northeastern Woodlands" label="Northeastern Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q905014" start="4206" end="4228" title="Indigenous peoples of the Southeastern Woodlands" label="Southeastern Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="4231" end="4243" title="Plains Indians" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q319245" start="4246" end="4257" title="Indigenous peoples of the Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q966966" start="4260" end="4277" title="Indigenous peoples of the Northwest Plateau" label="Northwest Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q210561" start="4280" end="4295" title="Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast" label="Northwest Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="4298" end="4308" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081865" start="4311" end="4320" title="Indigenous peoples of the North American Southwest" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885121" start="4322" end="4334" title="Oasisamerica" label="Oasisamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4456" end="4465" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="4543" end="4554" title="matrilineal" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="4854" end="4869" title="property rights" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979955" start="5164" end="5194" title="Native American disease and epidemics" label="contact with European diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="5253" end="5261" title="immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868867" start="5263" end="5281" title="Smallpox epidemics in the Americas" label="Smallpox epidemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="6165" end="6190" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="thirteen British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="6208" end="6221" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="6257" end="6266" title="U.S. President" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="6267" end="6284" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="6289" end="6305" title="U.S. Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q355680" start="6306" end="6316" title="Henry Knox" label="Henry Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826959" start="6345" end="6355" title="Civilizing mission" label="civilizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="6494" end="6501" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371354" start="6506" end="6512" title="Forced assimilation" label="forced"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="6654" end="6670" title="manifest destiny" label="manifest destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="6747" end="6764" title="European Americans" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="6787" end="6806" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6919" end="6932" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q786008" start="6944" end="6962" title="Indian Removal Act" label="Indian Removal Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="6980" end="6998" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="7096" end="7113" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="7216" end="7232" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="7236" end="7244" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q326259" start="7290" end="7304" title="death march" label="forced marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="7357" end="7371" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="7521" end="7532" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837326" start="7537" end="7550" title="treaty rights" label="treaty rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714638" start="7996" end="8020" title="First Nations Experience" label="First Nations Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q27752" start="8080" end="8103" title="Native American studies" label="Native American studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840326" start="8129" end="8141" title="tribal colleges and universities" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979964" start="8479" end="8511" title="Native American name controversy" label="have at times been controversial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="8863" end="8879" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="8891" end="8906" title="Alaskan Natives" label="Alaskan Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="8916" end="8921" title="Aleut people" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q37014" start="8923" end="8934" title="Yupik peoples" label="Yup&amp;#x27;ik"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="8939" end="8944" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="8973" end="9001" title="Indigenous peoples of Canada" label="Indigenous peoples of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="9025" end="9038" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="9040" end="9045" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="9050" end="9055" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="9057" end="9061" title="FNIM" label="FNIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q13925462" start="9210" end="9236" title="settlement of the Americas" label="settlement of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="9244" end="9257" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleo-Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="9326" end="9334" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="9358" end="9365" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="9370" end="9376" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9679" end="9691" title="Jon_M._Erlandson#Kelp_Highway_Hypothesis:_The_Peopling_of_the_New_World" label="Kelp Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="9748" end="9761" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleo-Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="9896" end="9902" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257815" start="9907" end="9924" title="Folsom tradition" label="Folsom traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647910" start="10019" end="10031" title="Lithic stage" label="Lithic stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q632376" start="10108" end="10121" title="Archaic period (North America)" label="Archaic stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q262714" start="10224" end="10238" title="Mound Builders" label="Mound Builders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552689" start="10276" end="10288" title="Watson Brake" label="Watson Brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q964745" start="10293" end="10306" title="Poverty Point" label="Poverty Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299963" start="10451" end="10466" title="Woodland period" label="Woodland period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305793" start="10533" end="10551" title="Hopewell tradition" label="Hopewell tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="10592" end="10603" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="10612" end="10626" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="10651" end="10672" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q333661" start="10704" end="10711" title="Cahokia" label="Cahokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="11075" end="11091" title="Manifest destiny" label="Manifest destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="11143" end="11157" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851858" start="11259" end="11273" title="Sioux Uprising" label="Sioux Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="11278" end="11302" title="Battle of Little Bighorn" label="Battle of Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q786008" start="11376" end="11394" title="Indian Removal Act" label="Indian Removal Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="11417" end="11426" title="Dawes Act" label="Dawes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="11674" end="11715" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11739" end="11751" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="12090" end="12101" title="American Indian Wars" label="Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851858" start="12148" end="12158" title="Dakota War of 1862" label="Dakota War"/>
<link wikidata="Q430053" start="12160" end="12175" title="Great Sioux War of 1876" label="Great Sioux War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547104" start="12177" end="12186" title="Snake War" label="Snake War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602070" start="12188" end="12200" title="Colorado War" label="Colorado War"/>
<link wikidata="Q474891" start="12206" end="12223" title="Texas-Indian Wars" label="Texas-Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="12272" end="12290" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413" start="12479" end="12500" title="Wounded Knee Massacre" label="Wounded Knee Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="12583" end="12589" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295854" start="12599" end="12610" title="Ghost Dance" label="Ghost Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="12670" end="12682" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642162" start="12800" end="12815" title="Northern Paiute" label="Northern Paiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q558420" start="12833" end="12839" title="Wovoka" label="Wovoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="13137" end="13141" title="Garden of Eden" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q207544" start="13318" end="13331" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="13582" end="13606" title="American Indian Movement" label="American Indian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986011" start="13683" end="13737" title="Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act" label="Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="15353" end="15386" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous people of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="15398" end="15410" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerican"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="15431" end="15435" title="Maya peoples" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="15448" end="15456" title="Indigenous peoples in Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479328" start="15461" end="15483" title="Indigenous peoples of South America" label="South American natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="15621" end="15648" title="Indigenous peoples of Mexico" label="Indigenous people of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="15686" end="15699" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="15814" end="15832" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="16099" end="16107" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="16121" end="16127" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="16139" end="16146" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123248" start="16158" end="16167" title="Blackfeet Nation" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="16179" end="16184" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="16200" end="16206" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="16251" end="16264" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="16277" end="16293" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="16374" end="16391" title="Pacific Islander Americans" label="Pacific Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="17076" end="17092" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="17639" end="17663" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Office of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="17703" end="17716" title="United States Census Bureau" label="Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="17935" end="17948" title="United States Census Bureau" label="Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="18132" end="18138" title="Navajo people" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="18333" end="18341" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="19140" end="19179" title="List of Native American Tribal Entities" label="federally recognized tribal governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q252380" start="19188" end="19207" title="List of Indian reservations in the United States" label="Indian reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669249" start="19789" end="19820" title="List of State Recognized American Indian Tribal Entities" label="recognized by individual states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="19897" end="19914" title="diplomatic recognition" label="state recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="20552" end="20576" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="20784" end="20798" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q598406" start="21475" end="21489" title="Ohlone" label="Muwekma Ohlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="22158" end="22170" title="Genealogy" label="genealogical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972273" start="22255" end="22288" title="Washington State Republican Party" label="Washington State Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="22372" end="22387" title="U.S. government" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="22438" end="22454" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="22510" end="22539" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="22580" end="22595" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="22964" end="22968" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="22973" end="22980" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="23008" end="23013" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649265" start="23196" end="23215" title="Passamaquoddy Tribe" label="Passamaquoddy Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="23436" end="23444" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964180" start="24094" end="24114" title="Walter Ashby Plecker" label="Walter Ashby Plecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154577" start="24230" end="24243" title="one-drop rule" label="one-drop rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="24395" end="24409" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142648" start="24667" end="24671" title="Passing (racial identity)" label="pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891269" start="25552" end="25583" title="Senate Indian Affairs Committee" label="Senate Indian Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="25722" end="25728" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="25730" end="25738" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="25740" end="25747" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="25749" end="25754" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="25756" end="25762" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="25764" end="25770" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673132" start="25772" end="25781" title="Piegan Blackfeet" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="25783" end="25791" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="25797" end="25803" title="Puebloan peoples" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="25994" end="26015" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="26204" end="26222" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="26288" end="26301" title="Jim Crow Laws" label="Jim Crow Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="26325" end="26335" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q548645" start="26389" end="26411" title="Indian Citizenship Act" label="Indian Citizenship Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="26926" end="26931" title="Deep South" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="27083" end="27110" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="27175" end="27180" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="27265" end="27287" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="27410" end="27415" title="Creek tribe" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128871" start="29105" end="29129" title="March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom" label="1963 March on Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="29230" end="29243" title="Navajo nation" label="Navajo nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228810" start="29284" end="29311" title="Poor People&amp;#x27;s Campaign" label="Poor People&amp;#x27;s Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228810" start="29365" end="29392" title="Poor People&amp;#x27;s Campaign" label="Poor People&amp;#x27;s Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967040" start="29404" end="29441" title="National Congress of American Indians" label="National Congress of American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979950" start="29774" end="29801" title="Native American Rights Fund" label="Native American Rights Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741924" start="29970" end="30005" title="Native Americans and the prison–industrial complex" label="criminalization of Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810863" start="30098" end="30106" title="Mel Thom" label="Mel Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q313258" start="30164" end="30173" title="Dean Rusk" label="Dean Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315230" start="30316" end="30323" title="Reservation poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744115" start="30519" end="30561" title="Alcohol and Native Americans" label="disproportionately high rate of alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150076" start="30938" end="30958" title="Indian Country Today" label="Indian Country Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q716815" start="31529" end="31548" title="settler colonialism" label="settler colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="31655" end="31667" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617137" start="32111" end="32120" title="Racism in the United States" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238062" start="32140" end="32150" title="Native Americans and reservation inequality" label="inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384153" start="32329" end="32357" title="equal opportunity employment" label="equal opportunity employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q356112" start="32362" end="32380" title="Affirmative action in the United States" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021393" start="32798" end="32819" title="Indian Relocation Act of 1956" label="Indian Relocation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="35047" end="35053" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193258" start="35114" end="35136" title="cultural appropriation" label="cultural appropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="35414" end="35438" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="35596" end="35599" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="35607" end="35628" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="35691" end="35694" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="35702" end="35723" title="Washington Commanders" label="Washington Commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972150" start="35738" end="35757" title="Washington Redskins name controversy" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140747" start="35790" end="35798" title="Redskin" label="the term"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="35835" end="35838" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="35846" end="35865" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095596" start="35893" end="35910" title="Cleveland Indians name and logo controversy" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096954" start="35945" end="35956" title="Chief Wahoo" label="Chief Wahoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="36302" end="36321" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561437" start="36398" end="36414" title="List of American artists" label="American artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342298" start="36674" end="36695" title="Elbridge Ayer Burbank" label="Elbridge Ayer Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q455133" start="36697" end="36710" title="George Catlin" label="George Catlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q931422" start="36712" end="36724" title="Seth and Mary Eastman" label="Seth Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q506000" start="36726" end="36735" title="Paul Kane" label="Paul Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945792" start="36737" end="36752" title="W. Langdon Kihn" label="W. Langdon Kihn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958563" start="36754" end="36771" title="Charles Bird King" label="Charles Bird King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330927" start="36773" end="36791" title="Joseph Henry Sharp" label="Joseph Henry Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676888" start="36797" end="36813" title="John Mix Stanley" label="John Mix Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="36877" end="36883" title="movies" label="movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="36888" end="36898" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q518816" start="37114" end="37121" title="F Troop" label="F Troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q981630" start="37190" end="37205" title="Jay Silverheels" label="Jay Silverheels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37215" end="37230" title="The Lone Ranger#Television series" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132535" start="37476" end="37490" title="Little Big Man (film)" label="Little Big Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027905" start="37511" end="37521" title="Billy Jack" label="Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q477630" start="37546" end="37568" title="The Outlaw Josey Wales" label="The Outlaw Josey Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="37776" end="37783" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q954212" start="37892" end="37907" title="The Lone Ranger (TV series)" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071394" start="37933" end="37941" title="Cheyenne (1955 TV series)" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835814" start="37971" end="37991" title="Law of the Plainsman" label="Law of the Plainsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q527569" start="38131" end="38151" title="How the West Was Won (TV series)" label="How the West Was Won"/>
<link wikidata="Q20456" start="38241" end="38259" title="Dances With Wolves" label="Dances With Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q144483" start="38491" end="38515" title="The Last of the Mohicans (1992 film)" label="The Last of the Mohicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="38684" end="38695" title="Plains Cree people" label="Plains Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q510139" start="38702" end="38718" title="Michael Greyeyes" label="Michael Greyeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44555" start="38763" end="38774" title="Crazy Horse" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183169" start="38809" end="38820" title="Crazy Horse (1996 film)" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="38875" end="38887" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q27703197" start="38912" end="38929" title="Woman Walks Ahead" label="Woman Walks Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545870" start="38958" end="38971" title="Smoke Signals (film)" label="Smoke Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457234" start="39000" end="39030" title="Coeur D&amp;#x27;Alene Reservation" label="Coeur D&amp;#x27;Alene Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106521" start="39441" end="39451" title="Chris Eyre" label="Chris Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977743" start="39574" end="39589" title="We Shall Remain (documentary)" label="We Shall Remain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322454" start="39632" end="39641" title="Ric Burns" label="Ric Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="39664" end="39683" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="39989" end="40011" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q325314" start="40087" end="40106" title="Tecumseh&amp;#x27;s War" label="Tecumseh&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="40171" end="40185" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="40214" end="40222" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q617827" start="40231" end="40242" title="Apache Wars" label="Apache Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202299" start="40267" end="40288" title="Wounded Knee incident" label="Wounded Knee incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="40311" end="40335" title="American Indian Movement" label="American Indian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="41687" end="41721" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="41741" end="41746" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q776280" start="41775" end="41782" title="Mohican" label="Mohican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182683" start="41790" end="41813" title="John Wannuaucon Quinney" label="John Wannuaucon Quinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="41936" end="41947" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="42006" end="42042" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290293" start="42388" end="42414" title="Commonwealth Caribbean" label="English-speaking Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="42506" end="42511" title="Negro" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="42627" end="42633" title="List of federally recognized tribes" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="42699" end="42708" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319799" start="42765" end="42778" title="Russell Means" label="Russell Means"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075141" start="43276" end="43314" title="National Museum of the American Indian" label="National Museum of the American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q465811" start="43340" end="43348" title="The Mall (Washington, D.C.)" label="the Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="43352" end="43368" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6827436" start="46779" end="46790" title="Miami Tribe of Oklahoma" label="Miami tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="47611" end="47629" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770058" start="47636" end="47654" title="tribal sovereignty" label="tribal sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020335" start="47729" end="47757" title="Indian Gaming Regulatory Act" label="Indian Gaming Regulatory Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="47778" end="47784" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q878160" start="47787" end="47792" title="Bingo (U.S.)" label="bingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="47810" end="47818" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108926" start="48059" end="48073" title="Otoe-Missouria" label="Otoe-Missouria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51710" start="48075" end="48088" title="Tunica-Biloxi" label="Tunica-Biloxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813702" start="48098" end="48111" title="Rosebud Indian Reservation" label="Rosebud Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="48837" end="48868" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="48888" end="48910" title="United States Attorney" label="United States Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892488" start="48919" end="48958" title="United States federal judicial district" label="United States federal judicial district"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="49017" end="49031" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521192" start="49060" end="49073" title="Gangs in the United States" label="gang violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929568" start="49081" end="49110" title="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation" label="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="49192" end="49198" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="49627" end="49654" title="Centers for Disease Control" label="Centers for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="50108" end="50119" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="50291" end="50297" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="50334" end="50368" title="U.S. Small Business Administration" label="U.S. Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="50443" end="50463" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q905998" start="50536" end="50551" title="Stephen Cornell" label="Stephen Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676524" start="50559" end="50614" title="Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development" label="Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="50618" end="50636" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="51307" end="51331" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q897793" start="51756" end="51781" title="Indian Reorganization Act" label="Indian Reorganization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="52062" end="52081" title="Indian reservations" label="Indian reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="52244" end="52260" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="52898" end="52918" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089113" start="54103" end="54118" title="Checkerboarding (land)" label="checkerboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="54820" end="54838" title="Smallholding" label="smallholder status"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090827" start="55944" end="55971" title="Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act" label="Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377422" start="56312" end="56331" title="profit maximization" label="profit maximization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770058" start="56719" end="56737" title="Tribal sovereignty in the United States" label="tribal sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030017" start="57410" end="57427" title="Historical trauma" label="Historical trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413" start="57613" end="57634" title="Wounded Knee Massacre" label="Wounded Knee Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="57695" end="57714" title="Dawes Allotment Act" label="Dawes Allotment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340721" start="59904" end="59952" title="Classification of Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="classify the Indigenous peoples of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="60293" end="60297" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q767253" start="60415" end="60433" title="Columbian exchange" label="Columbian exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="60604" end="60612" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="60630" end="60639" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="60683" end="60703" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60711" end="60722" title="Voyages of Christopher Columbus#First voyage (1492–1493)" label="1492 voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q26986" start="62159" end="62166" title="Na-Dené languages" label="Na-Dené"/>
<link wikidata="Q721612" start="62168" end="62173" title="Algic languages" label="Algic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34073" start="62179" end="62190" title="Uto-Aztecan languages" label="Uto-Aztecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="62383" end="62390" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="62494" end="62500" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33390" start="62558" end="62562" title="Cree language" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q33875" start="62567" end="62573" title="Ojibwe language" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429504" start="62772" end="62780" title="Kickapoo people" label="Kickapoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="62803" end="62813" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q34685" start="62815" end="62820" title="Yurok language" label="Yurok"/>
<link wikidata="Q36937" start="62825" end="62830" title="Wiyot language" label="Wiyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="62886" end="62896" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="62898" end="62904" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="62928" end="62942" title="Southwestern United States" label="U.S. Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q115485" start="63206" end="63214" title="Penutian languages" label="Penutian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33406" start="63219" end="63224" title="Hokan languages" label="Hokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616057" start="63350" end="63388" title="List of English words from indigenous languages of the Americas" label="derived from Native American languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="63623" end="63638" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="63735" end="63752" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092194" start="64036" end="64068" title="Cherokee Preservation Foundation" label="Cherokee Preservation Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330573" start="64344" end="64359" title="Qualla Boundary" label="Qualla Boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447589" start="64426" end="64437" title="fifth grade" label="fifth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q736809" start="64625" end="64644" title="Tahlequah, Oklahoma" label="Tahlequah, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="66073" end="66087" title="charter school" label="charter school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452573" start="66270" end="66290" title="Sequoyah High School (Tahlequah, Oklahoma)" label="Sequoyah High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417088" start="66648" end="66655" title="Iñupiat" label="Iñupiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q37014" start="66657" end="66663" title="Yupiit" label="Yupiit"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="66665" end="66672" title="Unangan" label="Unangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="66685" end="66699" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="66877" end="66884" title="caribou" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="66889" end="66894" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="66967" end="66984" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q596073" start="67010" end="67022" title="dugout canoe" label="dugout canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847401" start="67049" end="67066" title="Eastern Woodlands" label="Eastern Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329949" start="67161" end="67189" title="Eastern Agricultural Complex" label="Eastern Agricultural Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229863" start="67219" end="67233" title="Cucurbita pepo" label="Cucurbita pepo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="67272" end="67289" title="Helianthus annuus" label="Helianthus annuus"/>
<link wikidata="Q820986" start="67332" end="67355" title="Chenopodium berlandieri" label="Chenopodium berlandieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095678" start="67387" end="67396" title="Iva annua" label="Iva annua"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="67426" end="67440" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="67467" end="67474" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="67479" end="67489" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q613648" start="67517" end="67529" title="Aridoamerica" label="Aridoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639734" start="67553" end="67564" title="tepary bean" label="tepary bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639734" start="67572" end="67593" title="Phaseolus acutifolius" label="Phaseolus acutifolius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315767" start="67648" end="67656" title="mesquite" label="mesquite"/>
<link wikidata="Q144412" start="67687" end="67699" title="Opuntia ficus-indica" label="prickly pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q275573" start="67721" end="67728" title="saguaro" label="saguaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67747" end="67753" title="Acorn#Use by Native Americans" label="acorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="67874" end="67884" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117255" start="67922" end="67926" title="Hopi" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="68021" end="68029" title="droughts" label="droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="68031" end="68036" title="Maize" label="Maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="68040" end="68044" title="corn" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="68078" end="68084" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885121" start="68124" end="68136" title="Oasisamerica" label="Oasisamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="68138" end="68147" title="Southwestern United States" label="southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="68201" end="68213" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847401" start="68218" end="68235" title="Eastern Woodlands" label="Eastern Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739133" start="68272" end="68284" title="Polyculture" label="polycropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478954" start="68340" end="68353" title="Three Sisters (agriculture)" label="Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="68383" end="68391" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394051" start="68637" end="68643" title="hominy" label="hominy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052219" start="68664" end="68679" title="Nixtamalization" label="Nixtamalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531014" start="68686" end="68710" title="Gender roles in agriculture" label="agriculture gender roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154" start="68815" end="68819" title="Hoe (tool)" label="hoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q777671" start="68849" end="68857" title="planting" label="planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739141" start="68859" end="68866" title="weeding" label="weeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="68872" end="68882" title="harvesting" label="harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="69203" end="69214" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="69265" end="69273" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154" start="69384" end="69387" title="Hoe (tool)" label="hoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981947" start="69389" end="69393" title="Sledgehammer" label="maul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010091" start="69399" end="69405" title="dibber" label="dibber"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="69550" end="69554" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="69559" end="69564" title="stone" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="69592" end="69596" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q672890" start="69641" end="69649" title="hatchets" label="hatchets"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="69999" end="70013" title="Spirituality" label="spiritualities"/>
<link wikidata="Q161162" start="70502" end="70512" title="Hierochloe odorata" label="sweetgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702896" start="70516" end="70520" title="Leucophyllum" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q254843" start="70546" end="70556" title="sweatlodge" label="sweatlodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662072" start="70709" end="70717" title="Native American music" label="drumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q538136" start="70734" end="70749" title="Midewiwin" label="Midewiwin Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="70823" end="70829" title="Ojibwa" label="Ojibwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="70934" end="70956" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="70966" end="70978" title="Syncretism" label="syncretistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="71106" end="71118" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="71141" end="71147" title="peyote" label="peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745666" start="71212" end="71223" title="Wakan Tanka" label="Wakan Tanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="71263" end="71273" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="71300" end="71311" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="71426" end="71439" title="Pueblo people" label="Pueblo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="71462" end="71468" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="71472" end="71480" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663700" start="71488" end="71511" title="Saint Francis Cathedral" label="Saint Francis Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q609" start="71615" end="71632" title="Kateri Tekakwitha" label="Kateri Tekakwitha"/>
<link wikidata="Q593663" start="71643" end="71658" title="Fonda, New York" label="Fonda, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978447" start="71668" end="71713" title="National Shrine of the North American Martyrs" label="National Shrine of the North American Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871900" start="71717" end="71738" title="Auriesville, New York" label="Auriesville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886046" start="71810" end="71816" title="Lumbee" label="Lumbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q107404532" start="71855" end="71911" title="Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church" label="Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582446" start="71918" end="71935" title="eagle feather law" label="eagle feather law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="72137" end="72142" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="72572" end="72583" title="Matrilineality" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="72587" end="72598" title="patrilineal" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="72703" end="72716" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q121046704" start="72786" end="72797" title="Haudenosaunee Clan Mother" label="Clan Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="72994" end="73002" title="Cherokee people" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="73800" end="73811" title="patrilineal" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="73832" end="73837" title="Omaha" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="73839" end="73844" title="Osage Nation" label="Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754891" start="73846" end="73851" title="Ponca" label="Ponca"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="73857" end="73863" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="73977" end="73981" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568536" start="74631" end="74642" title="cradleboard" label="cradleboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q243688" start="74856" end="74864" title="polygyny" label="polygyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="74915" end="74941" title="Sioux" label="Lakota, Dakota, and Nakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998378" start="75374" end="75400" title="Bureau of Indian Education" label="Bureau of Indian Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q221482" start="75968" end="75978" title="Jim Thorpe" label="Jim Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761766" start="75980" end="75994" title="Lewis Tewanima" label="Lewis Tewanima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210342" start="75996" end="76004" title="Joe Hipp" label="Joe Hipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062478" start="76006" end="76021" title="Notah Begay III" label="Notah Begay III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077877" start="76023" end="76040" title="Chris Wondolowski" label="Chris Wondolowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207375" start="76042" end="76057" title="Jacoby Ellsbury" label="Jacoby Ellsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189644" start="76059" end="76075" title="Joba Chamberlain" label="Joba Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356080" start="76077" end="76087" title="Kyle Lohse" label="Kyle Lohse"/>
<link wikidata="Q714292" start="76089" end="76101" title="Sam Bradford" label="Sam Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502281" start="76103" end="76114" title="Jack Brisco" label="Jack Brisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q467409" start="76116" end="76130" title="Tommy Morrison" label="Tommy Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q436062" start="76132" end="76143" title="Billy Mills" label="Billy Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q18223558" start="76145" end="76159" title="Angel Goodrich" label="Angel Goodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16762769" start="76161" end="76175" title="Shoni Schimmel" label="Shoni Schimmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q348618" start="76181" end="76193" title="Kyrie Irving" label="Kyrie Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="76306" end="76314" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="76453" end="76460" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077450" start="76534" end="76542" title="Onondaga language" label="Onondaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507077" start="77173" end="77180" title="Chunkey" label="Chunkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q221482" start="77568" end="77578" title="Jim Thorpe" label="Jim Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474201" start="77582" end="77594" title="Sauk and Fox" label="Sauk and Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="77712" end="77729" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q185027" start="78365" end="78375" title="pole vault" label="pole vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q180935" start="78378" end="78390" title="shot put" label="put the shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q178108" start="78393" end="78410" title="javelin throw" label="throw the javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182570" start="78427" end="78433" title="discus throw" label="discus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761766" start="78514" end="78528" title="Louis Tewanima" label="Louis Tewanima"/>
<link wikidata="Q117255" start="78530" end="78541" title="Hopi people" label="Hopi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366049" start="78958" end="78971" title="Ellison Brown" label="Ellison Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q609726" start="78980" end="78999" title="Narragansett people" label="Narragansett people"/>
<link wikidata="Q436062" start="79354" end="79365" title="Billy Mills" label="Billy Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="79369" end="79375" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="79380" end="79384" title="United States Marine Corps" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="79444" end="79463" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964 Tokyo Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q863155" start="79617" end="79627" title="Billy Kidd" label="Billy Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="79634" end="79641" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="79647" end="79654" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="79699" end="79712" title="alpine skiing" label="alpine skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117409" start="79761" end="79767" title="Slalom skiing" label="slalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q660694" start="79775" end="79795" title="Alpine skiing at the 1964 Winter Olympics" label="1964 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="79799" end="79808" title="Innsbruck, Austria" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="79810" end="79817" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457993" start="79899" end="79907" title="Alpine skiing combined" label="combined"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517163" start="79956" end="79971" title="Ashton Locklear" label="Ashton Locklear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886046" start="79973" end="79979" title="Lumbee people" label="Lumbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="80033" end="80053" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39089625" start="80080" end="80090" title="Final Five (gymnastics)" label="Final Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q348618" start="80101" end="80113" title="Kyrie Irving" label="Kyrie Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="80115" end="80120" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q18416654" start="80169" end="80189" title="Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="80334" end="80346" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="80348" end="80362" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193637" start="80368" end="80382" title="Scottie Pippen" label="Scottie Pippen"/>
<link wikidata="Q986539" start="80448" end="80463" title="oral literature" label="oral literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q63341394" start="80685" end="80697" title="Tommy Orange" label="Tommy Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q292180" start="80699" end="80708" title="Joy Harjo" label="Joy Harjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q442679" start="80710" end="80724" title="Louise Erdrich" label="Louise Erdrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609341" start="80726" end="80746" title="Stephen Graham Jones" label="Stephen Graham Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q56192533" start="80748" end="80765" title="Rebecca Roanhorse" label="Rebecca Roanhorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q53692241" start="80767" end="80777" title="Tommy Pico" label="Tommy Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q325944" start="80861" end="80871" title="Texture (music)" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="80944" end="80952" title="drum" label="drumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q279879" start="81045" end="81051" title="Native American flute" label="Flutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="81201" end="81213" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="81214" end="81221" title="Hernando de Soto (explorer)" label="de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="81265" end="81275" title="pentatonic" label="pentatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q268604" start="81381" end="81394" title="Rita Coolidge" label="Rita Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q552806" start="81396" end="81408" title="Wayne Newton" label="Wayne Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q471979" start="81410" end="81420" title="Gene Clark" label="Gene Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q729149" start="81422" end="81431" title="Blackfoot (band)" label="Blackfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751280" start="81437" end="81444" title="Redbone (band)" label="Redbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701970" start="81498" end="81510" title="John Trudell" label="John Trudell"/>
<link wikidata="Q198546" start="81590" end="81605" title="R. Carlos Nakai" label="R. Carlos Nakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206219" start="81607" end="81624" title="Joanne Shenandoah" label="Joanne Shenandoah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341169" start="81629" end="81657" title="Robert &amp;quot;Tree&amp;quot; Cody" label="Robert &amp;quot;Tree&amp;quot; Cody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080280" start="81762" end="81780" title="Charles Littleleaf" label="Charles Littleleaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q264400" start="82087" end="82102" title="Maria Tallchief" label="Maria Tallchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q805221" start="82145" end="82160" title="prima ballerina" label="prima ballerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766339" start="82254" end="82272" title="Marjorie Tallchief" label="Marjorie Tallchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="82408" end="82415" title="pow-wow" label="pow-wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527370" start="82449" end="82469" title="Gathering of Nations" label="Gathering of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="82473" end="82496" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="83056" end="83064" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="83084" end="83095" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q943899" start="83161" end="83167" title="wampum" label="wampum"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="83412" end="83426" title="Pueblo peoples" label="Pueblo peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570159" start="83502" end="83509" title="Kachina" label="Kachina"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="84044" end="84050" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439311" start="84200" end="84212" title="sandpainting" label="sandpainting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4219489" start="84805" end="84812" title="Native American pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="84814" end="84822" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="84825" end="84834" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="84836" end="84843" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="84846" end="84855" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q373017" start="84857" end="84865" title="basketry" label="basketry"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="84871" end="84879" title="Wood carving" label="carvings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491531" start="84881" end="84896" title="Franklin Gritts" label="Franklin Gritts"/>
<link wikidata="Q845332" start="84982" end="85015" title="Haskell Indian Nations University" label="Haskell Indian Nations University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101573" start="85157" end="85191" title="Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990" label="Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q66312074" start="85556" end="85576" title="Jeanne Rorex Bridges" label="Jeanne Rorex Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977119" start="85578" end="85593" title="Echota Cherokee Tribe of Alabama" label="Echota Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="87065" end="87071" title="Odawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="87076" end="87084" title="Chippewa" label="Chippewa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87420" end="87428" title="Alcohol tolerance#Alcohol tolerance in different ethnic groups" label="tolerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="88416" end="88423" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797817" start="88585" end="88602" title="Hampton Institute" label="Hampton Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q582476" start="88891" end="88906" title="Charles Eastman" label="Charles Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="88930" end="88936" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="88979" end="88996" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="89024" end="89041" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583168" start="89091" end="89105" title="Elaine Goodale" label="Elaine Goodale"/>
<link wikidata="Q931422" start="89159" end="89171" title="Seth Eastman" label="Seth Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="89920" end="89929" title="colonists" label="colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="89991" end="89998" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="90180" end="90191" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="90221" end="90231" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="90277" end="90294" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10649809" start="90852" end="90862" title="Racialization" label="racialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="91036" end="91054" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868863" start="91075" end="91094" title="History of slavery in Virginia" label="slavery in Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520241" start="91249" end="91260" title="Yamasee War" label="Yamasee War"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="91266" end="91277" title="Indian Wars" label="Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="91863" end="91870" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="91876" end="91881" title="Muscogee (Creek)" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="91891" end="91898" title="Catawba (tribe)" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="92062" end="92077" title="Southern United States" label="Southern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="92452" end="92462" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="93426" end="93437" title="Indian Wars" label="Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="93457" end="93478" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507284" start="94064" end="94071" title="runaway slave" label="runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896875" start="94477" end="94500" title="partus sequitur ventrem" label="partus sequitur ventrem"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="94881" end="94889" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="94891" end="94898" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="94904" end="94909" title="Muscogee (Creek)" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="95764" end="95812" title="federally recognized tribes in the United States" label="federally recognized tribes in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="96170" end="96183" title="ethnic origin" label="ethnic origin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96197" end="96253" title="First Families of Virginia#Pocahontas" label="First Families of Virginia claim descent from Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070417" start="96274" end="96289" title="Indian princess" label="Indian princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q107313768" start="96339" end="96356" title="Cherokee Syndrome" label="Cherokee Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938918" start="96413" end="96442" title="Ethnic option" label="opportunistic ethnic identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092232" start="96481" end="96505" title="Cherokee heritage groups" label="Cherokee heritage groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021847" start="96509" end="96532" title="Indian Wedding Blessing" label="Indian Wedding Blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="96574" end="96595" title="Eastern United States" label="Eastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979959" start="96654" end="96678" title="Native American identity" label="Native American identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="96808" end="96823" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245055" start="96882" end="96920" title="Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation" label="Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909614" start="96922" end="96937" title="Bill John Baker" label="Bill John Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242854" start="97021" end="97073" title="Cultural assimilation of Native Americans" label="assimilated into colonial and later American society"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="97088" end="97104" title="language shift" label="adopting English"/>
<link wikidata="Q212152" start="97109" end="97135" title="Praying Indians" label="converting to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371354" start="97182" end="97201" title="forced assimilation" label="forced assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096204" start="97226" end="97258" title="American Indian boarding schools" label="American Indian boarding schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142648" start="97311" end="97325" title="Racial passing" label="pass for white"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016489" start="97350" end="97365" title="white privilege" label="white privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927888" start="97453" end="97471" title="blood quantum laws" label="blood quantum laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848246" start="97860" end="97895" title="Interracial marriage in the United States" label="interracial or intertribal marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110329" start="98202" end="98211" title="Tribal disenrollment" label="disenroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979969" start="98290" end="98326" title="Native American reservation politics" label="Native American reservation politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927888" start="98738" end="98751" title="Blood quantum laws" label="blood quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19671714" start="98796" end="98810" title="lineal descent" label="lineal descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="99560" end="99586" title="federally recognized tribe" label="federally recognized tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946898" start="99922" end="99935" title="CDIB" label="blood quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946898" start="99957" end="99994" title="Certificate of Degree of Indian Blood" label="Certificate of Degree of Indian Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092231" start="100188" end="100205" title="Cherokee Freedmen" label="Cherokee Freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="100211" end="100226" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242314" start="100323" end="100334" title="Dawes Rolls" label="Dawes Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092177" start="100474" end="100498" title="Cherokee Nation (19th century)" label="historic Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="100521" end="100530" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="100536" end="100558" title="Cherokee Nation" label="modern Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113123" start="101368" end="101377" title="Jack Hitt" label="Jack Hitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="101419" end="101425" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="101550" end="101559" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="102257" end="102279" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927888" start="102510" end="102528" title="blood quantum laws" label="blood quantum laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="103119" end="103137" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="colonial invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024636" start="103504" end="103548" title="Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism" label="Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80686" start="103568" end="103578" title="haplogroup" label="haplogroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770058" start="103751" end="103769" title="tribal sovereignty" label="tribal sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28839773" start="103873" end="103885" title="Kim TallBear" label="Kim TallBear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590690" start="103887" end="103910" title="Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate" label="Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440169" start="105409" end="105417" title="Meskwaki" label="Meskwaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="105727" end="105730" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126128" start="105906" end="105917" title="geneticists" label="geneticists"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="105919" end="105937" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q561458" start="105948" end="105970" title="Henry Louis Gates, Jr." label="Henry Louis Gates, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="106017" end="106020" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689664" start="106035" end="106057" title="African American Lives" label="African American Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="106816" end="106827" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744249" start="106991" end="107025" title="American Journal of Human Genetics" label="American Journal of Human Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140073" start="107936" end="107954" title="West South Central states" label="West South Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="107978" end="107988" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="108123" end="108132" title="Autosome" label="autosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="108288" end="108300" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid-Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="108324" end="108331" title="Pacific region USA" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="108520" end="108528" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140073" start="108722" end="108747" title="West South Central states" label="West South Central Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="108836" end="108852" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="109007" end="109019" title="Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290725" start="109024" end="109042" title="Dominican Americans" label="Dominican-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532907" start="109108" end="109161" title="genetic history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="genetic history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q428875" start="109183" end="109217" title="human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups" label="human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356230" start="109222" end="109257" title="human mitochondrial DNA haplogroups" label="human mitochondrial DNA haplogroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="109304" end="109315" title="patrilineal" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="109385" end="109396" title="matrilineal" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="109451" end="109461" title="Genetic recombination" label="recombines"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="109599" end="109608" title="Autosome" label="Autosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532875" start="109794" end="109811" title="genetic admixture" label="genetic admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="109826" end="109838" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q815715" start="109851" end="109871" title="Population bottleneck" label="isolated populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="110722" end="110759" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="110816" end="110820" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="110831" end="110839" title="zygosity" label="zygosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80711" start="110863" end="110872" title="haplotype" label="haplotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638531" start="110918" end="110929" title="Population history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="111025" end="111046" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering sea coast line"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="111097" end="111105" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504568" start="111120" end="111139" title="Founder effect" label="founding population"/>
<link wikidata="Q265193" start="111145" end="111160" title="Microsatellite (genetics)" label="micro-satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="111255" end="111265" title="Amerindian" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26986" start="111347" end="111354" title="Na-Dené" label="Na-Dené"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="111356" end="111361" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="111366" end="111384" title="Alaska Natives" label="Indigenous Alaskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169543" start="111405" end="111430" title="haplogroup Q-M242 (Y-DNA)" label="haplogroup Q-M242 (Y-DNA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="111646" end="111655" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="111820" end="111831" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="111844" end="111849" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="111867" end="111873" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="111882" end="111916" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q210561" start="111951" end="111974" title="Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast" label="Pacific Northwest Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="111983" end="111990" title="Tlingit" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="112103" end="112114" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535232" start="112125" end="112141" title="Southern Siberia" label="Southern Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623328" start="112160" end="112219" title="List of historical Indian reservations in the United States" label="List of historical Indian reservations in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296930" start="112222" end="112263" title="List of Indian massacres in North America" label="List of Indian massacres in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q252380" start="112266" end="112314" title="List of Indian reservations in the United States" label="List of Indian reservations in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901823" start="112317" end="112347" title="List of Native American firsts" label="List of Native American firsts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591618" start="112350" end="112395" title="List of Native Americans of the United States" label="List of Native Americans of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q109381218" start="112425" end="112477" title="Racism against Native Americans in the United States" label="Racism against Native Americans in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600907" start="112480" end="112546" title="List of U.S. communities with Native-American majority populations" label="List of U.S. communities with Native-American majority populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="112609" end="112633" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="112647" end="112676" title="US Department of the Interior" label="US Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967040" start="112703" end="112740" title="National Congress of American Indians" label="National Congress of American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="112776" end="112820" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives and Records Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075141" start="112847" end="112885" title="National Museum of the American Indian" label="National Museum of the American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="112899" end="112922" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979950" start="112960" end="112987" title="Native American Rights Fund" label="Native American Rights Fund"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21218" wikidata="Q1855957" url="?curid=21218" title="Nights into Dreams">
<text>is a 1996 action game developed by Sonic Team and published by Sega for the Sega Saturn. The story follows the teenagers Elliot Edwards and Claris Sinclair, who enter Nightopia, a dream world where all dreams take place. With the help of Nights, an exiled &quot;Nightmaren&quot;, they begin a journey to stop the evil ruler Wizeman from destroying Nightopia and consequently the real world. Players control Nights flying through Elliot and Claris&#x27;s dreams to gather enough energy to defeat Wizeman and save Nightopia. The game is presented in 3D and imposes time limits on every level, in which the player must accumulate points to proceed.

Development began after the release of &quot;Sonic &amp; Knuckles&quot; in 1994, although the concept originated in 1992, during the development of &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog 2&quot;. Development was led by Sonic Team veterans Yuji Naka, Naoto Ohshima, and Takashi Iizuka. Naka began the project with the idea of flight, and Ohshima designed Nights as an androgynous character that resembles an angel that could fly like a bird. The team conducted research on dreaming and REM sleep, and was influenced by the works and theories of psychoanalysts Carl Jung and Sigmund Freud. An analogue controller, the Saturn 3D controller, was designed alongside the game and included with some retail copies.

&quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; received acclaim for its graphics, gameplay, soundtrack, and atmosphere. It has been cited as one of the greatest video games ever made. A shorter Christmas-themed version, Christmas Nights, was released in December 1996. &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; was ported to the PlayStation 2 in 2008 in Japan and a high-definition version was released worldwide for Windows, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360 in 2012. A sequel, &quot;&quot;, was released for the Wii in 2007.

== Gameplay ==

&quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; is split into seven levels, referred to as &quot;Dreams&quot;. The levels are distributed between the two teenage characters: three are unique to Claris, three to Elliot, and each play through an identical final seventh level, &quot;Twin Seeds&quot;. Initially, only Claris&#x27; &quot;Spring Valley&quot; and Elliot&#x27;s &quot;Splash Garden&quot; levels are available, and successful completion of one of these unlocks the next level in that character&#x27;s path. Previously completed stages may be revisited to improve the player&#x27;s high scores; a grade between A and F is given to the player upon completion, but a &quot;C&quot; grade (or better) in all the selected character&#x27;s levels must be achieved to unlock the relevant &quot;Twin Seeds&quot; stage for that character. Points are accumulated depending on how fast the player completes a level, and extra points are awarded when the player flies through rings.

Each level is split up into four &quot;Mares&quot; set in Nightopia and a boss fight which takes place in Nightmare. In each level, players initially control Claris or Elliot, who immediately have their Ideyas (spherical objects that contain emotions) of hope, wisdom, intelligence and purity stolen from them by Wizeman&#x27;s minions, leaving behind only their Ideya of courage. The goal of each Mare is to recover one of the stolen Ideya by collecting 20 blue chips and delivering them to the cage holding the Ideyas, which overloads and releases the orb it holds. If the player walks around the landscape for too long, they are pursued by a sentient alarm clock which awakens the character and ends the level if it comes into contact with the player. The majority of the gameplay centres on flying sequences, which are triggered by walking into the Ideya Palace near the start of each level so that the character merges with the imprisoned Nights. Once the flying sequence is initiated, the time limit begins.

In the flying sections, the player controls Nights&#x27; flight along a predetermined route through each Mare, resembling that of a 2D platformer. The player has only a limited period of time available before Nights falls to the ground and transforms back into Claris or Elliot, and each collision with an enemy subtracts five seconds from the time remaining. The player&#x27;s time is replenished each time they return an Ideya to the Ideya Palace. While flying, Nights can use a &quot;Drill Dash&quot; to travel faster, as well as defeat certain reverie enemies scattered throughout the level. Grabbing onto certain enemies causes Nights to spin around, which launches both Nights and the enemy in the direction the boost was initiated. Various acrobatic manoeuvres can be performed, including the &quot;Paraloop&quot;, whereby flying around in a complete circle and connecting the trail of stars left in Nights&#x27; wake causes any items within the loop to be attracted towards Nights. The game features a combo system known as &quot;Linking&quot;, whereby actions such as collecting items and flying through rings are worth more points when performed in quick succession. Power-ups may be gained by flying through several predetermined rings, indicated by a bonus barrel. The power-ups include a speed boost, point multiplier and an air pocket.

The player receives a grade based on their score at the end of each Mare, and an overall grade for the level after clearing all four Mares. Nights is then transported to Nightmare for a boss fight against one of Wizeman&#x27;s &quot;Level Two&quot; Nightmarens. Each boss fight has a time limit, and the game ends if the player runs out of time during the battle. Upon winning the boss fight, the player is awarded a score multiplier based on how quickly the boss was defeated, which is then applied to the score earned in the Nightopia section to produce the player&#x27;s final score for that Dream. The game also features a multiplayer mode, which allows two players to battle each other by using a splitscreen. One player controls Nights, whereas the other controls Reala. The winner is determined by the first player to defeat the other, which is accomplished by hitting or paralooping the other player three times.

The game features an artificial life system known as &quot;A-Life&quot;, which involves entities called Nightopians and keeps track of their moods. It is possible to have them mate with other Nightopians, which creates hybrids known as &quot;Superpians&quot;. The more the game is played, the more inhabitants appear, and environmental features and aesthetics change. The A-Life system features an evolving music engine, allowing tempo, pitch, and melody to alter depending on the state of Nightopians within the level. The feature runs from the Sega Saturn&#x27;s internal clock, which alters features in the A-Life system depending on the time.

== Plot ==
Every night, all human dreams are played out in Nightopia and Nightmare, the two parts of the dream world. In Nightopia, distinct aspects of dreamers&#x27; personalities are represented by luminous coloured spheres known as &quot;Ideya&quot;. The evil ruler of Nightmare, Wizeman the Wicked, is stealing this dream energy from sleeping visitors in order to gather power and take control of Nightopia and eventually the real world. To achieve this, he creates five beings called &quot;Nightmaren&quot;: jester-like, flight-capable beings, which include Jackle, Clawz, Gulpo, Gillwing and Puffy as well as many minor maren. He also creates two &quot;Level One&quot; Nightmaren: Nights and Reala. However, Nights rebels against Wizeman&#x27;s plans, and is punished by being imprisoned inside an Ideya palace, a container for dreamers&#x27; Ideya.

One day, Elliot Edwards and Claris Sinclair, two teenagers from the city of Twin Seeds, go through failures. Elliot, a basketball player, is challenged by a group of older students and suffers a humiliating defeat on the court. Claris, a singer, is overcome by stage fright when auditioning for judges, which causes her to lose all hopes of getting the role. When they go to sleep that night, both Elliot and Claris suffer nightmares that replay the events. They escape into Nightopia and find that they both possess the rare Red Ideya of Courage, the only type that Wizeman cannot steal. Elliot and Claris release Nights, who tells them about dreams and Wizeman and his plans; the three begin a journey to stop Wizeman and restore peace to Nightopia. When they defeat Wizeman and Reala, peace is returned to Nightopia and the world of Nightmare is suppressed.

The next day, in Twin Seeds, a centenary ceremony begins. Elliot walks through the parade and has a vision of Nights looking at him through a billboard. Realizing that Claris is performing in a hall, Elliot runs through the crowd and sees Claris on stage in front of a large audience, singing well. The two look at each other and transition to Nightopia.

== Development ==
&quot;Nights&quot; was developed by Sonic Team, the Sega development division that had created the &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; games for Genesis. The &quot;Nights&quot; concept originated during the development of &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog 2&quot; in 1992, but development did not begin until after the release of &quot;Sonic &amp; Knuckles&quot; in late 1994. Programming began in April 1995 and total development spanned six months. Yuji Naka was lead programmer and producer, while Naoto Ohshima and Takashi Iizuka were director and lead designer, respectively. Naka and Ohshima felt they had spent enough time with the &quot;Sonic&quot; franchise and were eager to work on new concepts. According to Naka, the initial development team consisted of seven people, and grew to 20 as programmers arrived.

&quot;Sonic&quot; creator and project director Ohshima created the character of Nights based on his inspirations from travelling Europe and western Asia. The character design incorporated Japanese, European, and American stylistics in order to give Nights as universal an appeal as possible. Ohshima later decided that the character should resemble an angel and fly like a bird. In the context of the game, Nights is a part of every human&#x27;s subconsciousness, and so was purposely designed to be neither male nor female. Nights&#x27; personality is intended to be a &quot;a mirror of the child&#x27;s personality.&quot;

Naka originally intended to make &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; a slow-paced game, but as development progressed the gameplay pace gradually increased, in similar vein to &quot;Sonic&quot; games. The initial concept envisioned the flying character in a rendered 2D sprite art, with side-scrolling features similar to &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot;. The team were hesitant to switch from 2D to 3D, as Naka was sceptical that appealing characters could be created with polygons, in contrast to traditional pixel sprites, which the designers found &quot;more expressive&quot;. According to Iizuka, the design and story took two years to finalise. The difficulty was designed with the intent that young and inexperienced players would be able to complete the game, while more experienced players would be compelled by the replay value.

&quot;Nights&quot; was developed using Silicon Graphics workstations for graphical designs and Sega Saturn emulators running on Hewlett-Packard machines for programming. There were problems during early stages of development because of a lack of games to use as reference; the team had to redesign the Spring Valley level numerous times and build &quot;everything from scratch&quot;. The team used the Sega Graphics Library operating system, said by many developers to make programming for the Saturn dramatically easier, only sparingly, instead creating the game almost entirely with custom libraries. Because the Sonic Team offices did not include soundproof studios, team members recorded sound effects at night. According to Naka, every phrase in the game has a meaning; for example, &quot;abayo&quot; is Japanese slang for &quot;goodbye&quot;. The team felt that the global market would be less resistant to a game featuring full 3D CGI cut scenes than 2D anime. Norihiro Nishiyama, the designer of the in-game movies, felt that the 3D cutscenes were a good method to show the different concepts of dreaming and waking up. Naka said that the movies incorporate realism to make it more difficult for the player to disambiguate the boundary between dreams and reality.

The development took longer than expected because of the team&#x27;s inexperience with Saturn hardware and uncertainty about using the full 560 megabyte space on the CD-ROM. The team initially thought that the game would consume around 100 megabytes of data, and at one point considered releasing it on two separate discs. Iizuka said that the most difficult part of development was finding a way of handling the &quot;contradiction&quot; of using 2D sidescroller controls in a fully 3D game. Naka limited the flying mechanic to &quot;invisible 2D tracks&quot; because early beta testing revealed that the game was too difficult to play in full 3D. The standard Saturn gamepad was found to be insufficient to control Nights in flight, so the team developed the Saturn analog controller. It took about six months to develop, and the team went through many ideas for alternate controllers, including one shaped like a Nights doll.

Iizuka said &quot;Nights&quot; was inspired by anime and Cirque du Soleil&#x27;s &quot;Mystère&quot; theatrical performance. The team researched dream sequences and REM sleep, including the works of psychoanalysts Carl Jung, Sigmund Freud and Friedrich Holtz. Iizuka studied dreams and theories about them, such as Jung&#x27;s theories of dream archetypes. Naka said that Nights reflected Jung&#x27;s analytical &quot;shadow&quot; theory, whereas Claris and Elliot were inspired by Jung&#x27;s animus and anima.

== Release ==

&quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; was introduced alongside an optional gamepad, the Saturn 3D controller, included with some copies of the game. It features an analogue stick and analogue triggers designed for &quot;Nights&quot; to make movement easier. Sonic Team noted the successful twinning of the Nintendo 64 controller with &quot;Super Mario 64&quot; (1996), and realised that the default Saturn controller was better suited to arcade games than &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot;. During development, the director Steven Spielberg visited the Sonic Team studio and became the first person outside the team to play the game. Naka asked him to use an experimental version of the Saturn 3D controller, and it was jokingly referred to as the &quot;Spielberg controller&quot; throughout development.

Because the Nights character was testing very young in focus groups, Sega used a nighttime scene for the cover art to create a more mature look. Sega of America, fearing the game would appeal to too young of a demographic in the West, and considered altering the game to better appeal to the older Saturn demographic in the West, though these plans never materialized. &quot;Nights&quot; was marketed with a budget of $10 million, which included television and print advertisements in the United States. In the US, it was advertised with the slogan &quot;Prepare to fly&quot;.

== Related games ==

=== &quot;Christmas Nights&quot; ===
Christmas NiGHTS into Dreams... is a short Christmas-themed version of &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; released in December 1996. Iizuka stated that &quot;Christmas Nights&quot; was created to increase Saturn sales. Development began in July 1996 and took three to four months, according to Naka. Designer Takao Miyoshi recalled working &quot;in the peak of summer ... holed up at the office listening to &#x27;Jingle Bells&#x27;&quot;.

In Japan, &quot;Christmas Nights&quot; was included as part of a Christmas Sega Saturn bundle and distributed free to Saturn owners who covered the shipping cost. Elsewhere, it was given away with the purchase of Saturn games such as &quot;Daytona USA: Championship Circuit Edition&quot; (1996) or issues of &quot;Sega Saturn Magazine&quot; and &quot;Next Generation Magazine&quot;. In the United Kingdom, &quot;Christmas Nights&quot; was not included with &quot;Sega Saturn Magazine&quot; until December 1997.

&quot;Christmas Nights&quot; follows Elliot and Claris during the holiday season following their adventures with Nights. Realizing that the Christmas Star is missing from the Twin Seeds Christmas tree, the pair travel to Nightopia to find it, where they reunite with Nights and retrieve the Christmas Star from Gillwing&#x27;s lair.&quot;Christmas Nights&quot; contains the full version of Claris&#x27; Spring Valley dream level from &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot;, playable as both Claris and Elliot. The Saturn&#x27;s internal clock changes elements according to the date and time: December activates &quot;Christmas Nights&quot; mode, replacing item boxes with Christmas presents, greenery with snow and gumdrops, rings with wreaths, and Ideya captures with Christmas trees; Nightopians wear elf costumes, and the music is replaced with a rendition of &quot;Jingle Bells&quot; and an a cappella version of the &quot;Nights&quot; theme song. During the &quot;Winter Nights&quot; period, the Spring Valley weather changes according to the hour. Other changes apply on New Year&#x27;s Day, Valentine&#x27;s Day, April Fool&#x27;s Day, Halloween, Christmas Day, and December 31, 2099; on April Fool&#x27;s Day, Reala replaces Nights as the playable character.

&quot;Nights&quot; features several unlockable bonuses, such as being able to play the game&#x27;s soundtrack, observe the status of the A-life system, experiment with the game&#x27;s music mixer, time attack one Mare, or play as Sega&#x27;s mascot Sonic the Hedgehog in the minigame &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog: Into Dreams.&quot; Sonic may only play through Spring Valley on foot, and must defeat the boss: an inflatable Dr. Robotnik. The music is a remixed version of &quot;Final Fever&quot;, the final boss battle music from the Japanese and European version of &quot;Sonic CD&quot; (1993). In the HD version of &quot;Nights&quot;, the &quot;Christmas Nights&quot; content is playable after the game has been cleared once.

=== Sequel ===

Sonic Team made a prototype Saturn sequel with the title &quot;Air Nights&quot; for the Saturn, and began development for the Dreamcast. In August 1999, Naka confirmed that a sequel was in development; by December 2000, however, it had been cancelled. Naka expressed reluctance to develop a sequel, but later said he was interested in using &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; &quot;to reinforce Sega&#x27;s identity&quot;. Aside from a handheld electronic game released by Tiger Electronics and small minigames featured in several Sega games, no sequel was released for a Sega console.

A sequel, &quot;,&quot; was announced for the Wii in April 2007. It was first previewed on Portuguese publication &quot;Maxi Consolas&quot;, after the release of short reveals from the &quot;Official Nintendo Magazine&quot; and &quot;Game Reactor&quot;. It is a Wii exclusive, making use of the Wii Remote. The gameplay involves the use of various masks, and features a multiplayer mode for two players in addition to Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection online functions. &quot;Journey of Dreams&quot; was developed by Sega Studio USA, with Iizuka, one of the designers of the original game, serving as producer. It was released in Japan and the United States in December 2007, and in Europe and Australia in January 2008. In 2010, Iizuka said that he would be interested in making a third &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; game.

== Reception ==

=== Commercial ===
In Japan, &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; topped the Japanese all-format games chart, despite increased competition from the newly launched Nintendo 64. It was the best-selling Sega Saturn game and the 21st best-selling game of 1996, with 392,383 copies sold. The PS2 version sold 6,828 units in Japan, bringing total Japanese sales to 399,211 units. In the US, &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; was reported to sell out at several different retail outlets.

=== Critical ===
&quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; received critical acclaim, holding an average score of 89 percent at GameRankings, based on an aggregate of nine reviews. Upon release, &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; magazine called it &quot;one of the most sensational video games EVER made!&quot;

The graphics and flight mechanics were the most praised aspects. Tom Guise of &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; said the flight system and freedom were captivating and that &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; was the &quot;perfect evolution&quot; of a &quot;Sonic&quot; game. Scary Larry of &quot;GamePro&quot; said flying using the analogue joystick &quot;is a breeze&quot; and that the gameplay is fun, enjoyable, and impressive. He gave it a 4.5 out of 5 for graphics and a 5 out of 5 in every other category (sound, control, and FunFactor). &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; said its &quot;graceful acrobatic stunts&quot; offer &quot;a more compelling sensation of soaring than most flight simulators&quot;. &quot;Edge&quot; praised the analogue controller and called the levels &quot;well-designed and graphically unrivaled&quot;, but the reviewer expressed disappointment in the limited level count compared to &quot;Super Mario 64&quot;, and suggested that &quot;Nights&quot; seemed to prioritise technical achievements and Saturn selling points over gameplay with as clear a focus as &quot;Sonic&quot;. Martin Robinson from Eurogamer opined that the flight mechanics were a &quot;giddy thrill&quot;. Colin Ferris from Game Revolution praised the graphics and speed as breathtaking and awe-inspiring, concluding that it offered the best qualities of the fifth-generation machines. &quot;GameFan&quot; praised the combination of &quot;lush graphics, amazing music, and totally unique gameplay&quot;. &quot;Next Generation&quot; criticised the speed, saying that the only disappointing aspect was the way &quot;it all rushes by so fast&quot;, but the magazine praised the two-player mode and the innovative method of grading the player once they completed a level. &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot;″s four reviewers were impressed with both the technical aspects and style of the graphics, and said the levels are great fun to explore, though they expressed disappointment that the game was not genuinely 3D and said it did not surpass &quot;Super Mario 64&quot;.

Levi Buchanan from &quot;IGN&quot; believed that the console &quot;was not built to handle &quot;Nights&quot;&quot; due to the game occasionally clipping and warping, though he admitted that the graphics were &quot;pretty darn good&quot;. A reviewer from &quot;Mean Machines Sega&quot; praised the vibrant colours and detailed textures, and described its animation as being &quot;fluid as water&quot;. The reviewer also noted occasional pop-in and glitching. Rad Automatic from the British &quot;Sega Saturn Magazine&quot; praised the visuals and colour scheme as rich in both texture and detail, while suggesting that &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; is &quot;one of the most captivating games the Saturn has witnessed yet&quot;. &quot;Next Generation&quot; said the visuals were &quot;beyond a doubt&quot; the most fluid and satisfying for any game on any system. Upon release, the Japanese &quot;Sega Saturn Magazine&quot; wrote that &quot;Nights&quot; would have a significant impact on the video game industry, particularly the action game genre. The reviewer also said &quot;Nights&quot; felt better through with the analogue pad, in contrast to the conventional controller, and also praised the light and smooth feeling the analogue pad portrayed during gameplay.

Reviewers also praised the soundtrack and audio effects. Paul Davies from &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; said &quot;Nights&quot; had &quot;the best music ever&quot;; in the same review, Tom Guise said it created a hypnotically magical atmosphere. Ferris said that the music and sound effects were that of a dream world, and asserted that they were fitting for a game like &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot;. &quot;IGN&quot;&#x27;s Buchanan praised the soundtrack and that the sound effects &quot;fit in perfectly with the dream universe&quot;.

=== Accolades ===
&quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; received the &quot;Best Graphics&quot; and &quot;Best Programming&quot; awards at the Japan Game Awards. In &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot;″s &quot;Best of &#x27;96&quot; awards, it was a runner-up for Flying Game of the Year (behind &quot;Pilotwings 64&quot;), Nights was a runner-up for &quot;coolest mascot&quot; (behind Mario), and the Saturn analog controller, which the magazine called the &quot;Nights Controller&quot;, won Best Peripheral. The following year &quot;EGM&quot; ranked it the 70th best console video game of all time, describing it as &quot;unlike anything you&#x27;ve seen before ... a 2.5-D platform game without the platforms&quot;.

== Legacy and adaptations ==
&quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; has appeared on several best-game-of-all-time lists. In a January 2000 poll by &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot;, readers named it the 15th greatest game, behind &quot;Super Mario 64&quot;. &quot;IGN&quot; ranked it the 94th best game of all time in 2007, and in 2008, Levi Buchanan ranked it fourth in his list of the top 10 Sega Saturn games. &quot;Next Generation&quot; ranked it the 25th best game in their September 1996 issue (one month before they actually reviewed the game, and roughly two months before it saw release outside Japan). &quot;1UP&quot; ranked it third in its &quot;Top Ten Cult Classics&quot; list. In 2014, GamesRadar listed &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; as the best Sega Saturn game of all time, saying it &quot;tapped into a new kind of platform gameplay for its era&quot;. Naka said that the release of &quot;Nights&quot; was when Sonic Team was truly formed as a brand.

=== Remakes ===
Sega released a remake of &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; for the PlayStation 2 exclusively in Japan on 21 February 2008. It includes 16:9 wide screen support, an illustration gallery and features the ability to play the game in classic Saturn graphics. The game was also featured in a bundle named the Nightopia Dream Pack, which includes a reprint of a picture book that was released in Japan alongside the original Saturn game. A &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; handheld electronic game was released by Tiger Electronics in 1997, and a port of it was later released for Tiger&#x27;s unsuccessful R-Zone console.

A high definition remaster of the PlayStation 2 version was released for PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Arcade in October 2012. A Windows version was released via Steam on in December 2012, with online score leaderboards and the option to play with enhanced graphics or with the original Saturn graphics. The HD version also includes &quot;Christmas Nights&quot;, but the two-player mode and &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; level were removed.

=== In other media ===
Claris and Elliot make a cameo appearance in Sonic Team&#x27;s &quot;Burning Rangers&quot; (1998), with both Claris and Eliot sending the Rangers emails thanking them for their help. &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot;-themed pinball areas feature in &quot;Sonic Adventure&quot; (1998) and &quot;Sonic Pinball Party&quot; (2003). The PlayStation 2 games &quot;&quot; (2003) and &quot;Sega SuperStars&quot; (2004) both feature minigames based on &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot;, in which Nights is controlled using the player&#x27;s body. Nights is also an unlockable character in &quot;Sonic Riders&quot; (2006) and &quot;Sonic Riders: Zero Gravity&quot; (2008).

A minigame version of &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; is playable through using the Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable connectivity with &quot;Phantasy Star Online Episode I &amp; II&quot; (2002) and &quot;Billy Hatcher and the Giant Egg&quot; (2003). Following a successful fan campaign by a &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; fansite, the character Nights was integrated into &quot;Sonic &amp; Sega All-Stars Racing&quot; (2010) as a traffic guard. Nights and Reala also appear as playable characters in &quot;Sega Superstars Tennis&quot; (2008) and &quot;Sonic &amp; All-Stars Racing Transformed&quot; (2012), the latter of which also features a &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot;-themed racetrack. The limited Deadly Six edition of &quot;Sonic Lost World&quot; (2013) features a &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot;-inspired stage, &quot;Nightmare Zone&quot;, as downloadable content.

=== Comics ===
In February 1998, Archie Comics adapted &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; into a three-issue comic book miniseries to test whether a Nights comic would sell well in North America. The first miniseries was loosely based on the game, with Nights identified as male despite the character&#x27;s androgynous design. The company later released a second three-issue miniseries, continuing the story of the first, but the series did not gain enough sales to warrant an ongoing series. It was later added to a list of guest franchises featured in Archie Comics&#x27; &quot;Worlds Unite&quot; crossover between its &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; and &quot;Mega Man&quot; comics.

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
Citations
Bibliography
*
== External links ==
*Official website for the PlayStation 2 remake </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270948" start="10" end="21" title="action game" label="action game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="35" end="45" title="Sonic Team" label="Sonic Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="63" end="67" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="76" end="87" title="Sega Saturn" label="Sega Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425624" start="180" end="191" title="Dream world (plot device)" label="dream world"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="548" end="550" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465133" start="563" end="573" title="time limit" label="time limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40177" start="692" end="712" title="Sonic &amp;amp; Knuckles" label="Sonic &amp;amp; Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35627" start="801" end="821" title="Sonic the Hedgehog 2" label="Sonic the Hedgehog 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q726119" start="872" end="881" title="Yuji Naka" label="Yuji Naka"/>
<link wikidata="Q658384" start="883" end="896" title="Naoto Ohshima" label="Naoto Ohshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514194" start="902" end="916" title="Takashi Iizuka (game designer)" label="Takashi Iizuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q207959" start="1000" end="1011" title="androgynous" label="androgynous"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="1118" end="1127" title="REM sleep" label="REM sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="1192" end="1201" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="1206" end="1219" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042483" start="1478" end="1508" title="List of video games considered the best" label="greatest video games ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="1630" end="1636" title="porting" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="1644" end="1657" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1732" end="1739" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="1741" end="1754" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="1760" end="1768" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="1823" end="1826" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="1904" end="1910" title="level (video game)" label="levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q522344" start="2426" end="2436" title="high score" label="high score"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="2890" end="2900" title="boss fight" label="boss fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q212758" start="3470" end="3481" title="alarm clock" label="alarm clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="3966" end="3976" title="platform game" label="platformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608165" start="4841" end="4846" title="Combo (video gaming)" label="combo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107094" start="5008" end="5016" title="Power-up" label="Power-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="5809" end="5820" title="Multiplayer video game" label="multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q85802655" start="5884" end="5895" title="split screen (computer graphics)" label="splitscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q263847" start="6125" end="6140" title="artificial life" label="artificial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q228395" start="6280" end="6284" title="mating" label="mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="6534" end="6539" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="6541" end="6546" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="6552" end="6558" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425624" start="6857" end="6868" title="dream world (plot device)" label="dream world"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="7265" end="7271" title="jester" label="jester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431258" start="7870" end="7882" title="stage fright" label="stage fright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="8881" end="8891" title="Sonic Team" label="Sonic Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="8897" end="8901" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="8950" end="8968" title="Sonic the Hedgehog" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="8985" end="8992" title="Sega Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35627" start="9068" end="9088" title="Sonic the Hedgehog 2" label="Sonic the Hedgehog 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q40177" start="9167" end="9187" title="Sonic &amp;amp; Knuckles" label="Sonic &amp;amp; Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q726119" start="9282" end="9291" title="Yuji Naka" label="Yuji Naka"/>
<link wikidata="Q658384" start="9332" end="9345" title="Naoto Ohshima" label="Naoto Ohshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514194" start="9350" end="9364" title="Takashi Iizuka (game designer)" label="Takashi Iizuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="11150" end="11166" title="Silicon Graphics" label="Silicon Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="11239" end="11254" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="12072" end="12077" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211457" start="12959" end="12963" title="beta release" label="beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q504715" start="13371" end="13387" title="Cirque du Soleil" label="Cirque du Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="13479" end="13488" title="REM sleep" label="REM sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="13528" end="13537" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="13539" end="13552" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q286363" start="13732" end="13738" title="Shadow (psychology)" label="shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q548488" start="13808" end="13824" title="animus and anima" label="animus and anima"/>
<link wikidata="Q273140" start="13910" end="13917" title="gamepad" label="gamepad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="13999" end="14013" title="analogue stick" label="analogue stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039136" start="14141" end="14163" title="Nintendo 64 controller" label="Nintendo 64 controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q216995" start="14175" end="14189" title="Super Mario 64" label="Super Mario 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="14356" end="14372" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126687" start="14693" end="14704" title="focus group" label="focus group"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="14783" end="14798" title="Sega of America" label="Sega of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094729" start="15180" end="15186" title="advertising slogan" label="slogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11630161" start="15579" end="15592" title="Takao Miyoshi" label="Takao Miyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15951" end="15992" title="Daytona USA: Championship Circuit Edition" label="Daytona USA: Championship Circuit Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="16062" end="16086" title="Next Generation Magazine" label="Next Generation Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174396" start="17018" end="17021" title="Elf (Christmas)" label="elf"/>
<link wikidata="Q406845" start="17084" end="17096" title="Jingle Bells" label="Jingle Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="17110" end="17120" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="17292" end="17311" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q37587" start="17313" end="17333" title="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="17335" end="17356" title="April Fool&amp;#x27;s Day" label="April Fool&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="17358" end="17367" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q185948" start="17680" end="17691" title="time attack" label="time attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q191626" start="17732" end="17750" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (character)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996763" start="17903" end="17915" title="Dr. Robotnik" label="Dr. Robotnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q579708" start="18052" end="18060" title="Sonic CD" label="Sonic CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797918" start="18656" end="18680" title="handheld electronic game" label="handheld electronic game"/>
<link wikidata="Q119267" start="18693" end="18710" title="Tiger Electronics" label="Tiger Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192658" start="18721" end="18730" title="minigames" label="minigames"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="18853" end="18856" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q668937" start="18998" end="19024" title="Official Nintendo Magazine" label="Official Nintendo Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56898" start="19102" end="19112" title="Wii Remote" label="Wii Remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053784" start="19225" end="19250" title="Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection" label="Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="19316" end="19331" title="Sega Studio USA" label="Sega Studio USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="19800" end="19811" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q40160" start="20233" end="20245" title="GameRankings" label="GameRankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="20306" end="20330" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q315718" start="20715" end="20722" title="GamePro" label="GamePro"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="20969" end="20989" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q793975" start="21135" end="21139" title="Edge (magazine)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="21549" end="21558" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310127" start="21643" end="21658" title="Game Revolution" label="Game Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094955" start="21811" end="21818" title="GameFan" label="GameFan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="21929" end="21944" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="22193" end="22218" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="22516" end="22519" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101812" start="22636" end="22644" title="clipping (computer graphics)" label="clipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659609" start="22649" end="22656" title="image warping" label="warping"/>
<link wikidata="Q15853476" start="22752" end="22770" title="Mean Machines Sega" label="Mean Machines Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305992" start="22928" end="22934" title="Pop-up graphics" label="pop-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q972783" start="22987" end="23007" title="Sega Saturn Magazine" label="Sega Saturn Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q270948" start="23522" end="23533" title="action game" label="action game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156638" start="24443" end="24460" title="Japan Game Awards" label="Japan Game Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q933524" start="24603" end="24616" title="Pilotwings 64" label="Pilotwings 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q12379" start="24687" end="24692" title="Mario" label="Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042483" start="25105" end="25126" title="list of video games considered the best" label="best-game-of-all-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595902" start="25628" end="25643" title="1UP.com" label="&amp;quot;1UP&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q960011" start="25716" end="25726" title="GamesRadar" label="GamesRadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="26017" end="26023" title="Video game remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="26066" end="26079" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273280" start="26598" end="26604" title="R-Zone" label="R-Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916762" start="26617" end="26632" title="High-definition video" label="high definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q719629" start="26688" end="26707" title="PlayStation Network" label="PlayStation Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q49612" start="26712" end="26728" title="Xbox Live Arcade" label="Xbox Live Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="26748" end="26755" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="26781" end="26786" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713183" start="27154" end="27169" title="Burning Rangers" label="Burning Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069059" start="27337" end="27352" title="Sonic Adventure" label="Sonic Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839174" start="27376" end="27395" title="Sonic Pinball Party" label="Sonic Pinball Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="27414" end="27427" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049259" start="27464" end="27479" title="Sega SuperStars" label="Sega SuperStars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192658" start="27506" end="27514" title="minigame" label="minigame"/>
<link wikidata="Q683373" start="27665" end="27677" title="Sonic Riders" label="Sonic Riders"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27701" end="27727" title="Sonic Riders: Zero Gravity" label="Sonic Riders: Zero Gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009653" start="27826" end="27873" title="Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable" label="Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084882" start="27898" end="27937" title="Phantasy Star Online Episode I &amp;amp; II" label="Phantasy Star Online Episode I &amp;amp; II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330052" start="27961" end="27992" title="Billy Hatcher and the Giant Egg" label="Billy Hatcher and the Giant Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350108" start="28079" end="28086" title="fansite" label="fansite"/>
<link wikidata="Q162707" start="28135" end="28168" title="Sonic &amp;amp; Sega All-Stars Racing" label="Sonic &amp;amp; Sega All-Stars Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q609611" start="28187" end="28200" title="traffic guard" label="traffic guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451357" start="28263" end="28285" title="Sega Superstars Tennis" label="Sega Superstars Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614466" start="28309" end="28349" title="Sonic &amp;amp; All-Stars Racing Transformed" label="Sonic &amp;amp; All-Stars Racing Transformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q13357805" start="28489" end="28505" title="Sonic Lost World" label="Sonic Lost World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="28608" end="28628" title="downloadable content" label="downloadable content"/>
<link wikidata="Q633812" start="28664" end="28677" title="Archie Comics" label="Archie Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="28747" end="28757" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597358" start="29255" end="29273" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (comics)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754121" start="29290" end="29298" title="Mega Man (Archie Comics)" label="Mega Man"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21220" wikidata="Q6987384" url="?curid=21220" title="Negligence per se">
<text>Negligence &quot;per se&quot; is a doctrine in US law whereby an act is considered negligent because it violates a statute (or regulation). The doctrine is effectively a form of strict liability.

Negligence &quot;per se&quot; means greater liability than contributory negligence.

==Elements==
In order to prove negligence &quot;&quot;, the plaintiff usually must show that:
# the defendant violated a common law duty of care or a duty of care under statute,
# the act caused harm or all harm the statute was designed to prevent, and
# the plaintiff was the victim suffering harm due to the breach of the duty of care generally and as a member of the statute&#x27;s protected class.

The Common Law will not be abrogated by statute but may be adopted by statute. The Common Law will always remain our tradition and the basis of principles that inform the appropriate development of statutory laws and codes. New arrivals to the discussion may not like the word &quot;owe&quot; in the formulation of the discussion involving duties of care but it is understood that Tort law is about obligations and one party owes the other a duty of care in certain scenarios where we can say reasonably that such a duty exists and is rightfully owed, lets say, to a customer, to a passenger, to a business client and to a building occupant. We can say to the person who has failed his duty of care with poisoned products or negligent building works that he can face a claim where it will show that he will owe a duty of care, that he breached that duty of care and the claimant suffered harm or loss as a result of that breach. There is debate as to whether pure economic loss can be considered harm but it could be a significant loss and therefore sufficient harm in any context. We might have to reassess the discussion and ensure there is no doubt that economic loss is sufficient harm to satisfy a claim in tory and not only a claim under contract law or in Delict. The claimant can make his choice. The damages might be the same if awarded but it seems Tort is usually the body of law that we utilise to address duties, harm and loss when there is no evident written agreement between the parties. 

In some jurisdictions, negligence &quot;per se&quot; creates merely a rebuttable presumption of negligence.

A typical example is one in which a contractor violates a building code when constructing a house. The house then collapses, injuring somebody. The violation of the building code establishes negligence &quot;per se&quot; and the contractor will be found liable, so long as the contractor&#x27;s breach of the code was the cause (proximate cause and actual cause) of the injury.

==History==
A famous early case in negligence &quot;per se&quot; is &quot;Gorris v. Scott&quot; (1874), a Court of Exchequer case that established that the harm in question must be of the kind that the statute was intended to prevent. &quot;Gorris&quot; involved a shipment of sheep that was washed overboard but would not have been washed overboard had the shipowner complied with the regulations established pursuant to the Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act 1869, which required that livestock be transported in pens to segregate potentially-infected animal populations from uninfected ones. Chief Baron Fitzroy Kelly held that as the statute was intended to prevent the spread of disease, rather than the loss of livestock in transit, the plaintiff could not claim negligence &quot;per se&quot;.

A subsequent New York Court of Appeals case, &quot;Martin v. Herzog&quot; (1920), penned by Judge Benjamin N. Cardozo, first presented the notion that negligence &quot;per se&quot; could be absolute evidence of negligence in certain cases.

==Strict liability==
Negligence &quot;per se&quot; involves the concept of strict liability. Within the law of negligence there has been a move away from strict liability (as typified by &quot;Re Polemis&quot;) to a standard of reasonable care (as seen in &quot;Donoghue v Stevenson&quot;, &quot;The Wagon Mound (No. 1)&quot;, and &quot;Hughes v Lord Advocate&quot;). This is true not just for breach of the common law, but also for breach of statutory duty. The criminal law case of &quot;Sweet v Parsley&quot; (which required &quot;mens rea&quot; to be read into a criminal statue) follows this trend. In this light, &quot;negligence &quot;per se&quot;&quot; may be criticised as running counter to the general tendency.

==See also==
* Illegal &quot;per se&quot;
* Tedla v. Ellman

==References==
==Further reading==
*Restatement (Third) of Torts § 14 (Tentative Draft No. 1, March 28, 2001)
*&quot;Grable &amp; Sons Metal Prods. v. Darue Eng&#x27;g &amp; Mfg.&quot;, 125 S. Ct. 2363, 2370 (2005).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6987384" start="0" end="23" title="Negligence per se" label="Negligence &amp;quot;per se"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="47" end="53" title="US law" label="US law"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="178" end="194" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q847212" start="256" end="279" title="contributory negligence" label="contributory negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="313" end="323" title="negligence" label="negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="2622" end="2627" title="cause" label="cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630714" start="2629" end="2644" title="proximate cause" label="proximate cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923601" start="2649" end="2661" title="actual cause" label="actual cause"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2753" end="2768" title="Gorris v. Scott" label="Gorris v. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137765" start="2785" end="2803" title="Exchequer of Pleas" label="Court of Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3105" end="3143" title="Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act 1869" label="Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act 1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963439" start="3273" end="3284" title="Chief Baron of the Exchequer" label="Chief Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455706" start="3285" end="3298" title="Fitzroy Kelly" label="Fitzroy Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="3492" end="3517" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776983" start="3530" end="3546" title="Martin v. Herzog" label="Martin v. Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q817637" start="3577" end="3596" title="Benjamin N. Cardozo" label="Benjamin N. Cardozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="3795" end="3811" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="3831" end="3841" title="negligence" label="negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300109" start="3913" end="3923" title="Re Polemis" label="Re Polemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296782" start="3982" end="4002" title="Donoghue v Stevenson" label="Donoghue v Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113931" start="4016" end="4039" title="Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock and Engineering Co Ltd" label="The Wagon Mound (No. 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845392" start="4057" end="4079" title="Hughes v Lord Advocate" label="Hughes v Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655640" start="4210" end="4225" title="Sweet v Parsley" label="Sweet v Parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048403" start="4254" end="4262" title="mens rea" label="mens rea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029236" start="4459" end="4485" title="Illegal per se" label="Illegal &amp;quot;per se&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694150" start="4488" end="4503" title="Tedla v. Ellman" label="Tedla v. Ellman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21221" wikidata="Q520797" url="?curid=21221" title="Neuromyotonia">
<text>Neuromyotonia (NMT) is a form of peripheral nerve hyperexcitability that causes spontaneous muscular activity resulting from repetitive motor unit action potentials of peripheral origin. NMT along with Morvan&#x27;s syndrome are the most severe types in the Peripheral Nerve Hyperexciteability spectrum. Example of two more common and less severe syndromes in the spectrum are cramp fasciculation syndrome and benign fasciculation syndrome. NMT can have both hereditary and acquired (non-inherited) forms. The prevalence of NMT is unknown.

== Signs and symptoms ==
NMT is a diverse disorder. As a result of muscular hyperactivity, patients may present with muscle cramps, stiffness, myotonia-like symptoms (slow relaxation), associated walking difficulties, hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating), myokymia (quivering of a muscle), fasciculations (muscle twitching), fatigue, exercise intolerance, myoclonic jerks and other related symptoms. These neuromyotonic discharges can cause bursts of spontaneous motor activity that present either continuously or in recurring, decrementing clusters. They can start and stop abruptly, typically waning in strength and are unaffected by voluntary activity.

The symptoms (especially the stiffness and fasciculations) are most prominent in the calves, legs, trunk, and sometimes the face and neck, but can also affect other body parts. NMT symptoms may fluctuate in severity and frequency. Symptoms range from mere inconvenience to debilitating. At least a third of people also experience sensory symptoms.

== Causes ==
The three causes of NMT are:
# Acquired
# Paraneoplastic
# Hereditary

The acquired form is the most common, accounting for up to 80 percent of all cases and is suspected to be autoimmune-mediated, which is usually caused by antibodies against the neuromuscular junction.

The exact cause is unknown. However, autoreactive antibodies can be detected in a variety of peripheral (e.g. myasthenia gravis, Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome) and central nervous system (e.g. paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis) disorders. Their causative role has been established in some of these diseases but not all. Neuromyotonia is considered to be one of these with accumulating evidence for autoimmune origin over the last few years. Autoimmune neuromyotonia is typically caused by antibodies that bind to potassium channels on the motor nerve resulting in continuous/hyper-excitability. Onset is typically seen between the ages of 15–60, with most experiencing symptoms before the age of 40. Some neuromyotonia cases do not only improve after plasma exchange but they may also have antibodies in their serum samples against voltage-gated potassium channels. Moreover, these antibodies have been demonstrated to reduce potassium channel function in neuronal cell lines.

It is suspected that the peripheral nerve hyperexcitability associated with Isaacs&#x27; and Morvan&#x27;s syndromes is a result of a potassium channel defect in the motor nerve membrane.

== Diagnosis ==
Diagnosis is clinical and initially consists of ruling out more common conditions, disorders, and diseases, and usually begins at the general practitioner level. A doctor may conduct a basic neurological exam, including coordination, strength, reflexes, sensation, etc. A doctor may also run a series of tests that include blood work and MRIs.

From there, a patient is likely to be referred to a neurologist or a neuromuscular specialist. The neurologist or specialist may run a series of more specialized tests, including needle electromyography EMG/ and nerve conduction studies (NCS) (these are the most important tests), chest CT (to rule out paraneoplastic) and specific blood work looking for voltage-gated potassium channel antibodies, acetylcholine receptor antibody, and serum immunofixation, TSH, ANA ESR, EEG etc. Neuromyotonia is characterized electromyographically by doublet, triplet or multiplet single unit discharges that have a high, irregular intraburst frequency. Fibrillation potentials and fasciculations are often also present with electromyography.

Because the condition is so rare, it can often be years before a correct diagnosis is made.

NMT is not fatal and many of the symptoms can be controlled. However, because NMT mimics some symptoms of motor neuron disease (ALS) and other more severe diseases, which may be fatal, there can often be significant anxiety until a diagnosis is made. In some rare cases, acquired neuromyotonia has been misdiagnosed as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) particularly if fasciculations may be evident in the absence of other clinical features of ALS. However, fasciculations are rarely the first sign of ALS as the hallmark sign is weakness. Similarly, multiple sclerosis has been the initial misdiagnosis in some NMT patients. In order to get an accurate diagnosis see a trained neuromuscular specialist.

People diagnosed with benign fasciculation syndrome or enhanced physiological tremor may experience similar symptoms as NMT, although it is unclear today whether BFS or EPT are weak forms of NMT.

=== Types ===
There are three main types of NMT:
* Chronic
* Monophasic (symptoms that resolve within several years of onset; postinfection, postallergic)
* Relapsing Remitting

=== Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability ===
Neuromyotonia is a type of peripheral nerve hyperexcitability. Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability is an umbrella diagnosis that includes (in order of severity of symptoms from least severe to most severe) benign fasciculation syndrome, cramp fasciculation syndrome, neuromyotonia and morvan&#x27;s syndrome. Some doctors will only give the diagnosis of peripheral nerve hyperexcitability as the differences between the three are largely a matter of the severity of the symptoms and can be subjective. However, some objective EMG criteria have been established to help distinguish between the three.

Moreover, the generic use of the term &quot;peripheral nerve hyperexcitability syndromes&quot; to describe the aforementioned conditions is recommended and endorsed by several prominent researchers and practitioners in the field.

== Treatments ==
There is no known cure for neuromyotonia, but the condition is treatable. Anticonvulsants, including phenytoin and carbamazepine, usually provide significant relief from the stiffness, muscle spasms, and pain associated with neuromyotonia. Plasma exchange and IVIg treatment may provide short-term relief for patients with some forms of the acquired disorder. It is speculated that the plasma exchange causes an interference with the function of the voltage-dependent potassium channels, one of the underlying issues of hyper-excitability in autoimmune neuromyotonia. Botox injections also provide short-term relief. Immunosuppressants such as Prednisone may provide long term relief for patients with some forms of the acquired disorder.

== Prognosis ==
The long-term prognosis is uncertain, and has mostly to do with the underlying cause; i.e. autoimmune, paraneoplastic, etc. However, in recent years increased understanding of the basic mechanisms of NMT and autoimmunity has led to the development of novel treatment strategies. NMT disorders are now amenable to treatment and their prognoses are good. Many patients respond well to treatment, which usually provide significant relief of symptoms. Some cases of spontaneous remission have been noted, including Isaac&#x27;s original two patients when followed up 14 years later.

While NMT symptoms may fluctuate, they generally don&#x27;t deteriorate into anything more serious, and with the correct treatment the symptoms are manageable.

A very small proportion of cases with NMT may develop central nervous system findings in their clinical course, causing a disorder called Morvan&#x27;s syndrome, and they may also have antibodies against potassium channels in their serum samples. Sleep disorder is only one of a variety of clinical conditions observed in Morvan&#x27;s syndrome cases ranging from confusion and memory loss to hallucinations and delusions. However, this is a separate disorder.

Some studies have linked NMT with certain types of cancers, mostly lung and thymus, suggesting that NMT may be paraneoplastic in some cases. In these cases, the underlying cancer will determine prognosis. However, most examples of NMT are autoimmune and not associated with cancer.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q520797" start="0" end="13" title="Neuromyotonia" label="Neuromyotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q520797" start="15" end="18" title="Neuromyotonia" label="NMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="92" end="100" title="muscle" label="muscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964544" start="202" end="224" title="Morvan&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Morvan&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277793" start="684" end="692" title="myotonia" label="myotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q935781" start="759" end="772" title="hyperhidrosis" label="hyperhidrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593390" start="795" end="803" title="myokymia" label="myokymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397878" start="829" end="842" title="fasciculation" label="fasciculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="895" end="909" title="myoclonic jerk" label="myoclonic jerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q936417" start="1600" end="1614" title="Paraneoplastic syndrome" label="Paraneoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="1783" end="1793" title="antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="1806" end="1828" title="neuromuscular junction" label="neuromuscular junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="1941" end="1958" title="myasthenia gravis" label="myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756898" start="1960" end="1993" title="Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome" label="Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508804" start="2028" end="2066" title="paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration" label="paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q282783" start="2068" end="2102" title="paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis" label="paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="2274" end="2291" title="autoimmune disorder" label="autoimmune origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423778" start="2389" end="2407" title="potassium channels" label="potassium channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422765" start="2415" end="2426" title="motor nerve" label="motor nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="2627" end="2633" title="blood plasma" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="2686" end="2691" title="blood plasma" label="serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106939566" start="2708" end="2739" title="voltage-gated potassium channel" label="voltage-gated potassium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q507369" start="3590" end="3606" title="electromyography" label="electromyography"/>
<link wikidata="Q380117" start="3616" end="3640" title="nerve conduction studies" label="nerve conduction studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001150" start="4044" end="4056" title="Fibrillation" label="Fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397878" start="4072" end="4086" title="fasciculations" label="fasciculations"/>
<link wikidata="Q507369" start="4115" end="4131" title="electromyography" label="electromyography"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="4333" end="4353" title="ALS" label="motor neuron disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q817298" start="5557" end="5586" title="benign fasciculation syndrome" label="benign fasciculation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181860" start="5588" end="5616" title="cramp fasciculation syndrome" label="cramp fasciculation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964544" start="5636" end="5658" title="morvan&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="morvan&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="6274" end="6289" title="Anticonvulsants" label="Anticonvulsants"/>
<link wikidata="Q410400" start="6301" end="6310" title="phenytoin" label="phenytoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410412" start="6315" end="6328" title="carbamazepine" label="carbamazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q603502" start="6586" end="6601" title="plasma exchange" label="plasma exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q106939566" start="6650" end="6685" title="voltage-dependent potassium channel" label="voltage-dependent potassium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964544" start="7835" end="7857" title="Morvan&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Morvan&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="7944" end="7958" title="Sleep disorder" label="Sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="8090" end="8103" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="8109" end="8117" title="delusion" label="delusion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21224" wikidata="Q193415" url="?curid=21224" title="Napoleon (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Napoleon]] (1769–1821) was a French military leader and emperor.

Napoleon, Napoléon, Napoleón, Napoleone, or Napoleonic may also refer to:
*Napoleon (given name), a given name, including list of people and characters with the name
*Napoleone, an Italian masculine given name
==Fictional characters==
* Napoleon (&quot;Animal Farm&quot;), the main antagonist of George Orwell&#x27;s &quot;Animal Farm&quot;
* Napoleon, a bloodhound in &quot;The Aristocats&quot;
* Napoleon, a character in &quot;My Uncle Napoleon&quot;
* Napoleon, a nickname given to Captain Mainwaring by Chief ARP Warden Hodges in &quot;Dad&#x27;s Army&quot;

==Film, stage, and television==
* &quot;Napoléon&quot; (1927 film), a French silent film by Abel Gance
* &quot;Napoleon&quot; (1951 film), an Italian film by Carlo Borghesio 
* &quot;Napoléon&quot; (1955 film), a French historical epic by Sacha Guitry
* &quot;Napoleon&quot; (1995 film), an Australian film by Mario Andreacchio
* &quot;Napoleon&quot; (&quot;Heroes and Villains&quot; episode), an episode of 2007 British drama-documentary series, &quot;Heroes and Villains&quot;.
* &quot;Napoleon&quot; (2023 film), a film by Ridley Scott
*&quot;Napoleon&quot; (1991 TV series), a French-Polish historical miniseries
* &quot;Napoléon&quot; (miniseries), a 2002 historical miniseries
* &quot;Napoleon&quot; (musical)
*&quot;Napoleon&quot;, an unrealized project of Stanley Kubrick

== Games ==

=== Board games ===
* &quot;Napoleon&quot; (board game), a 1974 board game about the Waterloo campaign
* Napoleon Gambit, a variation of the Scotch Game chess opening
* Napoleon Opening, a chess opening

=== Card games ===
* Napoleon (card game), a trick-taking card game
* Napoleon at St Helena, a two-deck patience or solitaire
* Napoleon, a single-deck patience or solitaire more commonly known as Freecell
* Napoleon&#x27;s Square, a patience or solitaire

=== Video or PC games ===
* &quot;Napoleon&quot; (video game), a 2001 Game Boy Advance game
* &quot;&quot;, a strategy game for the PC
* &quot;Napoleon&quot;, a real-time strategy game for Windows
* &quot;Napoleon&quot;, a video game published by Enix

==Music==
* Napoleon (band), a British metalcore band
* &quot;Napoleon&quot;, a song by Ani DiFranco from &quot;Dilate&quot;
* Napoleon XIV, stage name of singer Jerry Samuels
* José María Napoleón, Mexican singer and composer

==People==
* Napoleon II (1811–1832), son of Napoleon I
* Napoleon III (1808–1873), last monarch and first president of France, son of Napoleon I&#x27;s brother Louis
* Napoléon, Prince Imperial (1856–1879), the only child of Emperor Napoleon III
* Prince Napoléon Bonaparte (1822-1891), son of Napoleon I&#x27;s brother Jérôme
* Napoléon, comte Daru (1807–1890), French soldier and politician, godson of Napoléon 
* Napoleon Cybulski (1854–1919), Polish physiologist, discoverer of adrenaline
* Napoleon A. L&#x27;Herault (1882-1932), American lawyer and politician
* Napoleon (actor) (born 1963), Tamil film actor
* Napoleon (rapper) (born 1977), American rapper
* Napoleon Bonaparte (police officer) (born 1965), Indonesian police officer
* Napoleon Lemay (1865–1946), Canadian politician from Quebec

==Places==
===Australia===
* Napoleons, Victoria
===Poland===
* Napoleon, Silesian Voivodeship
===United States===
* Napoleon, Arkansas
* Napoleon, Indiana
* Napoleon, Kentucky
* Napoleon, Michigan
* Napoleon, Mississippi
* Napoleon, Missouri
* Napoleon, North Dakota
* Napoleon, Ohio
* Napoleon Township (disambiguation)

==Ships==
* &quot;Napoléon&quot;-class ship of the line, a class of ship of the French Navy
* French ship &quot;Napoléon&quot;, a French Navy ship name
* French battleship &quot;Napoléon&quot;, a French ship of the line commissioned in 1850
* MV &quot;Napoleon&quot;, a British ship
* &quot;Corse&quot; (ship) or &quot;Napoléon&quot;, a French schooner ship

==Other uses==
* Napoléon (coin)
* Napoleon (gun), a cannon
* Napoleon, a grade of cognac
* Napoleon (pastry) or Mille-feuille, a French pastry
* Napoleonka or kremówka, a Polish variation of the French pastry
* Napoleon sweets, small Belgian sweet 
* Humphead wrasse or Napoleon fish
* &quot;Napoleone&quot;, a comics series published by Sergio Bonelli Editore
* Napoleonic collar, a kind of turnover collar
* Napoleon (company), a manufacturer of fireplaces and grills
* Napoleonic (Fabergé egg)

==See also==

* &quot;Age of Napoleon&quot; (board game), a 2003 board game about the Napoleonic Wars in Europe
* Napoleon and Uncle Elby, a syndicated comic strip
* Napoleon complex, a psychological condition affecting short people
* Napoleonite, a variety of igneous rock
* Napoleon Bonaparte (disambiguation)
* Prince Napoléon (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193415" start="0" end="12" title="Napoleon (disambiguation)" label="[[Napoleon]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q193415" start="68" end="76" title="Napoleon (disambiguation)" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193415" start="78" end="86" title="Napoleon (disambiguation)" label="Napoléon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193415" start="88" end="96" title="Napoleon (disambiguation)" label="Napoleón"/>
<link wikidata="Q193415" start="98" end="107" title="Napoleon (disambiguation)" label="Napoleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193415" start="112" end="122" title="Napoleon (disambiguation)" label="Napoleonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17522194" start="143" end="164" title="Napoleon (given name)" label="Napoleon (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q240790" start="235" end="244" title="Napoleone" label="Napoleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063221" start="305" end="339" title="Napoleon (Animal Farm)" label="Napoleon (&amp;quot;Animal Farm&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q184701" start="443" end="457" title="The Aristocats" label="The Aristocats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119212" start="497" end="514" title="My Uncle Napoleon" label="My Uncle Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036655" start="553" end="571" title="Captain Mainwaring" label="Captain Mainwaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632158" start="665" end="697" title="Napoléon (1927 film)" label="&amp;quot;Napoléon&amp;quot; (1927 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870243" start="736" end="768" title="Napoleon (1951 film)" label="&amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot; (1951 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335922" start="808" end="840" title="Napoléon (1955 film)" label="&amp;quot;Napoléon&amp;quot; (1955 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018979" start="885" end="917" title="Napoleon (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot; (1995 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965004" start="961" end="1023" title="Napoleon (Heroes and Villains episode)" label="&amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Heroes and Villains&amp;quot; episode)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105806948" start="1113" end="1145" title="Napoleon (2023 film)" label="&amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot; (2023 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1171" end="1208" title=" Napoleon (1991 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot; (1991 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q548876" start="1250" end="1283" title="Napoléon (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Napoléon&amp;quot; (miniseries)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965008" start="1316" end="1346" title="Napoleon (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot; (musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q386077" start="1373" end="1410" title="Stanley Kubrick&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects" label="unrealized project of Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965007" start="1447" end="1480" title="Napoleon (board game)" label="&amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot; (board game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q831778" start="1530" end="1545" title="Napoleon Gambit" label="Napoleon Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236580" start="1594" end="1610" title="Napoleon Opening" label="Napoleon Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077653" start="1650" end="1670" title="Napoleon (card game)" label="Napoleon (card game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472990" start="1699" end="1720" title="Napoleon at St Helena" label="Napoleon at St Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050614" start="1826" end="1834" title="Freecell" label="Freecell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964998" start="1837" end="1859" title="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s Square" label="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201635" start="1914" end="1947" title="Napoleon (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950443" start="2047" end="2070" title="Chronology of real-time strategy video games" label="real-time strategy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570225" start="2109" end="2137" title="List of Enix home computer games" label="video game published by Enix"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610115" start="2151" end="2166" title="Napoleon (band)" label="Napoleon (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276672" start="2251" end="2257" title="Dilate (Ani DiFranco album)" label="Dilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q947316" start="2266" end="2278" title="Napoleon XIV" label="Napoleon XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293296" start="2317" end="2336" title="José María Napoleón" label="José María Napoleón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723" start="2380" end="2391" title="Napoleon II" label="Napoleon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="2425" end="2437" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q221549" start="2536" end="2561" title="Napoléon, Prince Imperial" label="Napoléon, Prince Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q434077" start="2616" end="2641" title="Prince Napoléon Bonaparte" label="Prince Napoléon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469507" start="2697" end="2717" title="Napoléon, comte Daru" label="Napoléon, comte Daru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399292" start="2784" end="2801" title="Napoleon Cybulski" label="Napoleon Cybulski"/>
<link wikidata="Q111229040" start="2863" end="2889" title="Napoleon A. L&amp;#x27;Herault" label="Napoleon A. L&amp;#x27;Herault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534639" start="2936" end="2952" title="Napoleon (actor)" label="Napoleon (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394507" start="2985" end="3002" title="Napoleon (rapper)" label="Napoleon (rapper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19729623" start="3034" end="3069" title="Napoleon Bonaparte (police officer)" label="Napoleon Bonaparte (police officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q59783373" start="3111" end="3125" title="Napoleon Lemay" label="Napoleon Lemay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965080" start="3201" end="3210" title="Napoleons" label="Napoleons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789547" start="3236" end="3266" title="Napoleon, Silesian Voivodeship" label="Napoleon, Silesian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964999" start="3289" end="3307" title="Napoleon, Arkansas" label="Napoleon, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423375" start="3310" end="3327" title="Napoleon, Indiana" label="Napoleon, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965000" start="3330" end="3348" title="Napoleon, Kentucky" label="Napoleon, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848741" start="3351" end="3369" title="Napoleon, Michigan" label="Napoleon, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965001" start="3372" end="3393" title="Napoleon, Mississippi" label="Napoleon, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q958465" start="3396" end="3414" title="Napoleon, Missouri" label="Napoleon, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q996166" start="3417" end="3439" title="Napoleon, North Dakota" label="Napoleon, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q986312" start="3442" end="3456" title="Napoleon, Ohio" label="Napoleon, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964969" start="3459" end="3493" title="Napoleon Township (disambiguation)" label="Napoleon Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204854" start="3507" end="3550" title="Napoléon-class ship of the line" label="&amp;quot;Napoléon&amp;quot;-class ship of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114208" start="3589" end="3621" title="French ship Napoléon" label="French ship &amp;quot;Napoléon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532858" start="3649" end="3687" title="French battleship Napoléon" label="French battleship &amp;quot;Napoléon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569977" start="3738" end="3761" title="MV Napoleon" label="MV &amp;quot;Napoleon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20894562" start="3780" end="3804" title="Corse (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Corse&amp;quot; (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q733369" start="3871" end="3886" title="Napoléon (coin)" label="Napoléon (coin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604756" start="3889" end="3903" title="Napoleon (gun)" label="Napoleon (gun)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3928" end="3943" title="Cognac#Grades" label="grade of cognac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491" start="3946" end="3963" title="Napoleon (pastry)" label="Napoleon (pastry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436743" start="4000" end="4010" title="Napoleonka" label="Napoleonka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750595" start="4066" end="4081" title="Napoleon sweets" label="Napoleon sweets"/>
<link wikidata="Q179377" start="4106" end="4121" title="Humphead wrasse" label="Humphead wrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103" start="4193" end="4215" title="Sergio Bonelli Editore" label="Sergio Bonelli Editore"/>
<link wikidata="Q497903" start="4229" end="4235" title="Collar (clothing)" label="collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97889933" start="4265" end="4283" title="Napoleon (company)" label="Napoleon (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006212" start="4327" end="4351" title="Napoleonic (Fabergé egg)" label="Napoleonic (Fabergé egg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25183670" start="4369" end="4409" title="Age of Napoleon (board game)" label="&amp;quot;Age of Napoleon&amp;quot; (board game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965059" start="4467" end="4490" title="Napoleon and Uncle Elby" label="Napoleon and Uncle Elby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964958" start="4519" end="4535" title="Napoleon complex" label="Napoleon complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965076" start="4588" end="4599" title="Napoleonite" label="Napoleonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q50199127" start="4629" end="4664" title="Napoleon Bonaparte (disambiguation)" label="Napoleon Bonaparte (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50199126" start="4667" end="4699" title="Prince Napoléon (disambiguation)" label="Prince Napoléon (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21226" wikidata="Q83042" url="?curid=21226" title="Neurology">
<text>Neurology (from , &quot;string, nerve&quot; and the suffix , &quot;study of&quot;) is the branch of medicine dealing with the diagnosis and treatment of all categories of conditions and disease involving the nervous system, which comprises the brain, the spinal cord and the peripheral nerves. Neurological practice relies heavily on the field of neuroscience, the scientific study of the nervous system, using various techniques of neurotherapy.

A neurologist is a physician specializing in neurology and trained to investigate, diagnose and treat neurological disorders. Neurologists diagnose and treat myriad neurologic conditions, including stroke, epilepsy, movement disorders such as Parkinson&#x27;s disease, brain infections, autoimmune neurologic disorders such as multiple sclerosis, sleep disorders, brain injury, headache disorders like migraine, tumors of the brain and dementias such as Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. Neurologists may also have roles in clinical research, clinical trials, and basic or translational research. Neurology is a nonsurgical specialty, its corresponding surgical specialty is neurosurgery.

==History==

The academic discipline began between the 15th and 16th centuries with the work and research of many neurologists such as Thomas Willis, Robert Whytt, Matthew Baillie, Charles Bell, Moritz Heinrich Romberg, Duchenne de Boulogne, William A. Hammond, Jean-Martin Charcot, C. Miller Fisher and John Hughlings Jackson. Neo-Latin &quot;neurologia&quot; appeared in various texts from 1610 denoting an anatomical focus on the nerves (variably understood as vessels), and was most notably used by Willis, who preferred Greek νευρολογία. 

==Training==

 In the United States and Canada, neurologists are physicians who have completed a postgraduate training period known as residency specializing in neurology after graduation from medical school. This additional training period typically lasts four years, with the first year devoted to training in internal medicine. On average, neurologists complete a total of eight to ten years of training. This includes four years of medical school, four years of residency and an optional one to two years of fellowship.

While neurologists may treat general neurologic conditions, some neurologists go on to receive additional training focusing on a particular subspecialty in the field of neurology. These training programs are called fellowships, and are one to three years in duration. Subspecialties in the United States include brain injury medicine, clinical neurophysiology, epilepsy, neurodevelopmental disabilities, neuromuscular medicine, pain medicine, sleep medicine, neurocritical care, vascular neurology (stroke), behavioral neurology, headache, neuroimmunology and infectious disease, movement disorders, neuroimaging, neurooncology, and neurorehabilitation.

In Germany, a compulsory year of psychiatry must be done to complete a residency of neurology.

In the United Kingdom and Ireland, neurology is a subspecialty of general (internal) medicine. After five years of medical school and two years as a Foundation Trainee, an aspiring neurologist must pass the examination for Membership of the Royal College of Physicians (or the Irish equivalent) and complete two years of core medical training before entering specialist training in neurology. Up to the 1960s, some intending to become neurologists would also spend two years working in psychiatric units before obtaining a diploma in psychological medicine. However, that was uncommon and, now that the MRCPsych takes three years to obtain, would no longer be practical. A period of research is essential, and obtaining a higher degree aids career progression. Many found it was eased after an attachment to the Institute of Neurology at Queen Square, London. Some neurologists enter the field of rehabilitation medicine (known as physiatry in the US) to specialise in neurological rehabilitation, which may include stroke medicine, as well as traumatic brain injuries.

==Physical examination==

During a neurological examination, the neurologist reviews the patient&#x27;s health history with special attention to the patient&#x27;s neurologic complaints. The patient then takes a neurological exam. Typically, the exam tests mental status, function of the cranial nerves (including vision), strength, coordination, reflexes, sensation and gait. This information helps the neurologist determine whether the problem exists in the nervous system and the clinical localization. Localization of the pathology is the key process by which neurologists develop their differential diagnosis. Further tests may be needed to confirm a diagnosis and ultimately guide therapy and appropriate management. Useful adjunct imaging studies in neurology include CT scanning and MRI. Other tests used to assess muscle and nerve function include nerve conduction studies and electromyography.

==Clinical tasks==
Neurologists examine patients who are referred to them by other physicians in both the inpatient and outpatient settings. Neurologists begin their interactions with patients by taking a comprehensive medical history, and then performing a physical examination focusing on evaluating the nervous system. Components of the neurological examination include assessment of the patient&#x27;s cognitive function, cranial nerves, motor strength, sensation, reflexes, coordination, and gait.

In some instances, neurologists may order additional diagnostic tests as part of the evaluation. Commonly employed tests in neurology include imaging studies such as computed axial tomography (CAT) scans, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasound of major blood vessels of the head and neck. Neurophysiologic studies, including electroencephalography (EEG), needle electromyography (EMG), nerve conduction studies (NCSs) and evoked potentials are also commonly ordered. Neurologists frequently perform lumbar punctures to assess characteristics of a patient&#x27;s cerebrospinal fluid. Advances in genetic testing have made genetic testing an important tool in the classification of inherited neuromuscular disease and diagnosis of many other neurogenetic diseases. The role of genetic influences on the development of acquired neurologic diseases is an active area of research.

===Neurotherapy===

Neurotherapy involves systemic targeted delivery of an energy stimulus or chemical agents to a specific neurological zone in the body. Some of the commonly encountered conditions treated by neurologists include headaches, radiculopathy, neuropathy, stroke, dementia, seizures and epilepsy, Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, Parkinson&#x27;s disease, Tourette&#x27;s syndrome, multiple sclerosis, head trauma, sleep disorders, neuromuscular diseases, and various infections and tumors of the nervous system. Neurologists are also asked to evaluate unresponsive patients on life support to confirm brain death.

Treatment options vary depending on the neurological problem. They can include referring the patient to a physiotherapist, prescribing medications, or recommending a surgical procedure.

Some neurologists specialize in certain parts of the nervous system or in specific procedures. For example, clinical neurophysiologists specialize in the use of EEG and intraoperative monitoring to diagnose certain neurological disorders. Other neurologists specialize in the use of electrodiagnostic medicine studies – needle EMG and NCSs. In the US, physicians do not typically specialize in all the aspects of clinical neurophysiology – i.e. sleep, EEG, EMG, and NCSs. The American Board of Clinical Neurophysiology certifies US physicians in general clinical neurophysiology, epilepsy, and intraoperative monitoring. The American Board of Electrodiagnostic Medicine certifies US physicians in electrodiagnostic medicine and certifies technologists in nerve-conduction studies. Sleep medicine is a subspecialty field in the US under several medical specialties including anesthesiology, internal medicine, family medicine, and neurology. Neurosurgery is a distinct specialty that involves a different training path and emphasizes the surgical treatment of neurological disorders.

Also, many nonmedical doctors, those with doctoral degrees (usually PhDs) in subjects such as biology and chemistry, study and research the nervous system. Working in laboratories in universities, hospitals, and private companies, these neuroscientists perform clinical and laboratory experiments and tests to learn more about the nervous system and find cures or new treatments for diseases and disorders.

A great deal of overlap occurs between neuroscience and neurology. Many neurologists work in academic training hospitals, where they conduct research as neuroscientists in addition to treating patients and teaching neurology to medical students.

===General caseload===
Neurologists are responsible for the diagnosis, treatment, and management of all the conditions mentioned above. When surgical or endovascular intervention is required, the neurologist may refer the patient to a neurosurgeon or an interventional neuroradiologist. In some countries, additional legal responsibilities of a neurologist may include making a finding of brain death when it is suspected that a patient has died. Neurologists frequently care for people with hereditary (genetic) diseases when the major manifestations are neurological, as is frequently the case. Lumbar punctures are frequently performed by neurologists. Some neurologists may develop an interest in particular subfields, such as stroke, dementia, movement disorders, neurointensive care, headaches, epilepsy, sleep disorders, chronic pain management, multiple sclerosis, or neuromuscular diseases.

===Overlapping areas===
Some overlap also occurs with other specialties, varying from country to country and even within a local geographic area. Acute head trauma is most often treated by neurosurgeons, whereas sequelae of head trauma may be treated by neurologists or specialists in rehabilitation medicine. Although stroke cases have been traditionally managed by internal medicine or hospitalists, the emergence of vascular neurology and interventional neuroradiology has created a demand for stroke specialists. The establishment of Joint Commission-certified stroke centers has increased the role of neurologists in stroke care in many primary, as well as tertiary, hospitals. Some cases of nervous system infectious diseases are treated by infectious disease specialists. Most cases of headache are diagnosed and treated primarily by general practitioners, at least the less severe cases. Likewise, most cases of sciatica are treated by general practitioners, though they may be referred to neurologists or surgeons (neurosurgeons or orthopedic surgeons). Sleep disorders are also treated by pulmonologists and psychiatrists. Cerebral palsy is initially treated by pediatricians, but care may be transferred to an adult neurologist after the patient reaches a certain age. Physical medicine and rehabilitation physicians may treat patients with neuromuscular diseases with electrodiagnostic studies (needle EMG and nerve-conduction studies) and other diagnostic tools. In the United Kingdom and other countries, many of the conditions encountered by older patients such as movement disorders, including Parkinson&#x27;s disease, stroke, dementia, or gait disorders, are managed predominantly by specialists in geriatric medicine.

Clinical neuropsychologists are often called upon to evaluate brain-behavior relationships for the purpose of assisting with differential diagnosis, planning rehabilitation strategies, documenting cognitive strengths and weaknesses, and measuring change over time (e.g., for identifying abnormal aging or tracking the progression of a dementia).

===Relationship to clinical neurophysiology===
In some countries such as the United States and Germany, neurologists may subspecialize in clinical neurophysiology, the field responsible for EEG and intraoperative monitoring, or in electrodiagnostic medicine nerve conduction studies, EMG, and evoked potentials. In other countries, this is an autonomous specialty (e.g., United Kingdom, Sweden, Spain).

===Overlap with psychiatry===
In the past, prior to the advent of more advanced diagnostic techniques such as MRI some neurologists have considered psychiatry and neurology to overlap. Although mental illnesses are believed by many to be neurological disorders affecting the central nervous system, traditionally they are classified separately, and treated by psychiatrists. In a 2002 review article in the &quot;American Journal of Psychiatry&quot;, Professor Joseph B. Martin, Dean of Harvard Medical School and a neurologist by training, wrote, &quot;the separation of the two categories is arbitrary, often influenced by beliefs rather than proven scientific observations. And the fact that the brain and mind are one makes the separation artificial anyway&quot;.

Neurological disorders often have psychiatric manifestations, such as post-stroke depression, depression and dementia associated with Parkinson&#x27;s disease, mood and cognitive dysfunctions in Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, and Huntington disease, to name a few. Hence, the sharp distinction between neurology and psychiatry is not always on a biological basis. The dominance of psychoanalytic theory in the first three-quarters of the 20th century has since then been largely replaced by a focus on pharmacology. Despite the shift to a medical model, brain science has not advanced to a point where scientists or clinicians can point to readily discernible pathological lesions or genetic abnormalities that in and of themselves serve as reliable or predictive biomarkers of a given mental disorder.

==Neurological enhancement==
The emerging field of neurological enhancement highlights the potential of therapies to improve such things as workplace efficacy, attention in school, and overall happiness in personal lives. However, this field has also given rise to questions about neuroethics.

==See also==

* American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology
* American Osteopathic Board of Neurology and Psychiatry
* &quot;Developmental Neurorehabilitation&quot;, a peer-reviewed medical journal
* List of neurologists
* List of women neuroscientists
* Neuroepigenetics
* Neurohospitalist, a physician interested in inpatient neurological care

* Neurotherapy
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="0" end="9" title="Neurology" label="Neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q930752" start="100" end="108" title="specialty (medicine)" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="208" end="222" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="244" end="249" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="255" end="266" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="275" end="292" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="347" end="359" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="389" end="403" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131726203" start="433" end="445" title="neurotherapy" label="neurotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="450" end="461" title="Neurology" label="neurologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="467" end="476" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="550" end="571" title="neurological disorder" label="neurological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="646" end="652" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="654" end="662" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="691" end="715" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4316437" start="717" end="733" title="List of infections of the central nervous system" label="brain infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="775" end="793" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="795" end="810" title="Sleep disorder" label="sleep disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="850" end="858" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="860" end="879" title="Brain tumor" label="tumors of the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="884" end="892" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="902" end="926" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133849" start="964" end="981" title="clinical research" label="clinical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="983" end="997" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q964754" start="1004" end="1009" title="basic research" label="basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110373712" start="1013" end="1035" title="translational research" label="translational research"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="1093" end="1101" title="surgical" label="surgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="1115" end="1127" title="neurosurgery" label="neurosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q452335" start="1265" end="1278" title="Thomas Willis" label="Thomas Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q511430" start="1280" end="1292" title="Robert Whytt" label="Robert Whytt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909483" start="1294" end="1309" title="Matthew Baillie" label="Matthew Baillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q451727" start="1311" end="1323" title="Charles Bell" label="Charles Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q65001" start="1325" end="1348" title="Moritz Heinrich Romberg" label="Moritz Heinrich Romberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q551417" start="1350" end="1370" title="Duchenne de Boulogne" label="Duchenne de Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136599" start="1372" end="1390" title="William A. Hammond" label="William A. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710" start="1392" end="1411" title="Jean-Martin Charcot" label="Jean-Martin Charcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859128" start="1413" end="1429" title="C. Miller Fisher" label="C. Miller Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q611821" start="1434" end="1456" title="John Hughlings Jackson" label="John Hughlings Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q256698" start="1810" end="1819" title="Residency (medicine)" label="residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="1868" end="1882" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180" start="1987" end="2004" title="internal medicine" label="internal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912722" start="2415" end="2426" title="Fellowship (medicine)" label="fellowships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771886" start="2535" end="2559" title="clinical neurophysiology" label="clinical neurophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="2561" end="2569" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002432" start="2604" end="2626" title="neuromuscular medicine" label="neuromuscular medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q621261" start="2628" end="2641" title="pain medicine" label="pain medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744029" start="2643" end="2657" title="sleep medicine" label="sleep medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178830" start="2708" end="2728" title="behavioral neurology" label="behavioral neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608695" start="2780" end="2797" title="movement disorder" label="movement disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815097" start="3174" end="3219" title="Membership of the Royal College of Physicians" label="Membership of the Royal College of Physicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995326" start="3554" end="3562" title="MRCPsych" label="MRCPsych"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414013" start="3789" end="3801" title="Queen Square, London" label="Queen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678675" start="3882" end="3891" title="physiatry" label="physiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916167" start="4057" end="4081" title="neurological examination" label="neurological examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q180454" start="4310" end="4324" title="cranial nerves" label="cranial nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="5033" end="5042" title="inpatient" label="inpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="5047" end="5057" title="outpatient" label="outpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="5146" end="5161" title="medical history" label="medical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="5185" end="5205" title="physical examination" label="physical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916167" start="5267" end="5291" title="neurological examination" label="neurological examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141241" start="5333" end="5351" title="cognitive function" label="cognitive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q180454" start="5353" end="5367" title="cranial nerves" label="cranial nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11101" start="5385" end="5394" title="Sensory nervous system" label="sensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="5396" end="5404" title="reflexes" label="reflexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q852401" start="5406" end="5418" title="Motor coordination" label="coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370000" start="5424" end="5428" title="gait" label="gait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671652" start="5484" end="5500" title="diagnostic tests" label="diagnostic tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="5597" end="5622" title="computed axial tomography" label="computed axial tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="5636" end="5662" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="5674" end="5684" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="5766" end="5788" title="electroencephalography" label="electroencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q507369" start="5803" end="5819" title="electromyography" label="electromyography"/>
<link wikidata="Q380117" start="5827" end="5851" title="nerve conduction studies" label="nerve conduction studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q618678" start="5863" end="5880" title="evoked potentials" label="evoked potentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q719444" start="5940" end="5955" title="lumbar puncture" label="lumbar puncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="6003" end="6022" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="6036" end="6051" title="genetic testing" label="genetic testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q175180" start="6560" end="6573" title="radiculopathy" label="radiculopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="6575" end="6585" title="neuropathy" label="neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="6595" end="6603" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="6605" end="6612" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="6618" end="6626" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="6628" end="6652" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="6654" end="6694" title="attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="6696" end="6720" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="6722" end="6746" title="Tourette&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Tourette&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="6748" end="6766" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="6768" end="6779" title="head trauma" label="head trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="6781" end="6795" title="sleep disorder" label="sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246789" start="6798" end="6819" title="neuromuscular disease" label="neuromuscular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624498" start="6944" end="6956" title="life support" label="life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q223867" start="6968" end="6979" title="brain death" label="brain death"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="7088" end="7103" title="physiotherapist" label="physiotherapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981299" start="7338" end="7363" title="Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring" label="intraoperative monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357996" start="7452" end="7478" title="electrodiagnostic medicine" label="electrodiagnostic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357996" start="7866" end="7892" title="electrodiagnostic medicine" label="electrodiagnostic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q615057" start="8043" end="8057" title="anesthesiology" label="anesthesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180" start="8059" end="8076" title="internal medicine" label="internal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505712" start="8078" end="8093" title="family medicine" label="family medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="8700" end="8712" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="8889" end="8904" title="medical student" label="medical student"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="9143" end="9155" title="neurosurgeon" label="neurosurgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147442" start="9162" end="9193" title="Interventional neuroradiology" label="interventional neuroradiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="9412" end="9419" title="genetics" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q719444" start="9505" end="9520" title="Lumbar puncture" label="Lumbar puncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="9550" end="9562" title="neurologists" label="neurologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="9647" end="9655" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608695" start="9657" end="9675" title="movement disorders" label="movement disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002299" start="9677" end="9696" title="neurointensive care" label="neurointensive care"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="9709" end="9717" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="9719" end="9734" title="sleep disorders" label="sleep disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="9744" end="9748" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="9761" end="9779" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="9784" end="9797" title="neuromuscular" label="neuromuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="9961" end="9972" title="traumatic brain injury" label="head trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089469" start="10021" end="10029" title="sequelae" label="sequelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678675" start="10079" end="10117" title="Physical medicine and rehabilitation" label="specialists in rehabilitation medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147442" start="10251" end="10280" title="interventional neuroradiology" label="interventional neuroradiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703687" start="10347" end="10363" title="Joint Commission" label="Joint Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="10521" end="10539" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="10650" end="10670" title="general practitioner" label="general practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q565276" start="10729" end="10737" title="sciatica" label="sciatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="10850" end="10869" title="Orthopedic surgery" label="orthopedic surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="10872" end="10887" title="Sleep disorders" label="Sleep disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q203337" start="10908" end="10922" title="Pulmonology" label="pulmonologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="10927" end="10940" title="psychiatrists" label="psychiatrists"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="10942" end="10956" title="Cerebral palsy" label="Cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="10981" end="10994" title="Pediatrics" label="pediatricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678675" start="11089" end="11125" title="Physical medicine and rehabilitation" label="Physical medicine and rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384" start="11526" end="11544" title="geriatric medicine" label="geriatric medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362632" start="11547" end="11574" title="Clinical neuropsychology" label="Clinical neuropsychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002588" start="11600" end="11608" title="Neuropsychological assessment" label="evaluate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="11615" end="11623" title="Human behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q837512" start="11672" end="11694" title="differential diagnosis" label="differential diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678675" start="11705" end="11719" title="Physical medicine and rehabilitation" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="11744" end="11753" title="cognitive" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q332154" start="11843" end="11848" title="aging" label="aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="11882" end="11890" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="11998" end="12010" title="neurologists" label="neurologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771886" start="12032" end="12056" title="clinical neurophysiology" label="clinical neurophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981299" start="12092" end="12117" title="Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring" label="intraoperative monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q380117" start="12152" end="12176" title="nerve conduction study" label="nerve conduction studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q618678" start="12187" end="12204" title="evoked potentials" label="evoked potentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q930752" start="12248" end="12257" title="Specialty (medicine)" label="specialty"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="12408" end="12411" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="12492" end="12506" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="12658" end="12671" title="psychiatrists" label="psychiatrists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935368" start="12711" end="12741" title="American Journal of Psychiatry" label="American Journal of Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="12785" end="12807" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="13067" end="13089" title="Neurological disorders" label="Neurological disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="13101" end="13112" title="psychiatric" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="13176" end="13184" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="13201" end="13225" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q190564" start="13292" end="13310" title="Huntington disease" label="Huntington disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="13443" end="13464" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalytic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623243" start="13609" end="13614" title="Conceptual model" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133860" start="13678" end="13688" title="clinicians" label="clinicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q864574" start="13826" end="13836" title="biomarkers" label="biomarkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186272" start="14147" end="14158" title="neuroethics" label="neuroethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743221" start="14177" end="14219" title="American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology" label="American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744623" start="14222" end="14276" title="American Osteopathic Board of Neurology and Psychiatry" label="American Osteopathic Board of Neurology and Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709981" start="14285" end="14318" title="Developmental Neurorehabilitation" label="Developmental Neurorehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630401" start="14360" end="14380" title="List of neurologists" label="List of neurologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q70346063" start="14383" end="14412" title="List of women neuroscientists" label="List of women neuroscientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625002" start="14415" end="14431" title="Neuroepigenetics" label="Neuroepigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17094362" start="14434" end="14450" title="Neurohospitalist" label="Neurohospitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131726203" start="14509" end="14521" title="Neurotherapy" label="Neurotherapy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21227" wikidata="Q145598" url="?curid=21227" title="Nu">
<text>Nu or NU may refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
===Music===
* Nu metal, a heavy metal fusion genre
* Nu jazz, a jazz fusion genre
* Nu-disco, a genre of dance music
* Nu gaze, a shoegaze fusion genre
* Nu prog, a subgenre of progressive rock
* Nu-funk, a genre of dance music

===Other media===
* Nu-13, a fictional character from the &quot;BlazBlue&quot; video game series
* Nu (Chrono Trigger), a fictional species from the video game &quot;Chrono Trigger&quot;
* &quot;N.U.&quot; (film), 1948 documentary film directed by Michelangelo Antonioni
* Mr. Nu, a fictional character from the novel &quot;&quot;
* Nu Gundam from the anime &quot;Mobile Suit Gundam: Char&#x27;s Counterattack&quot;
* Nickelodeon Universe, an indoor theme park at Mall of America
* &quot;Nu&quot;, a 1934 collection of essays written in Romanian by &quot;Eugène Ionesco&quot;

== Businesses and organizations ==
===Universities===
====United States====
* National University (California), a private nonprofit university in La Jolla, California, United States
* Niagara University, a Roman Catholic university in Niagara County, New York, United States
* Northeastern University, a research university in Boston, Massachusetts, United States
* Northwest University (Washington), a private university in Kirkland, Washington, United States
* Northwestern University, a research institution in Evanston, Illinois, United States
* Norwich University, a private military and traditional university in Northfield, Vermont, United States
* University of Nebraska–Lincoln, United States

====Japan====
*Nagoya University, a national research university
*Niigata University, a national university
*Nihon University, a private university in Tokyo

====Other countries====
*Nazarbayev University, an international research university based in Astana, Kazakhstan
* Nanjing University, a national university in China
* Naresuan University, a public university in Phitsanulok, Thailand
* Nile University, a private research university in Egypt
* National University (Philippines), a private, non-sectarian university in Manila, Philippines
** NU Bulldogs, the intercollegiate athletic program of the above school
* Nkumba University, a private university near Entebbe, Uganda
* Nirma University, a private university in Ahmedabad, India
* Northern University, Nowshera, a private university in Nowshera, Pakistan

===Other businesses and organizations===
* Nahdatul Ulama, an Islamic group in Indonesia
* Northeast Utilities, a gas and electric company in the northeastern United States
* Northern Union, an early name of the Rugby Football League
* NU.nl, a Dutch online newspaper
* Nubank (NYSE: NU), a Brazilian bank
* Japan Transocean Air (IATA airline designator NU)

==Language and scripts==
* Nu (cuneiform), a cuneiform sign
* Nu (letter) (Ν or ν), the 13th letter of the Greek alphabet
* Nu (kana), the Japanese characters ぬ and ヌ
* Nu (Yiddish), a Yiddish interjection meaning &quot;so what&quot; or &quot;hurry up&quot;
* Nǀu language, a moribund Tuu (Khoisan) language spoken by the Nǁnǂe people in South Africa

==People==
===Burmese people===
* Nga Nu, a pretender to the Ava throne (1367)
* Saya Gyi U Nu, a writer famous during King Bodawpaya&#x27;s reign (r. 1782–1819)
* Me Nu, chief queen of King Bagyidaw (r. 1819–1837)
* U Nu, prime minister of the Union of Burma (1948–1958; 1960–1962)

===Other peoples===
* Nu people, a Chinese ethnic group

==Places==
* Nu river or Salween River, in China, Burma, and Thailand
* Nicaragua (NATO country code NU)
* Niue, (ISO 3166 country code NU)
** .nu, the Internet top-level domain for Niue
* Nunavut, the largest and newest of the territories of Canada
* North Uist, an island in the Scottish Hebrides

==Science and technology==
* Norton Utilities, system diagnostic software
* .nu, the Internet top-level domain for Niue
* Nu (programming language), an interpreted object-oriented programming language
* NuMachine, a computer architecture developed at MIT
* Nucellar embryony (Nu+), a form of seed reproduction that occurs in certain plant species
* Nusselt number (Nu), a dimensionless heat transfer ratio
* Nanodalton, a unit of mass; see dalton (unit)
* NU, the abbreviation for natural uranium, referring to uranium with the same isotopic ratio as found in nature
* Sega Nu, arcade board architecture
* Not used (N.U.), indicating not populated parts in schematics and BOMs
* Poisson&#x27;s ratio, a dimensionless ratio relating strain on element along one axis to the strain in an orthogonal axis, is symbolized by the Greek letter Nu, &quot;ν&quot;

== Other uses ==
* Nu (mythology), the male form of the Egyptian goddess Naunet
* The Chinese term for crossbow, as in the &quot;chu-ko-nu&quot; or repeating crossbow
* Bhutanese ngultrum (Nu.), the official currency of Bhutan
*The IATA airline code for Japan Transocean Air
*NU, designation used for the Nestle-Aland and United Bible Societies biblical texts in the New King James Version
* NU 107, defunct radio station in the Philippines

==See also==
* Nus (disambiguation)
* Gnu, GNU
* New (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145598" start="0" end="2" title="Nu" label="Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q145598" start="6" end="8" title="Nu" label="NU"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="65" end="73" title="Nu metal" label="Nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136331" start="104" end="111" title="Nu jazz" label="Nu jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045538" start="135" end="143" title="Nu-disco" label="Nu-disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879179" start="170" end="177" title="Nu gaze" label="Nu gaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="205" end="212" title="Nu prog" label="Nu prog"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="247" end="254" title="Nu-funk" label="Nu-funk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="319" end="358" title="List of BlazBlue characters#Nu-13" label="character from the &amp;quot;BlazBlue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670363" start="379" end="398" title="Nu (Chrono Trigger)" label="Nu (Chrono Trigger)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869333" start="469" end="492" title="N.U. (film)" label="&amp;quot;N.U.&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363770" start="613" end="622" title="Nu Gundam" label="Nu Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339833" start="698" end="718" title="Nickelodeon Universe" label="Nickelodeon Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q46706" start="835" end="849" title="Eugène Ionesco" label="Eugène Ionesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568237" start="935" end="967" title="National University (California)" label="National University (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551657" start="1041" end="1059" title="Niagara University" label="Niagara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="1134" end="1157" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060260" start="1223" end="1256" title="Northwest University (Washington)" label="Northwest University (Washington)"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="1320" end="1343" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681928" start="1407" end="1425" title="Norwich University" label="Norwich University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353679" start="1513" end="1543" title="University of Nebraska–Lincoln" label="University of Nebraska–Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191132" start="1575" end="1592" title="Nagoya University" label="Nagoya University"/>
<link wikidata="Q267111" start="1626" end="1644" title="Niigata University" label="Niigata University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326230" start="1669" end="1685" title="Nihon University" label="Nihon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783344" start="1743" end="1764" title="Nazarbayev University" label="Nazarbayev University"/>
<link wikidata="Q683580" start="1833" end="1851" title="Nanjing University" label="Nanjing University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311551" start="1886" end="1905" title="Naresuan University" label="Naresuan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146856" start="1954" end="1969" title="Nile University" label="Nile University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547601" start="2012" end="2045" title="National University (Philippines)" label="National University (Philippines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955674" start="2109" end="2120" title="NU Bulldogs" label="NU Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042657" start="2181" end="2198" title="Nkumba University" label="Nkumba University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763240" start="2244" end="2260" title="Nirma University" label="Nirma University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078286" start="2305" end="2334" title="Northern University, Nowshera" label="Northern University, Nowshera"/>
<link wikidata="Q686441" start="2423" end="2437" title="Nahdatul Ulama" label="Nahdatul Ulama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344199" start="2471" end="2490" title="Northeast Utilities" label="Northeast Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="2592" end="2613" title="Rugby Football League" label="Rugby Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183577" start="2616" end="2621" title="NU.nl" label="NU.nl"/>
<link wikidata="Q25422888" start="2650" end="2656" title="Nubank" label="Nubank"/>
<link wikidata="Q574659" start="2688" end="2708" title="Japan Transocean Air" label="Japan Transocean Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q87556210" start="2766" end="2780" title="Nu (cuneiform)" label="Nu (cuneiform)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14402" start="2801" end="2812" title="Nu (letter)" label="Nu (letter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40671" start="2863" end="2872" title="Nu (kana)" label="Nu (kana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147874" start="2908" end="2920" title="Nu (Yiddish)" label="Nu (Yiddish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618974" start="2999" end="3011" title="Nǀu language" label="Nǀu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068154" start="3125" end="3131" title="Nga Nu" label="Nga Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429072" start="3172" end="3185" title="Saya Gyi U Nu" label="Saya Gyi U Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963784" start="3255" end="3260" title="Me Nu" label="Me Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q316384" start="3308" end="3312" title="U Nu" label="U Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q868040" start="3397" end="3406" title="Nu people" label="Nu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q26422" start="3445" end="3453" title="Nu river" label="Nu river"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="3504" end="3513" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="3539" end="3543" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q44921" start="3575" end="3578" title=".nu" label=".nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="3621" end="3628" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="3684" end="3694" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370549" start="3761" end="3777" title="Norton Utilities" label="Norton Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q44921" start="3808" end="3811" title=".nu" label=".nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067717" start="3854" end="3879" title="Nu (programming language)" label="Nu (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086697" start="3935" end="3944" title="NuMachine" label="NuMachine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543223" start="3989" end="4006" title="Nucellar embryony" label="Nucellar embryony"/>
<link wikidata="Q898280" start="4081" end="4095" title="Nusselt number" label="Nusselt number"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="4172" end="4185" title="dalton (unit)" label="dalton (unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015337" start="4213" end="4228" title="natural uranium" label="natural uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111625" start="4301" end="4308" title="Sega Nu" label="Sega Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322175" start="4338" end="4346" title="Not used" label="Not used"/>
<link wikidata="Q190453" start="4411" end="4431" title="Poisson&amp;#x27;s ratio" label="Poisson&amp;#x27;s ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q276563" start="4606" end="4620" title="Nu (mythology)" label="Nu (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q576608" start="4735" end="4753" title="repeating crossbow" label="repeating crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q201799" start="4756" end="4774" title="Bhutanese ngultrum" label="Bhutanese ngultrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q574659" start="4841" end="4861" title="Japan Transocean Air" label="Japan Transocean Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270346" start="4954" end="4976" title="New King James Version" label="New King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955670" start="4979" end="4985" title="NU 107" label="NU 107"/>
<link wikidata="Q345956" start="5044" end="5064" title="Nus (disambiguation)" label="Nus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609" start="5067" end="5070" title="Gnu" label="Gnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="5072" end="5075" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q400375" start="5078" end="5098" title="New (disambiguation)" label="New (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21228" wikidata="Q34020" url="?curid=21228" title="Niue">
<text>Niue (, ; ) is a self-governing island country in free association with New Zealand. It is situated in the South Pacific Ocean and is part of Polynesia, and predominantly inhabited by Polynesians. One of the world&#x27;s largest coral islands, Niue is commonly referred to as &quot;The Rock&quot;, which comes from the traditional name &quot;Rock of Polynesia&quot;.

Niue&#x27;s position is inside a triangle drawn between Tonga, Samoa, and the Cook Islands. It is northeast of New Zealand, and northeast of Tonga. Niue&#x27;s land area is about and its population was 1,689 at the Census in 2022. 

The terrain of the island has two noticeable levels. The higher level is made up of a limestone cliff running along the coast, with a plateau in the centre of the island reaching approximately above sea level. The lower level is a coastal terrace approximately 0.5 km (0.3 miles) wide and about 25–27 metres (80–90 feet) high, which slopes down and meets the sea in small cliffs. A coral reef surrounds the island; the only major break in the reef is in the central western coast, close to the capital, Alofi.

Niue is subdivided into 14 &quot;villages&quot; (municipalities). Each village has a council that elects its chairperson; they are also electoral districts, and send an assemblyperson to the Niue Assembly (parliament).

Since Niue is part of the Realm of New Zealand, most diplomatic relations on behalf of Niue are conducted by New Zealand. Niueans are citizens of New Zealand, and Charles III is Niue&#x27;s head of state in his capacity as King of New Zealand. Between 90% and 95% of Niuean people live in New Zealand, along with about 70% of the speakers of the Niuean language. Niue is a bilingual country: 30% of the population speak both Niuean and English; 11% speak only English; and 46% speak only Niuean.

Niue is a parliamentary democracy; legislative elections are held every three years. Niue is not a member of the United Nations (UN), but UN organisations accept its status as a freely associated state, equivalent to an independent state for the purposes of international law. As such, Niue is a member of some UN specialised agencies (such as UNESCO and the WHO), and is invited, along with the other non-UN member state, the Cook Islands, to attend United Nations conferences open to &quot;all states&quot;. Niue has been a member of the Pacific Community since 1980.

==History==

Polynesians from Samoa settled Niue around 900 CE. Further settlers arrived from Tonga in the 16th century.

Until the beginning of the 18th century, Niue appears to have had no national government or national leader; chiefs and heads of families exercised authority over segments of the population. A succession of &quot;patu-iki&quot; (kings) ruled, beginning with Puni-mata. Tui-toga, who reigned from 1875 to 1887, was the first of the country&#x27;s kings to adopt Christianity.

The first Europeans to sight Niue sailed under Captain James Cook in 1774. Cook made three attempts to land, but the inhabitants refused to grant permission to do so. He named the island &quot;Savage Island&quot; because, as legend has it, the natives who &quot;greeted&quot; him were painted in what appeared to be blood. The substance on their teeth was hulahula, a native red fe&#x27;i banana. For the next couple of centuries, Niue was known as Savage Island until its original name, &quot;Niue&quot;, which translates as &quot;behold the coconut&quot;, regained use.

Whaling vessels were some of the most regular visitors to the island in the nineteenth century. The first on record was the &quot;Fanny&quot; in February 1824. The last known whaler to visit was the &quot;Albatross&quot; in November 1899.

===Religious colonialism===
The next documented European visitors represented the London Missionary Society, who arrived on the &quot;Messenger of Peace&quot;. After many years of trying to land a European missionary, they abducted a Niuean named Nukai Peniamina and trained him as a pastor at the Malua Theological College in Samoa.

Peniamina returned in 1846 on the &quot;John Williams&quot; as a missionary with the help of Toimata Fakafitifonua. He was finally allowed to land in Uluvehi Mutalau after a number of attempts in other villages had failed. The chiefs of Mutalau village allowed him to land and protected him day and night at the fort in Fupiu.

Christianity was first taught to the Mutalau people before it spread to all the villages. Originally other major villages opposed the introduction of Christianity and had sought to kill Peniamina. The people from the village of Hakupu, although the last village to receive Christianity, came and asked for a &quot;word of God&quot;; hence, their village was renamed &quot;Ha Kupu Atua&quot; meaning &quot;any word of God&quot;, or &quot;Hakupu&quot; for short.

In July 1849, Captain John Erskine visited the island in HMS &quot;Havannah&quot;.

===Request for colony status===
In 1889, the chiefs and rulers of Niue, in a letter to Queen Victoria, asked her &quot;to stretch out towards us your mighty hand, that Niue may hide herself in it and be safe&quot;. After expressing anxiety lest some other nation should take possession of the island, the letter continued: &quot;We leave it with you to do as seems best to you. If you send the flag of Britain that is well; or if you send a Commissioner to reside among us, that will be well&quot;. The British did not initially take up the offer. In 1900 a petition by the Cook Islanders asking for annexation included Niue &quot;if possible&quot;.

In a document dated 19 October 1900, the &quot;King&quot; and Chiefs of Niue consented to &quot;Queen Victoria taking possession of this island&quot;. A despatch to the Secretary of State for the Colonies from the Governor of New Zealand referred to the views expressed by the Chiefs in favour of &quot;annexation&quot; and to this document as &quot;the deed of cession&quot;. A British Protectorate was declared, but it remained short-lived. Niue was brought within the boundaries of New Zealand on 11 June 1901 by the same Order and Proclamation as the Cook Islands. The Order limited the islands to which it related by reference to an area in the Pacific described by co-ordinates, and Niue, at 19.02 S., 169.55 W, lies within that area.
===Modern period===
Niue International Airport was established in 1970 and opened to commercial flight passengers in November 1971.

The New Zealand Parliament restored self-government in Niue with the 1974 Niue Constitution Act, following the 1974 Niuean constitutional referendum in which Niueans had three options: independence, self-government, or continuation as a New Zealand territory. The majority selected self-government, and Niue&#x27;s written constitution
was promulgated as supreme law. Robert Rex, ethnically part European, part native, was elected by the Niue Assembly as the first Premier of Niue, a position he held until his death 18 years later. In 1984, Rex became the first Niuean to receive a knighthood.

In January 2004, Cyclone Heta hit Niue, killing one person and causing extensive damage to the entire island, including wiping out most of the south of the capital, Alofi.

On March 7, 2020, the International Dark-Sky Association announced that Niue had become the first entire country to be designated an International Dark Sky Sanctuary. On 29 September 2022, President Joe Biden announced that the United States would recognise Niue as a sovereign nation. On 25 September 2023, recognition was declared by President Biden and diplomatic relations were established.

==Geography==


Niue is a raised coral atoll in the southern Pacific Ocean, east of Tonga. There are three outlying coral reefs within the exclusive economic zone, with no land area:
#Beveridge Reef, southeast, submerged atoll drying during low tide, north-south, East-West, total area , no land area, lagoon deep.
#Antiope Reef, northeast, a circular plateau approximately in diameter, with a least depth of .
#Haran Reef (also known as Harans Reef), southeast.

Besides these, Albert Meyer Reef, (almost long and wide, least depth , southwest) is not officially claimed by Niue, and the existence of Haymet Rocks ( east-southeast) is in doubt.

Niue is one of the world&#x27;s largest coral islands. The terrain consists of steep limestone cliffs along the coast with a central plateau rising to about above sea level. A coral reef surrounds the island, with the only major break in the reef being in the central western coast, close to the capital, Alofi. A number of limestone caves occur near the coast.

The island is roughly oval in shape (with a diameter of about ), with two large bays indenting the western coast, Alofi Bay in the centre and Avatele Bay in the south. Between these is the promontory of Halagigie Point. A small peninsula, TePā Point (Blowhole Point), is close to the settlement of Avatele in the southwest. Most of the population resides close to the west coast, around the capital, and in the northwest.

===Geology===

Some Niue soils are geochemically very unusual. They are extremely weathered tropical soils, with high levels of iron and aluminium oxides (oxisol) and mercury, and they contain high levels of natural radioactivity, with Thorium-230 and Protactinium-231 heading the decay chains. This distribution of elements is found naturally on very deep seabeds, but the geochemical evidence suggests that the origin of these elements is extreme weathering of coral and brief sea submergence 120,000 years ago. Endothermal upwelling, by which mild volcanic heat draws deep seawater up through the porous coral, almost certainly contributes.

No adverse health effects from the radioactivity or the other trace elements have been demonstrated, and calculations show that the level of radioactivity is probably much too low to be detected in the population. These unusual soils are very rich in phosphate, but it is not accessible to plants, being in the very insoluble form of iron phosphate, or crandallite. It is thought that similar radioactive soils may exist on Lifou and Mare near New Caledonia, and Rennell in the Solomon Islands, but no other locations are known.

===Climate===
The island has a tropical rainforest climate (&quot;Af&quot;) according to the Köppen climate classification with high temperatures and rainfall throughout the year. Although there are no true wet or dry seasons, there is a noticeably wetter stretch from October to May.
===Environment===

Niue is attempting to pursue a policy of &quot;green growth&quot;. The Niue Island Organic Farmers Association is currently paving way to a Multilateral Environmental Agreement (MEA) committed to making Niue the world&#x27;s first fully organic nation by 2020.

Although Niue currently has one of the highest rates of greenhouse gas emissions per capita in the world, due to the small population, and the fossil fuel based generating capacity of between 833 kW to 1MW, with help from the European Union, Niue aims to use 80% renewable energy by 2025. 

In July 2009, a solar panel system was installed, injecting about 50 kW into the Niue national power grid. This is nominally 6% of the average 833 kW electricity production. The solar panels are at Niue High School (20 kW), Niue Power Corporation office, (1.7 kW) and the Niue Foou Hospital (30 kW). The EU-funded grid-connected photovoltaic systems are supplied under the REP-5 programme and were installed recently by the Niue Power Corporation on the roofs of the high school and the power station office and on ground-mounted support structures in front of the hospital. They will be monitored and maintained by the NPC.

In 2014, two additional solar power installations were added to the Niue national power grid, one funded under PALM5 of Japan is located outside the Tuila power station – so far only this has battery storage, the other under European Union funding is located opposite the Niue International Airport Terminal.

In 2023, the governments of Niue and other island states at risk from climate change (Fiji, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga and Vanuatu) launched the &quot;Port Vila Call for a Just Transition to a Fossil Fuel Free Pacific&quot;, calling for the phasing out of fossil fuels; a &quot;rapid and just transition&quot; to renewable energy; and a strengthening of environmental law, including introducing the crime of ecocide.

In 2022, Niue declared its entire EEZ to be a marine park, though enforcement of that declaration would be a challenge. The entire Fisheries Division was reported to have only five staff and there were no locally based patrol boats. Enforcement would depend on stronger support from the New Zealand Defence Forces, though its ability to maintain a continuous presence was limited.

===Flora and fauna===
Niue is part of the Tongan tropical moist forests terrestrial ecoregion. The island is home to approximately 60 native or pre-European plants, and approximately 160 naturalised flowering plant species. Compared to other Polynesian islands, Niue has sparse documentation for what plants were traditionally found on the island (almost no records are found between the documentation by James Cook&#x27;s crew in 1774, and Truman G. Yuncker&#x27;s botanical survey of the island in 1940).

The Huvalu Forest Conservation Area is a 5,400 hectare (20 sq. mi.) site on the eastern side of the island. It was established in 1992 and protects the largest area of primary forest in Niue. It has been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports populations of crimson-crowned fruit doves, blue-crowned lorikeets, Polynesian trillers and Polynesian starlings.

==Government and politics==

The Niue Constitution Act of 1974 vests executive authority in His Majesty the King in Right of New Zealand and in the Governor-General of New Zealand. The Constitution specifies that everyday practice involves the exercise of sovereignty by Cabinet, composed of the Prime Minister (currently Dalton Tagelagi since 11 June 2020) and of three other ministers. The Prime Minister and ministers are members of the Niue Assembly, the nation&#x27;s parliament.

The Assembly consists of 20 members, 14 of them elected by the electors of each village constituency, and six by all registered voters in all constituencies. Electors must be New Zealand citizens, resident for at least three months, and candidates must be electors and resident for 12 months. Everyone born in Niue must register on the electoral roll.

Niue has no political parties; all Assembly members are independents. The only Niuean political party to have ever existed, the Niue People&#x27;s Party (1987–2003), won once (in 2002) before disbanding the following year.

The Legislative Assembly elects a Speaker as its first official in the first sitting of the Assembly following an election. The speaker calls for nominations for prime minister; the candidate with the most votes from the 20 members is elected. The prime minister selects three other members to form a Cabinet, the executive arm of government. General elections take place every three years, most recently on 29 April 2023.

The judiciary, independent of the executive and the legislature, includes a High Court and a Court of Appeal, with appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London.

===Defence and foreign affairs===

Niue has operated as a self-governing state in free association with New Zealand since 3 September 1974, when the people endorsed the Constitution in a plebiscite. Niue is fully responsible for its internal affairs. Niue&#x27;s position concerning its external relations is less clear-cut. Section 6 of the Niue Constitution Act provides that: &quot;Nothing in this Act or in the Constitution shall affect the responsibilities of Her Majesty the Queen in right of New Zealand for the external affairs and defence of Niue.&quot; Section 8 elaborates but still leaves the position unclear: Effect shall be given to the provisions of sections 6 and 7 [concerning external affairs and defence and economic and administrative assistance respectively] of this Act, and to any other aspect of the relationship between New Zealand and Niue which may from time to time call for positive co-operation between New Zealand and Niue after consultation between the Prime Minister of New Zealand and the Prime Minister of Niue, and in accordance with the policies of their respective Governments; and, if it appears desirable that any provision be made in the law of Niue to carry out these policies, that provision may be made in the manner prescribed in the Constitution, but not otherwise.&quot;

Niue has a representative mission (High Commission) in Wellington, New Zealand.

Initially, Niue&#x27;s foreign relations and defence were the responsibility of New Zealand. However, Niue gradually began to develop its own foreign relations, independent of New Zealand. It is a member of the Pacific Islands Forum and of a number of regional and international agencies. It is not a member of the United Nations, but is a state party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Ottawa Treaty and the Treaty of Rarotonga. The country became a member state of UNESCO on 26 October 1993. It established diplomatic relations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China on 12 December 2007. The joint communique signed by Niue and China differs in its treatment of the Taiwan question from that agreed by New Zealand and China. New Zealand &quot;acknowledged&quot; China&#x27;s position on Taiwan but has never expressly agreed with it, but Niue &quot;recognises that there is only one China in the world, the Government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China is the sole legal government representing the whole of China and Taiwan is an inalienable part of the territory of China.&quot; Niue established diplomatic relations with India on 30 August 2012. On 10 June 2014, the Government of Niue announced that Niue had established diplomatic relations with Turkey. The Honourable Minister of Infrastructure Dalton Tagelagi formalised the agreement at the Pacific Small Island States Foreign Ministers meeting in Istanbul, Turkey.

People of Niue have fought as part of the New Zealand military. During World War I (1914–1918), Niue sent about 200 soldiers as part of the New Zealand (Māori) Pioneer Battalion in the New Zealand forces.

Niue is not a republic, but for a number of years the ISO list of country names (ISO 3166-1) listed its full name as &quot;the Republic of Niue&quot;. In its newsletter of 14 July 2011, the ISO acknowledged that this was a mistake and the words &quot;the Republic of&quot; were deleted from the ISO list of country names.

Niue has no regular indigenous military forces; defence is the responsibility of New Zealand. The New Zealand Defence Force has responsibilities for protecting the territory as well as its offshore exclusive economic zone (EEZ). The total offshore EEZ is about . Vessels of the Royal New Zealand Navy can be employed for this task including its s. These naval forces may also be supported by Royal New Zealand Air Force aircraft, including P-8 Poseidons. New Zealand forces also provide additional logistics and specialized support for Niue.

However, these forces are limited in size with, for instance, only infrequent air force overflights of the EEZ. In 2023 New Zealand&#x27;s forces were described by the Government as &quot;not in a fit state&quot; to respond to regional challenges. New Zealand&#x27;s subsequently announced &quot;Defence Policy and Strategy Statement&quot; noted that shaping the security environment, &quot;focusing in particular on supporting security in and for the Pacific&quot; would receive enhanced attention.

Niue has its own customs regulations.

==Economy==

Niue&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP) was NZ$17 million in 2003, or US$10 million at purchasing power parity. Its GDP had increased to US$24.9 million by 2016. Niue uses the New Zealand dollar.

The Niue Integrated Strategic Plan (NISP) is the national development plan, setting national priorities for development. Cyclone Heta set the island back about two years from its planned timeline to implement the NISP, since national efforts concentrated on recovery efforts. In 2008, Niue had yet to fully recover. After Heta, the government made a major commitment to rehabilitate and develop the private sector. In 2004, the New Zealand government allocated $1 million for the private sector, and spent it on helping businesses devastated by the cyclone, and on construction of the Fonuakula Industrial Park. This industrial park is now completed and some businesses are already operating from there. The Fonuakula Industrial Park is managed by the Niue Chamber of Commerce, a not-for-profit organisation providing advisory services to businesses.

===Joint ventures===
The government and the Reef Group from New Zealand started two joint ventures in 2003 and 2004 to develop fisheries and a 120-hectare (300 acre) noni juice operation. Noni fruit comes from &quot;Morinda citrifolia&quot;, a small tree with edible fruit. Niue Fish Processors Ltd (NFP) is a joint venture company processing fresh fish, mainly tuna (yellowfin, big eye and albacore), for export to overseas markets. NFP operates out of a fish plant in Amanau Alofi South, completed and opened in October 2004.

===Trade===
Niue is negotiating free trade agreements with other Pacific countries, PICTA Trade in Services (PICTA TIS), Economic Partnership Agreements with the European Union, and PACERPlus with Australia and New Zealand. The Office of the Chief Trade Adviser (OCTA) has been set up to assist Niue and other Pacific countries in the negotiation of the PACERPlus.

===Mining===
In August 2005, an Australian mining company, Yamarna Goldfields, suggested that Niue might have the world&#x27;s largest deposit of uranium. By early September these hopes were seen as overoptimistic, and in late October the company cancelled its plans, announcing that exploratory drilling had identified nothing of commercial value. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission filed charges in January 2007 against two directors of the company, now called Mining Projects Group Ltd, alleging that their conduct had been deceptive and that they engaged in insider trading. This case was settled out of court in July 2008, both sides withdrawing their claims.

===Debt===
On 27 October 2016, Niue officially declared that all its national debt was paid off. The government plans to spend money saved from servicing loans on increasing pensions and offering incentives to lure expatriates back home. However, Niue is not entirely independent. New Zealand pays $14 million in aid each year and Niue still depends on New Zealand economically. Premier Toke Talagi said Niue managed to pay off US$4 million of debt and had &quot;no interest&quot; in borrowing again, particularly from huge powers such as China.

===Revenue===
Remittances from expatriates were a major source of foreign exchange in the 1970s and early 1980s. Continuous migration to New Zealand has shifted most members of nuclear and extended families there, removing the need to send remittances back home. In the late 1990s, PFTAC conducted studies on the balance of payments, which confirmed that Niueans are receiving few remittances but are sending more money overseas.

====Foreign aid====
Foreign aid is a significant source of income, accounting for approximately a third of Niue&#x27;s annual government revenue. Most aid comes from New Zealand, which has a legal obligation to provide economic and administrative assistance. Other sources of revenue for the government are taxation and trading activities, such as philatelic services and the lease of phone lines.

====Offshore banking====
The government briefly considered offshore banking. Under pressure from the US Treasury, Niue agreed to end its support for schemes designed to minimise tax in countries like New Zealand. Niue provides automated Companies Registration, administered by the New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development. The Niue Legislative Assembly passed the Niue Consumption Tax Act in the first week of February 2009, and the 12.5% tax on goods and services was expected to take effect on 1 April 2009. Income tax has been lowered, and import tax may be reset to zero except for &quot;sin&quot; items like tobacco, alcohol and soft drinks. Tax on secondary income has been lowered from 35% to 10%, with the stated goal of fostering increased labour productivity.

====Internet====
In 1997, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), under contract with the US Department of Commerce, assigned the Internet Users Society-Niue (IUS-N), a private non-profit, as manager of the .nu top-level domain on the Internet. The stated purpose of IUS-N was to use revenue from .nu domain registrations to support Internet services for Niue. According to a letter to ICANN in 2007, IUS-N&#x27;s auditors reported an investment of US$3 million in Niue&#x27;s Internet services between 1999 and 2005, funded by domain registration revenue. In 1999, an agreement was reached between IUS-N and the Government of Niue, recognizing IUS-N&#x27;s management of the .nu ccTLD under IANA&#x27;s authority. This agreement included commitments to provide free Internet services to government departments and citizens.

A subsequent government disputed this agreement and sought compensation from IUS-N. A Commission of Inquiry in 2005 found no merit in these claims, which were dismissed by the government in 2007. Starting in 2003, IUS-N began expanding Wi-Fi coverage throughout the capital village of Alofi and in several nearby villages and schools, and has been expanding Wi-Fi coverage into the outer villages since then, making Niue the first Wi-Fi nation. Additionally, IUS-N provides secure DSL connections for government departments at no cost.

On December 16, 2020, the Government of Niue initiated proceedings to reassign control of its national webspace, .nu, from the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) to itself. This action reflects ongoing efforts by Niue to assert control over its digital assets amid concerns about national sovereignty and economic benefits associated with the .nu domain.

===Agriculture===

Agriculture is very important to the lifestyle of Niueans and the economy, and around 204 square kilometres of the land area are available for agriculture. Subsistence agriculture is very much part of Niue&#x27;s culture, where nearly all the households have plantations of taro. Taro is a staple food, and the pink taro now dominant in the taro markets in New Zealand and Australia is a product of Niue. This is one of the naturally occurring taro varieties on Niue, and has a strong resistance to pests. The Niue taro is known in Samoa as &quot;talo Niue&quot; and in international markets as pink taro. Niue exports taro to New Zealand.
Tapioca or cassava, yams and kumara also grow very well, as do different varieties of bananas. Coconut meat, passionfruit and limes dominated exports in the 1970s, but in 2008 vanilla, noni and taro were the main export crops.

Most families grow their own food crops for subsistence and sell their surplus at the Niue Makete in Alofi, or export to New Zealand. Coconut crab, or uga, is also part of the food chain; it lives in the forest and coastal areas.

In 2003, the government made a commitment to develop and expand vanilla production with the support of NZAID. Vanilla has grown wild on Niue for a long time. The industry was devastated by Cyclone Heta in early 2004, but has since recovered.

The last agricultural census was in 1989.

===Tourism===

Along with fisheries and agriculture, tourism is one of the three priority economic sectors for economic development. In 2006, estimated visitor expenditure reached (equivalent to about $M in ). The only airport is Niue International Airport, and Air New Zealand is the sole airline, flying twice a week from Auckland. In the early 1990s Niue International Airport was served by a local airline, Niue Airlines, but it closed in 1992.

There is a tourism development strategy to increase the number of rooms available to tourists at a sustainable level. Niue is trying to attract foreign investors to invest in the tourism industry by offering import and company tax concessions as incentives.

====Matavai Resort Controversy====
New Zealand businessman Earl Hagaman, founder of Scenic Hotel Group, was awarded a contract in 2014 to manage the Matavai Resort in Niue after he made a $101,000 political donation to the New Zealand National Party, which at that time led a minority government in New Zealand. The resort is subsidized by New Zealand, which wants to bolster tourism there. In 2015, New Zealand announced $7.5m in additional funding for expansion of the resort.

The selection of the Matavai contractor was made by the Niue Tourism Property Trust, whose trustees are appointed by New Zealand Foreign Affairs minister Murray McCully. Prime Minister John Key said he did not handle campaign donations, and that Niue premier Toke Talagi has long pursued tourism as a growth strategy. McCully denied any link between the donation, the foreign aid and the contractor selection.

====Dark Sky Country Status====
Niue became the world&#x27;s first dark sky country in March 2020. The entire island maintains standards of light development and keeps light pollution limited. Visitors will be able to enjoy guided Astro-tours led by trained Niuean community members. Viewing sites which are used for whale-watching and accessing the sea, as well as the roads that cross the island, make ideal viewing locations.

The sailing season begins in May. Alofi Bay has many mooring buoys and yacht crews can lodge at Niue Backpackers. The anchorage in Niue is one of the least protected in the South Pacific. Other challenges of the anchorage are a primarily coral bottom and many deep spots. Mooring buoys are attached to seine floats that support the mooring lines away from seabed obstructions.

===Information technology===
The Census of Households and Population in 1986 was the first to be processed using a personal computer with the assistance of David Marshall, FAO Adviser on Agricultural Statistics, advising UNFPA Demographer Dr Lawrence Lewis and Niue Government Statistician Bill Vakaafi Motufoou to switch from using manual tabulation cards. In 1987, Statistics Niue got its new personal computer NEC PC AT use for processing the 1986 census data; personnel were sent on training in Japan and New Zealand to use the new computer. The first Computer Policy was developed and adopted in 1988.

In 2003, Niue became the first country in the world to provide state-funded wireless internet to all inhabitants.

In August 2008, it has been reported that all school students have what is known as the OLPC XO-1, a specialised laptop by the One Laptop per Child project designed for children in the developing world. Niue was also a location of tests for the OpenBTS project, which aims to deliver low-cost GSM base stations built with open source software.
In July 2011, Telecom Niue launched pre-paid mobile services (Voice/EDGE – 2.5G) as Rokcell Mobile based on the commercial GSM product of vendor Lemko. Three BTS sites will cover the nation. International roaming is not currently available.

In January 2015, Telecom Niue completed the laying of the fibre optic cable around Niue connecting all the 14 villages, making land line phones and ADSL internet connection available to households.

Niue was connected to the Manatua Fibre Cable in 2021.

==Demographics==
The following demographic statistics are from the official figures from Niue Statistics at the relevant censuses.

===Population===
===Structure of the population===

===Population growth rate===
*−0.03%

===Nationality===
*Niuean(s) (noun)
*Niuean (adjective)

===Ethnic groups===
*Niuean 65.4%
*Part-Niuean 14%
*Non-Niuean 20.6% (includes 14% Pacific Islanders and 6.6% others including Europeans and Asians)

===Religions===
*Ekalesia Niue (Congregational Christian Church of Niue – a Protestant church founded by missionaries from the London Missionary Society) 61.7%
*Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 8.7%
*Catholic 8.4%
*Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses 2.7%
*Seventh-day Adventist 1.4%
*Other 8.2%
*None 8.9%

===Languages===
*Niuean (official; Polynesian language closely related to Tongan), 46%
*Niuean and English, 32%
*English (official), 11%
*Niuean and others, 5% 
*Other, 6%

===Health===
According to the World Health Organization, residents are evidently very susceptible to skin cancer. In 2002 Niue reported skin cancer deaths at a rate of 2,482 per 100,000 people – far higher than any other country.

==Culture==

Niue is the birthplace of New Zealand artist and writer John Pule. Author of &quot;The Shark That Ate the Sun&quot;, he also paints tapa cloth inspired designs on canvas. In 2005, he co-wrote &quot;Hiapo: Past and Present in Niuean Barkcloth&quot;, a study of a traditional Niuean artform, with Australian writer and anthropologist Nicholas Thomas. Matafetu Smith founded the first Niuean women&#x27;s weaving group in Auckland.

Taoga Niue is a new Government Department responsible for the preservation of culture, tradition and heritage. Recognising its importance, the Government has added Taoga Niue as the sixth pillar of the Niue Integrated Strategic Plan (NISP).

===Media===
Niue has two broadcast outlets, Television Niue and Radio Sunshine, managed and operated by the Broadcasting Corporation of Niue, and one newspaper, the &quot;Niue Star&quot;.

=== Museums ===
In 2004, Cyclone Heta destroyed the Huanaki Cultural Centre &amp; Museum. The damage resulted in the destruction of the buildings, but also the loss of over 90% of the museum&#x27;s collections. In 2018 Fale Tau Tāoga Museum opened, a new national museum for Niue.

===Cuisine===
Due to the island location and the fact that the Niue produce a significant array of fruits and vegetables, natural local produce, especially coconut, features in many of the dishes of the islands, as does fresh seafood. Takihi, the national dish, is made from coconut cream and thinly sliced taro and papaya.

===Sport===

Despite being a small country, a number of sports are popular. Rugby union is the most popular sport, played by both men and women; Niue was the 2008 FORU Oceania Cup champions. Netball is played only by women. There is a nine-hole golf course at Fonuakula and a single lawn bowling green. Association football is a popular sport, as evidenced by the Niue Soccer Tournament, though the Niue national football team has played only two matches. Rugby league is also a popular sport.

Niue participates in the Commonwealth Games, but unlike the Cook Islands, it is not a member of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and does not compete in the Olympic Games. Per IOC rules, participation in the Olympics requires being &quot;an independent State recognised by the international community&quot;.

==See also==

*Outline of Niue
*Bibliography of Niue
*Dark-sky movement

==Notes==
==References==

==Further reading==
*Niue, the Pacific island struggling to cope as its population plummets
* Chapman, Terry M. (1976) – &quot;The Decolonisation of Niue.&quot; 
*Hekau, Maihetoe &amp; al., &quot;Niue: A History of the Island&quot;, Suva: Institute of Pacific Studies (USP) &amp; the government of Niue, 1982 [no ISBN]
* Loeb, Edwin M. (1926) – &quot;History and Traditions of Niue.&quot; 
* Painter, Margaret and Kalaisi Folau (2000) – &quot;Tagi Tote e Loto Haaku, My Heart Is Crying a Little: Niue Island Involvement in the Great War, 1914–1918.&quot; 
* Smith, Percy – &quot;Niue-fekai (or Savage) Island and its People.&quot; 
* Sperlich, Wolfgang B. (2012) – &quot;Tohi Vagahau Niue/Niue Language Dictionary: Niuean-English, with English-Niuean Finderlist.&quot; 
* Thomson, Basil C. (2012) – &quot;Savage Island: An Account of a Sojourn in Niue and Tonga.&quot; 
* James P Terry and Warwick E Murray (edited by) – &quot;Niue Island: Geographical Perspectives on the Rock of Polynesia&quot; International Scientific Council for Island Development (INSULA), UNESCO, .
* SPREP, Rod Hay and Ralph Powlesland, Compiled by Joanna Sim –&quot;Guide to Birds of Niue&quot;
*Tregear, Edward, &quot;Niue: or Savage Island&quot;, &quot;The Journal of the Polynesian Society&quot;, vol.2, March 1893, pp. 11–16
* W R Sykes – &quot;Contributions to the Flora of Niue&quot;
* Dick Scott (1993) – &quot;Would a Good Man Die&quot;

==External links==

; Government
*Niuean Government &quot;official site&quot;
; General information
*Niue. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
*Niue from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
; Travel
*Niue Tourism Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="0" end="4" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="17" end="31" title="Self-governance" label="self-governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="32" end="46" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138279" start="50" end="66" title="associated state" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="72" end="83" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="107" end="126" title="South Pacific Ocean" label="South Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="142" end="151" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="184" end="195" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324426" start="229" end="241" title="coral island" label="coral island"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="424" end="429" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="431" end="436" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="446" end="458" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="687" end="696" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="983" end="993" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q30966" start="1104" end="1109" title="Alofi" label="Alofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283963" start="1120" end="1159" title="list of villages in Niue" label="subdivided into 14 &amp;quot;villages&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643140" start="1303" end="1316" title="Niue Assembly" label="Niue Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q889033" start="1358" end="1378" title="Realm of New Zealand" label="Realm of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="1495" end="1506" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="1522" end="1535" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296" start="1555" end="1574" title="King of New Zealand" label="King of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q33790" start="1678" end="1693" title="Niuean language" label="Niuean language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079581" start="1705" end="1722" title="bilingual country" label="bilingual country"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="1839" end="1862" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401610" start="1864" end="1885" title="elections in Niue" label="legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1942" end="1956" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q14638071" start="2140" end="2163" title="List of specialized agencies of the United Nations" label="UN specialised agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2173" end="2179" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2188" end="2191" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="2256" end="2268" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="2369" end="2386" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="2413" end="2422" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="2430" end="2435" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="2494" end="2499" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641997" start="2713" end="2763" title="List of Niuean monarchs" label="A succession of &amp;quot;patu-iki&amp;quot; (kings) ruled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2953" end="2963" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067814" start="3277" end="3293" title="fe&amp;#x27;i banana" label="fe&amp;#x27;i banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="3793" end="3818" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068843" start="3958" end="3973" title="Nukai Peniamina" label="Nukai Peniamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744944" start="4009" end="4014" title="Malua" label="Malua"/>
<link wikidata="Q11706063" start="4086" end="4099" title="John Williams (ship)" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552363" start="4204" end="4211" title="Mutalau" label="Mutalau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231900" start="4850" end="4870" title="John Erskine (Royal Navy officer)" label="Captain John Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632718" start="4893" end="4917" title="HMS Havannah (1811)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Havannah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5007" end="5021" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="5740" end="5775" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Secretary of State for the Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="5785" end="5808" title="Governor of New Zealand" label="Governor of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150665" start="6332" end="6358" title="Niue International Airport" label="Niue International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="6449" end="6471" title="New Zealand Parliament" label="New Zealand Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643153" start="6519" end="6540" title="Niue Constitution Act 1974 (NZ)" label="Niue Constitution Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041682" start="6556" end="6593" title="1974 Niuean constitutional referendum" label="1974 Niuean constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933697" start="6813" end="6823" title="Robert Rex" label="Robert Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643140" start="6883" end="6896" title="Niue Assembly" label="Niue Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602784" start="6910" end="6925" title="Premier of Niue" label="Premier of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008516" start="7058" end="7070" title="Cyclone Heta" label="Cyclone Heta"/>
<link wikidata="Q826992" start="7236" end="7270" title="International Dark-Sky Association" label="International Dark-Sky Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="7413" end="7422" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285116" start="7636" end="7654" title="raised coral atoll" label="raised coral atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="7726" end="7731" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="7732" end="7736" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="7749" end="7772" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q851603" start="7794" end="7808" title="Beveridge Reef" label="Beveridge Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="7831" end="7836" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591955" start="8212" end="8224" title="Haymet Rocks" label="Haymet Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="8297" end="8302" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="8342" end="8351" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="8390" end="8397" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="8433" end="8443" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="8664" end="8672" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552943" start="8762" end="8769" title="Avatele" label="Avatele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082328" start="9198" end="9204" title="oxisol" label="oxisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185086" start="9251" end="9272" title="Background radiation" label="natural radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="9279" end="9290" title="thorium" label="Thorium-230"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109" start="9295" end="9311" title="protoactinium" label="Protactinium-231"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="9324" end="9335" title="decay chain" label="decay chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="9492" end="9502" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="9538" end="9555" title="Pleistocene" label="120,000 years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="9939" end="9948" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211305" start="10022" end="10036" title="iron phosphate" label="iron phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9728" start="10112" end="10117" title="Lifou" label="Lifou"/>
<link wikidata="Q9729" start="10122" end="10126" title="Mare (island)" label="Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="10132" end="10145" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59580" start="10151" end="10158" title="Rennell Island" label="Rennell"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="10166" end="10181" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="10249" end="10276" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="10311" end="10340" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603535" start="10569" end="10581" title="green growth" label="green growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646218" start="10662" end="10698" title="Multilateral Environmental Agreement" label="Multilateral Environmental Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="10759" end="10766" title="Organic farming" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436230" start="10840" end="10875" title="list of countries by greenhouse gas emissions per capita" label="greenhouse gas emissions per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q774583" start="11091" end="11102" title="solar panel" label="solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183071" start="11273" end="11289" title="Niue High School" label="Niue High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11299" end="11321" title="Niue Power Corporation" label="Niue Power Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11347" end="11365" title="Niue Foou Hospital" label="Niue Foou Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="11404" end="11423" title="photovoltaic system" label="photovoltaic system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11812" end="11817" title="PALM5" label="PALM5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150665" start="11973" end="11999" title="Niue International Airport" label="Niue International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="12097" end="12101" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="12107" end="12122" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="12124" end="12130" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="12132" end="12137" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="12142" end="12149" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="12275" end="12286" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316391" start="12307" end="12322" title="just transition" label="just transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="12332" end="12348" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="12373" end="12390" title="environmental law" label="environmental law"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="12427" end="12434" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="12471" end="12474" title="EEZ" label="EEZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769625" start="12483" end="12494" title="Niue Nukutuluea Multiple-Use Marine Park" label="marine park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051650" start="12724" end="12750" title="New Zealand Defence Forces" label="New Zealand Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078715" start="12861" end="12890" title="Tongan tropical moist forests" label="Tongan tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q726241" start="13260" end="13277" title="Truman G. Yuncker" label="Truman G. Yuncker"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="13495" end="13509" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="13545" end="13564" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="13574" end="13596" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q305041" start="13632" end="13658" title="crimson-crowned fruit dove" label="crimson-crowned fruit dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q782949" start="13661" end="13682" title="blue-crowned lorikeet" label="blue-crowned lorikeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591898" start="13685" end="13703" title="Polynesian triller" label="Polynesian triller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483492" start="13709" end="13728" title="Polynesian starling" label="Polynesian starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643153" start="13765" end="13786" title="Niue Constitution Act 1974 (NZ)" label="Niue Constitution Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296" start="13824" end="13868" title="Monarchy in New Zealand" label="His Majesty the King in Right of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="13880" end="13911" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015539" start="14003" end="14010" title="Cabinet of Niue" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602784" start="14028" end="14042" title="Prime Minister of Niue" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876617" start="14054" end="14069" title="Dalton Tagelagi" label="Dalton Tagelagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643140" start="14172" end="14185" title="Niue Assembly" label="Niue Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="14306" end="14318" title="constituency" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14571" end="14600" title="Politics of Niue#Political parties and elections" label="Niue has no political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="14627" end="14639" title="Non-partisan" label="independents"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14650" end="14672" title="Politics of Niue#Political parties and elections" label="Niuean political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644044" start="14699" end="14723" title="Niue People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Niue People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587217" start="14737" end="14745" title="2002 Niuean general election" label="won once"/>
<link wikidata="Q117208800" start="15138" end="15155" title="2023 Niuean general election" label="General elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15295" end="15305" title="Court system of Niue#High Court" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15312" end="15327" title="Court system of Niue#Court of Appeal" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="15349" end="15388" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="15459" end="15473" title="Self-governance" label="self-governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138279" start="15483" end="15499" title="associated state" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643153" start="15743" end="15764" title="Niue Constitution Act" label="Niue Constitution Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602784" start="16425" end="16447" title="Prime Minister of Niue" label="Prime Minister of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="16756" end="16771" title="High Commission" label="High Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="16776" end="16786" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="17013" end="17034" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="17161" end="17208" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="17214" end="17267" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q570224" start="17273" end="17286" title="Ottawa Treaty" label="Ottawa Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760687" start="17295" end="17314" title="Treaty of Rarotonga" label="Treaty of Rarotonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="17353" end="17359" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="17556" end="17571" title="Political status of Taiwan" label="Taiwan question"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="17677" end="17683" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876617" start="18195" end="18210" title="Dalton Tagelagi" label="Dalton Tagelagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18390" end="18401" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033965" start="18459" end="18496" title="New Zealand (Māori) Pioneer Battalion" label="New Zealand (Māori) Pioneer Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25275" start="18606" end="18616" title="ISO 3166-1" label="ISO 3166-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051650" start="18946" end="18971" title="New Zealand Defence Force" label="New Zealand Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q575932" start="19126" end="19148" title="Royal New Zealand Navy" label="Royal New Zealand Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="19240" end="19267" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q611401" start="19288" end="19301" title="Boeing P-8 Poseidon" label="P-8 Poseidons"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="20032" end="20055" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="20146" end="20176" title="Niue Integrated Strategic Plan" label="Niue Integrated Strategic Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008516" start="20263" end="20275" title="Cyclone Heta" label="Cyclone Heta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="20759" end="20774" title="industrial park" label="industrial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q234238" start="21160" end="21164" title="noni" label="noni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="21555" end="21576" title="free trade agreements" label="free trade agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="21607" end="21612" title="PICTA" label="PICTA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21632" end="21641" title="PICTA TIS" label="PICTA TIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194845" start="21644" end="21675" title="Economic Partnership Agreements" label="Economic Partnership Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744287" start="21705" end="21714" title="PACERPlus" label="PACERPlus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079349" start="21751" end="21784" title="Office of the Chief Trade Adviser" label="Office of the Chief Trade Adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056092" start="22242" end="22290" title="Australian Securities and Investments Commission" label="Australian Securities and Investments Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="22469" end="22484" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="22642" end="22655" title="national debt" label="national debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="23134" end="23144" title="Remittance" label="Remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="23244" end="23253" title="Human migration" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q721790" start="23309" end="23326" title="Extended family" label="extended families"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="23433" end="23452" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="24051" end="24062" title="US Treasury" label="US Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866801" start="24231" end="24275" title="New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development" label="New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643140" start="24281" end="24306" title="Niue Legislative Assembly" label="Niue Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041665" start="24318" end="24338" title="Niue Consumption Tax" label="Niue Consumption Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q242540" start="24755" end="24790" title="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" label="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q44921" start="24940" end="24943" title=".nu" label=".nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="24944" end="24960" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="25119" end="25124" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="25795" end="25800" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30966" start="25844" end="25849" title="Alofi" label="Alofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="26652" end="26675" title="Subsistence agriculture" label="Subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="26770" end="26774" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="26786" end="26797" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="27011" end="27015" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q873761" start="27136" end="27143" title="Tapioca" label="Tapioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="27156" end="27160" title="yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="27165" end="27171" title="sweet potato" label="kumara"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="27231" end="27243" title="Copra" label="Coconut meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="27245" end="27257" title="passionfruit" label="passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="27262" end="27267" title="lime (fruit)" label="limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="27312" end="27319" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q234238" start="27321" end="27325" title="Morinda citrifolia" label="noni"/>
<link wikidata="Q206070" start="27498" end="27510" title="Coconut crab" label="Coconut crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="27540" end="27550" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="27659" end="27666" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015193" start="27698" end="27703" title="NZAID" label="NZAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008516" start="27784" end="27796" title="Cyclone Heta" label="Cyclone Heta"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="27971" end="27987" title="Economy (activity)" label="economic sectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150665" start="28111" end="28137" title="Niue International Airport" label="Niue International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q204296" start="28143" end="28158" title="Air New Zealand" label="Air New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="28205" end="28213" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876079" start="28292" end="28305" title="Niue Airlines" label="Niue Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q30045512" start="28649" end="28661" title="Earl Hagaman" label="Earl Hagaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="28813" end="28839" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q58291" start="29224" end="29238" title="Murray McCully" label="Murray McCully"/>
<link wikidata="Q57783" start="29255" end="29263" title="John Key" label="John Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q785548" start="29329" end="29340" title="Toke Talagi" label="Toke Talagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223097" start="29548" end="29564" title="Dark-sky movement" label="dark sky country"/>
<link wikidata="Q79076101" start="29574" end="29578" title="2020 in Oceania" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="30510" end="30515" title="UNFPA" label="UNFPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911209" start="30579" end="30600" title="Bill Vakaafi Motufoou" label="Bill Vakaafi Motufoou"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="30973" end="30990" title="wireless internet" label="wireless internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13931" start="31100" end="31109" title="OLPC XO-1" label="OLPC XO-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q842120" start="31139" end="31159" title="One Laptop per Child" label="One Laptop per Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580729" start="31257" end="31264" title="OpenBTS" label="OpenBTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="31305" end="31308" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379116" start="31309" end="31322" title="base stations" label="base stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="31334" end="31354" title="open source software" label="open source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q97656960" start="31823" end="31842" title="Manatua Fibre Cable" label="Manatua Fibre Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="32215" end="32231" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643508" start="32314" end="32353" title="Congregational Christian Church of Niue" label="Congregational Christian Church of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="32443" end="32486" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="32493" end="32501" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="32508" end="32532" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="32539" end="32560" title="Seventh-day Adventist" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33790" start="32607" end="32613" title="Niuean language" label="Niuean"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="32625" end="32644" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="32664" end="32670" title="Tongan language" label="Tongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33790" start="32678" end="32684" title="Niuean language" label="Niuean"/>
<link wikidata="Q33790" start="32728" end="32734" title="Niuean language" label="Niuean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222678" start="33063" end="33072" title="John Pule" label="John Pule"/>
<link wikidata="Q972724" start="33139" end="33149" title="tapa cloth" label="tapa cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q109606447" start="33356" end="33370" title="Matafetu Smith" label="Matafetu Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684261" start="33437" end="33447" title="Taoga Niue" label="Taoga Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="33639" end="33669" title="Niue Integrated Strategic Plan" label="Niue Integrated Strategic Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972143" start="33723" end="33738" title="Television Niue" label="Television Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972143" start="33743" end="33757" title="Radio Sunshine" label="Radio Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972143" start="33787" end="33819" title="Broadcasting Corporation of Niue" label="Broadcasting Corporation of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041675" start="33850" end="33859" title="Niue Star" label="Niue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008516" start="33893" end="33905" title="Cyclone Heta" label="Cyclone Heta"/>
<link wikidata="Q108254635" start="33920" end="33956" title="Huanaki Cultural Centre &amp;amp; Museum" label="Huanaki Cultural Centre &amp;amp; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q108471226" start="34087" end="34108" title="Tāoga Niue Museum" label="Fale Tau Tāoga Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044840" start="34385" end="34391" title="Takihi" label="Takihi"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="34457" end="34461" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="34466" end="34472" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="34551" end="34562" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999797" start="34638" end="34654" title="FORU Oceania Cup" label="FORU Oceania Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="34666" end="34673" title="Netball" label="Netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="34720" end="34731" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q895453" start="34763" end="34776" title="bowling green" label="bowling green"/>
<link wikidata="Q974058" start="34839" end="34861" title="Niue Soccer Tournament" label="Niue Soccer Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q876633" start="34874" end="34901" title="Niue national football team" label="Niue national football team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34918" end="34929" title="Football at the 1983 South Pacific Games#Group B" label="two matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="34931" end="34943" title="Rugby league" label="Rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="34995" end="35013" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="35030" end="35042" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="35070" end="35101" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="35136" end="35149" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112385" start="35303" end="35318" title="Outline of Niue" label="Outline of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="35320" end="35340" title="Bibliography of Niue" label="Bibliography of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223097" start="35342" end="35359" title="Dark-sky movement" label="Dark-sky movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q38807" start="35620" end="35624" title="Suva" label="Suva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="35656" end="35659" title="University of the South Pacific" label="USP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345076" start="36559" end="36574" title="Edward Tregear" label="Tregear, Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395669" start="36637" end="36655" title="Polynesian Society" label="Polynesian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="36922" end="36940" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="36948" end="36975" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21230" wikidata="Q405608" url="?curid=21230" title="New England (disambiguation)">
<text>[[New England]] is a region of the Northeastern United States, comprising the states of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, and Vermont.

New England may also refer to:

==Places==
===United Kingdom===
* New England, Peterborough, an area of Peterborough, Cambridgeshire, England
* New England, Lincolnshire, a settlement within the parish of Croft, Lincolnshire, England
* New England Island, an uninhabited island in Essex, England
* New England Quarter, a mixed-use development in Brighton and Hove, England

===United States===
* New England Colonies of British America (1620–1776), which became five of the six states in New England
* New England, Georgia, an unincorporated community in Dade County
* New England, North Dakota, a city in Hettinger County
* New England, Ohio, an unincorporated community in Athens County
* New England, West Virginia, an unincorporated community in Wood County

===Elsewhere===
* New England (New South Wales), a loosely-defined region of Australia
* New England (medieval), on the north coast of the Black Sea, said to have been colonised by 11th century English refugees
* Nieuw Engeland, a district in Rotterdam, Netherlands

==Education==
* New England College, based in Henniker, New Hampshire, U.S.
* University of New England (Australia), based in Armidale, New South Wales, Australia
* University of New England (United States), based in Biddeford, Maine, U.S.

==Government==
* Division of New England, an electoral district in Australia, 1901–present
* Dominion of New England in America (1686–1689), an administrative union of English colonies in America
* Electoral district of New England, a defunct electoral district in Australia, 1859–1894
* Electoral district of New England and Macleay, a defunct electoral district in Australia, 1856–1859
* New England Confederation in America (1643–1686), a confederal alliance of English colonies in America
* New England town, the basic unit of local government in the New England states of the United States

==Literature==
* New England, an imagined region in &quot;Nine Nations of North America&quot; by Joel Garreau
* Republic of New England, a fictional location in &quot;The Alteration&quot; by Kingsley Amis

==Music==
* New England (band), an American rock band formed in 1978
** &quot;New England&quot; (New England album), 1979
* &quot;New England&quot; (Wishbone Ash album), 1976
* &quot;A New England&quot;, a 1983 song by Billy Bragg, covered by Kirsty MacColl and others

==Other uses==
*, several ships of the U.S. Navy
*, several non-naval ships

==See also==
* 
* New Englander (disambiguation)
* England (disambiguation)
* Old England (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q405608" start="0" end="15" title="New England (disambiguation)" label="[[New England]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q405608" start="166" end="177" title="New England (disambiguation)" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007121" start="232" end="257" title="New England, Peterborough" label="New England, Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187471" start="371" end="390" title="Croft, Lincolnshire" label="Croft, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007294" start="402" end="420" title="New England Island" label="New England Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063820" start="464" end="483" title="New England Quarter" label="New England Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007213" start="562" end="582" title="New England Colonies" label="New England Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086799" start="668" end="688" title="New England, Georgia" label="New England, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816718" start="735" end="760" title="New England, North Dakota" label="New England, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391947" start="791" end="808" title="New England, Ohio" label="New England, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714273" start="857" end="883" title="New England, West Virginia" label="New England, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467315" start="947" end="976" title="New England (New South Wales)" label="New England (New South Wales)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345312" start="1018" end="1040" title="New England (medieval)" label="New England (medieval)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103147" start="1142" end="1156" title="Nieuw Engeland" label="Nieuw Engeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705363" start="1212" end="1231" title="New England College" label="New England College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814435" start="1274" end="1311" title="University of New England (Australia)" label="University of New England (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215036" start="1361" end="1402" title="University of New England (United States)" label="University of New England (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973794" start="1454" end="1477" title="Division of New England" label="Division of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="1530" end="1553" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355766" start="1635" end="1668" title="Electoral district of New England" label="Electoral district of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355767" start="1725" end="1770" title="Electoral district of New England and Macleay" label="Electoral district of New England and Macleay"/>
<link wikidata="Q633593" start="1827" end="1852" title="New England Confederation" label="New England Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="1932" end="1948" title="New England town" label="New England town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754208" start="2091" end="2120" title="Nine Nations of North America" label="Nine Nations of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713244" start="2200" end="2214" title="The Alteration" label="The Alteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487832" start="2251" end="2269" title="New England (band)" label="New England (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007130" start="2311" end="2354" title="New England (New England album)" label="&amp;quot;New England&amp;quot; (New England album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091302" start="2363" end="2407" title="New England (Wishbone Ash album)" label="&amp;quot;New England&amp;quot; (Wishbone Ash album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658503" start="2422" end="2435" title="A New England" label="A New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q60981695" start="2604" end="2634" title="New Englander (disambiguation)" label="New Englander (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q257294" start="2637" end="2661" title="England (disambiguation)" label="England (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083915" start="2664" end="2692" title="Old England (disambiguation)" label="Old England (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21231" wikidata="Q11649" url="?curid=21231" title="Nirvana (band)">
<text>Nirvana was an American rock band formed in Aberdeen, Washington, in 1987. Founded by lead singer and guitarist Kurt Cobain and bassist Krist Novoselic, the band went through a succession of drummers, most notably Chad Channing, before recruiting Dave Grohl in 1990. Nirvana&#x27;s success popularized alternative rock, and they were often referenced as the figurehead band of Generation X. Despite a short mainstream career spanning only three years, their music maintains a popular following and continues to influence modern rock culture.

In the late 1980s, Nirvana established itself as part of the Seattle grunge scene, releasing its first album, &quot;Bleach&quot;, for the independent record label Sub Pop in 1989. They developed a sound that relied on dynamic contrasts, often between quiet verses and loud, heavy choruses. After signing to the major label DGC Records in 1991, Nirvana found unexpected mainstream success with &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;, the first single from its landmark second album, &quot;Nevermind&quot; (1991). A cultural phenomenon of the 1990s, &quot;Nevermind&quot; was certified diamond and is credited for ending the popularity of hair metal.

Characterized by a punk aesthetic, Nirvana&#x27;s fusion of pop melodies with noise, combined with its themes of abjection and social alienation, brought them global popularity. Following extensive tours and the 1992 compilation album &quot;Incesticide&quot; and EP &quot;Hormoaning&quot;, the band released its highly anticipated third studio album, &quot;In Utero&quot; (1993). The album topped both the US and UK album charts, and was acclaimed by critics. Nirvana disbanded following Cobain&#x27;s suicide in April 1994. Further releases have been overseen by Novoselic, Grohl, and Cobain&#x27;s widow, Courtney Love. The live album &quot;MTV Unplugged in New York&quot; (1994) won Best Alternative Music Performance at the 1996 Grammy Awards.

Nirvana is one of the best-selling bands of all time, having sold more than 75 million records worldwide. During its three years as a mainstream act, Nirvana received an American Music Award, Brit Award, and Grammy Award, as well as seven MTV Video Music Awards and two NME Awards. The band achieved five number-one hits on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Alternative Songs chart and four number-one albums on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. In 2010, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked Nirvana No. 30 in its list of the &quot;100 Greatest Artists of All Time&quot;. Their members were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in their first year of eligibility in 2014. In 2023, they were honored with the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.

== History ==

=== 1987–1988: Formation and early years ===
Singer and guitarist Kurt Cobain and bassist Krist Novoselic met while attending Aberdeen High School in Washington state. The pair became friends while frequenting the practice space of the Melvins. Cobain wanted to form a band with Novoselic, but Novoselic did not respond for a long period. Cobain gave him a demo tape of his project Fecal Matter. Three years after the two first met, Novoselic notified Cobain that he had finally listened to the Fecal Matter demo and suggested they start a group. Their first band, the Sellouts, was a Creedence Clearwater Revival tribute band. The project featured Novoselic on guitar and vocals, Cobain on drums, and Steve Newman on bass but only lasted a short time. Another project, this time featuring originals, was also attempted in late 1986. Bob McFadden was enlisted to play drums, but after a month this project also fell through. In early 1987, Cobain and Novoselic recruited drummer Aaron Burckhard. They practiced material from Cobain&#x27;s Fecal Matter tape but started writing new material soon after forming.

During its initial months, the band went through a series of names, including Skid Row, Pen Cap Chew, Bliss and Ted Ed Fred. The band played under the name Nirvana for the first time on March 19, 1988, at Community World Theater, Tacoma, Washington, together with the bands Lush and Vampire Lezbos. This concert&#x27;s flyer, designed by Kurt Cobain, also mentioned all of the previous band names: &quot;Nirvana (also known as... Skid Row, Ted Ed Fred, Pen Cap Chew, Bliss)&quot;. The group settled on Nirvana because, according to Cobain, &quot;I wanted a name that was kind of beautiful or nice and pretty instead of a mean, raunchy punk name like the Angry Samoans.&quot; The band were initially sued by the British band Nirvana over the usage of the name, reaching an out-of-court settlement. Novoselic moved to Tacoma and Cobain to Olympia, Washington. They temporarily lost contact with Burckhard, and instead practiced with Dale Crover of the Melvins. Nirvana recorded its first demos in January 1988.

In early 1988, Crover moved to San Francisco but recommended Dave Foster as his replacement on drums. Foster&#x27;s tenure with Nirvana was a rocky one; during a stint in jail, he was replaced by Burckhard, who again departed after telling Cobain he was too hungover to practice one day. Foster would rejoin the band, but after Cobain and Novoselic were introduced to drummer Chad Channing, the band would permanently dismiss him (although not before Foster witnessed the group play live without him). Channing continued to jam with Cobain and Novoselic; however, by Channing&#x27;s account, &quot;They never actually said &#x27;okay, you&#x27;re in. Channing played his first show with Nirvana in late May 1988.

=== 1988–1990: Early releases ===
Nirvana released its first single, a cover of Shocking Blue&#x27;s &quot;Love Buzz&quot;, in November 1988 on the Seattle independent record label Sub Pop. They did their first interview with John Robb in &quot;Sounds&quot;, which made their release its single of the week. The following month, the band began recording its debut album, &quot;Bleach&quot;, with local producer Jack Endino. &quot;Bleach&quot; was influenced by the heavy dirge-rock of the Melvins, the 1980s punk rock of Mudhoney, and the 1970s heavy metal of Black Sabbath. The money for the recording sessions for &quot;Bleach&quot;, listed as on the album sleeve, was supplied by Jason Everman, who was subsequently brought into the band as the second guitarist. Though Everman did not play on the album, he received a credit on &quot;Bleach&quot; because, according to Novoselic, they &quot;wanted to make him feel more at home in the band&quot;. Prior to the album&#x27;s release, Nirvana became the first band to sign an extended contract with Sub Pop.

&quot;Bleach&quot; was released in June 1989, and became a favorite of college radio stations. Nirvana embarked on its first national tour, but canceled the last few dates and returned to Washington state due to increasing differences with Everman. No one told Everman he was fired; Everman later said he had quit. Although Sub Pop did not promote &quot;Bleach&quot; as much as other releases, it was a steady seller, and had initial sales of 40,000 copies. However, Cobain was upset by the label&#x27;s lack of promotion and distribution. In late 1989, Nirvana recorded the &quot;Blew&quot; EP with producer Steve Fisk. In an interview with Robb, Cobain said the band&#x27;s music was changing: &quot;The early songs were really angry... But as time goes on the songs are getting poppier and poppier as I get happier and happier. The songs are now about conflicts in relationships, emotional things with other human beings.&quot;

In April 1990, Nirvana began working on their next album with producer Butch Vig at Smart Studios in Madison, Wisconsin. Cobain and Novoselic became disenchanted with Channing&#x27;s drumming, and Channing expressed frustration at not being involved in songwriting. As bootlegs of Nirvana demos with Vig began to circulate in the music industry and draw attention from major labels, Channing left the band. That July, Nirvana recorded the single &quot;Sliver&quot; with Mudhoney drummer Dan Peters. Dale Crover filled in on drums on Nirvana&#x27;s seven-date American West Coast tour with Sonic Youth that August.

In September 1990, Buzz Osborne of the Melvins introduced the band to drummer Dave Grohl, whose Washington, D.C. band Scream had broken up. Grohl auditioned for Novoselic and Cobain days after arriving in Seattle; Novoselic later said, &quot;We knew in two minutes that he was the right drummer.&quot; Grohl told &quot;Q&quot;: &quot;I remember being in the same room with them and thinking, &#x27;What? &quot;That&quot; Nirvana? Are you kidding?&#x27; Because on their record cover they looked like psycho lumberjacks... I was like, &#x27;What, that little dude and that big motherfucker? You&#x27;re kidding me&#x27;.&quot;

=== 1991–1992: &quot;Nevermind&quot; and mainstream breakthrough ===
Disenchanted with Sub Pop, and with the Smart Studios sessions generating interest, Nirvana sought a deal with a major record label since no indie label could buy them out of their contract. Cobain and Novoselic consulted Soundgarden and Alice in Chains manager Susan Silver for advice. They met Silver in Los Angeles and she introduced them to agent Don Muller and music business attorney Alan Mintz, who was specialized in finding deals for new bands. Mintz started sending out Nirvana&#x27;s demo tape to major labels looking for deals. Following repeated recommendations by Sonic Youth&#x27;s Kim Gordon, Nirvana signed to DGC Records in 1990. When Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2014, Novoselic thanked Silver during his speech for &quot;introducing them to the music industry properly&quot;.

After signing, the band began recording its first major label album, &quot;Nevermind&quot;. The group was offered a number of producers, but held out for Vig. Rather than record at Vig&#x27;s Madison studio as they had in 1990, production shifted to Sound City Studios in Van Nuys, Los Angeles, California. For two months, the band worked through a variety of songs. Some, such as &quot;In Bloom&quot; and &quot;Breed&quot;, had been in Nirvana&#x27;s repertoire for years, while others, including &quot;On a Plain&quot; and &quot;Stay Away&quot;, lacked finished lyrics until midway through the recording process. After the recording sessions were completed, Vig and the band set out to mix the album. However, the recording sessions had run behind schedule and the resulting mixes were deemed unsatisfactory. Slayer mixer Andy Wallace was brought in to create the final mix. After the album&#x27;s release, members of Nirvana expressed dissatisfaction with the polished sound the mixer had given &quot;Nevermind&quot;.
Initially, DGC Records was hoping to sell 250,000 copies of &quot;Nevermind&quot;, the same they had achieved with Sonic Youth&#x27;s &quot;Goo&quot;. However, the first single, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;, quickly gained momentum, boosted by major airplay of the music video on MTV. As it toured Europe during late 1991, the band found that its shows were dangerously oversold, that television crews were becoming a constant presence onstage, and that &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; was almost omnipresent on radio and music television. By Christmas 1991, &quot;Nevermind&quot; was selling 400,000 copies a week in the US. In January 1992, the album displaced Michael Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Dangerous&quot; at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; album charts, and topped the charts in numerous other countries. The month &quot;Nevermind&quot; reached number one, &quot;Billboard&quot; proclaimed, &quot;Nirvana is that rare band that has everything: critical acclaim, industry respect, pop radio appeal, and a rock-solid college/alternative base.&quot; The album eventually sold over seven million copies in the United States and over 30 million worldwide. Nirvana&#x27;s sudden success was credited for popularizing alternative rock and ending the popularity of hair metal.

Citing exhaustion, Nirvana did not undertake another American tour in support of &quot;Nevermind&quot;, and made only a handful of performances later that year. In March 1992, Cobain sought to reorganize the group&#x27;s songwriting royalties (which to this point had been split equally) to better represent that he wrote the majority of the music. Grohl and Novoselic did not object, but when Cobain wanted the agreement to be retroactive to the release of &quot;Nevermind&quot;, the disagreements came close to breaking up the band. After a week of tension, Cobain received a retroactive share of 75 percent of the royalties. Bad feelings about the situation remained within the group afterward.

Amid rumors that the band was disbanding due to Cobain&#x27;s health, Nirvana headlined the closing night of the 1992 Reading Festival in England. Cobain programmed the performance lineup. Nirvana&#x27;s performance at Reading is often regarded as one of the most memorable of their career. A few days later, Nirvana performed at the MTV Video Music Awards; despite the network&#x27;s refusal to let the band play the new song &quot;Rape Me&quot;, Cobain strummed and sang the first few bars of the song before breaking into &quot;Lithium&quot;. The band received awards for the Best Alternative Video and Best New Artist categories.

DGC had hoped to have a new Nirvana album ready for a late 1992 holiday season; instead, it released the compilation album &quot;Incesticide&quot; in December 1992. A joint venture between DGC and Sub Pop, &quot;Incesticide&quot; collected various rare Nirvana recordings and was intended to provide the material for a better price and higher quality than bootlegs. As &quot;Nevermind&quot; had been out for 15 months and had yielded a fourth single in &quot;In Bloom&quot; by that point, Geffen/DGC opted not to heavily promote &quot;Incesticide&quot;, which was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America the following February.

=== 1993: &quot;In Utero&quot; ===
In February 1993, Nirvana released &quot;Puss&quot; / &quot;Oh, the Guilt&quot;, a split single with the Jesus Lizard, on the independent label Touch &amp; Go. For their third album, Nirvana chose producer Steve Albini, who had a reputation as principled and opinionated in the American indie music scene. While some speculated that Nirvana chose Albini for his underground credentials, Cobain said they chose him for his &quot;natural&quot; recording style, without layers of studio trickery. Albini and Nirvana recorded the album in two weeks in Pachyderm Studio in Cannon Falls, Minnesota, that February for .

After its completion, stories ran in the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; and &quot;Newsweek&quot; that quoted sources claiming DGC considered the album &quot;unreleasable&quot;. Fans became concerned that Nirvana&#x27;s creative vision might be compromised by their label. While the stories about DGC shelving the album were untrue, the band was unhappy with certain aspects of Albini&#x27;s mixes; they thought the bass levels were too low, and Cobain felt that &quot;Heart-Shaped Box&quot; and &quot;All Apologies&quot; did not sound &quot;perfect&quot;. The longtime R.E.M. producer Scott Litt was called in to remix the two songs, with Cobain adding more instrumentation and backing vocals.

&quot;In Utero&quot; topped the American and British album charts. &quot;Time&quot; critic Christopher John Farley wrote in his review, &quot;Despite the fears of some alternative-music fans, Nirvana hasn&#x27;t gone mainstream, though this potent new album may once again force the mainstream to go Nirvana.&quot; &quot;In Utero&quot; went on to sell more than five million copies in the United States. That October, Nirvana embarked on its first tour of the United States in two years, with support from Half Japanese and the Breeders. For the tour, the band added Pat Smear of the punk rock band Germs as the second guitarist.

In November, Nirvana recorded a performance for the television program &quot;MTV Unplugged&quot;. Augmented by Smear and cellist Lori Goldston, they broke convention for the show by choosing not to play their best known songs. Instead, they performed several covers, and invited Cris and Curt Kirkwood of the Meat Puppets to join them for renditions of three Meat Puppets songs.

In early 1994, Nirvana embarked on a European tour. Their final concert took place in Munich, Germany, on March 1. In Rome, on the morning of March 4, Cobain&#x27;s wife, Courtney Love, found Cobain unconscious in their hotel room and he was rushed to the hospital. Cobain had reacted to a combination of prescribed rohypnol and alcohol. The rest of the tour was canceled.

=== 1994–1996: Death of Cobain and disbandment ===

In the weeks following his hospitalization in Rome, Cobain&#x27;s heroin addiction resurfaced. Following an intervention, he was persuaded to enter drug rehabilitation. After less than a week, Cobain scaled the 6-foot wall and escaped, then returned to Seattle. On April 6, 1994, it was announced that Nirvana withdrew from their planned appearance at the Lollapalooza 94 tour due to Cobain&#x27;s ongoing health problems, with reports that they had broken up. Two days later, on April 8, Cobain was found dead of a self-inflicted shotgun wound to the head at his home in the Denny-Blaine neighborhood of the city. He had died approximately 3 days earlier. Until the discovery of his body, Cobain had been missing since escaping the rehabilitation center.

Cobain&#x27;s death drew international attention and became a topic of public fascination and debate. Within hours, stocks ran low of Nirvana records in stores, and Nirvana sales rose dramatically in the United Kingdom. Unused tickets for Nirvana concerts sold for inflated prices on the used market. The inflation was triggered by the manager of Brixton Academy, who lied on BBC Radio 1 that fans were purchasing tickets as a &quot;piece of history&quot;, in an effort to retain the money he stood to lose from ticket refunds. A public vigil for Cobain was held on April 10, 1994, at a park at Seattle Center, drawing approximately 7,000 mourners, followed by a final ceremony on May 31, 1999.

In 1994, Grohl founded a new band, the Foo Fighters. He and Novoselic decided against Novoselic joining. Grohl said it would have felt &quot;really natural&quot; for them to work together again, but would have been uncomfortable for the other band members and placed more pressure on Grohl. Novoselic turned his attention to political activism.

Plans for a live Nirvana album, &quot;Verse Chorus Verse&quot;, were canceled as Novoselic and Grohl found assembling the material so soon after Cobain&#x27;s death emotionally overwhelming. Instead, in November 1994, DGC released the &quot;MTV Unplugged&quot; performance as &quot;MTV Unplugged in New York&quot;. It debuted at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts and earned Nirvana a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album at the 1996 Grammys. It was followed by Nirvana&#x27;s first full-length VHS live video, &quot;Live! Tonight! Sold Out!!&quot;. In 1996, the live album &quot;From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah&quot; became the third consecutive Nirvana release to debut at the top of the &quot;Billboard&quot; album chart.

=== 1997–2005: Conflicts with Courtney Love ===
In 1997, Novoselic, Grohl and Love formed the limited liability company Nirvana LLC to oversee Nirvana projects. A 45-track box set of Nirvana rarities was scheduled for release in October 2001. However, shortly before the release date, Love filed a suit to dissolve Nirvana LLC, and an injunction was issued preventing the release of any new Nirvana material until the case was resolved. Love contended that Cobain was Nirvana, that Grohl and Novoselic were sidemen, and that she had signed the partnership agreement originally under bad advice. Grohl and Novoselic countersued, asking the court to remove Love from the partnership and to replace her with another representative of Cobain&#x27;s estate.

The day before the case was set to go to trial in October 2002, Love, Novoselic, and Grohl announced that they had reached a settlement. The next month, the best-of compilation &quot;Nirvana&quot; was released, featuring the previously unreleased track &quot;You Know You&#x27;re Right&quot;, the last song Nirvana recorded. It debuted at number three on the &quot;Billboard&quot; album chart. The box set, &quot;With the Lights Out&quot;, was released in November 2004. The release contained early Cobain demos, rough rehearsal recordings, and live tracks. An album of selected tracks from the box set, &quot;&quot;, was released in late 2005.

=== 2006–present: Further reissues and reunions ===

In April 2006, Love sold 25 percent of her stake in the Nirvana song catalog to Primary Wave for an estimated . She sought to assure Nirvana&#x27;s fanbase that the music would not simply be licensed to the highest bidder: &quot;We are going to remain very tasteful and true to the spirit of Nirvana while taking the music to places it has never been before.&quot; 

&quot;Live! Tonight! Sold Out!!&quot;, was re-released on DVD in 2006, followed by the full version of &quot;MTV Unplugged in New York&quot; on DVD in 2007. In November 2009, Nirvana&#x27;s performance at the 1992 Reading Festival was released on CD and DVD as &quot;Live at Reading,&quot; alongside a deluxe 20th-anniversary edition of &quot;Bleach.&quot; DGC released a number of 20th-anniversary deluxe packages of &quot;Nevermind&quot; in September 2011, which included the &quot;Live at the Paramount&quot; show, and of &quot;In Utero&quot; in September 2013, which included the &quot;Live and Loud&quot; show.

In 2012, Grohl, Novoselic, and Smear joined Paul McCartney at 12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief. The performance featured the premiere of a new song written by the four, &quot;Cut Me Some Slack&quot;. A studio recording was released on the soundtrack to &quot;Sound City&quot;, a documentary film by Grohl. On July 19, 2013, the group played with McCartney again during the encore of his Safeco Field &quot;Out There&quot; concert in Seattle, the first time Nirvana members had performed together in their hometown in over 15 years.

In 2014, Cobain, Novoselic, and Grohl were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. At the induction ceremony, Novoselic, Grohl and Smear performed a four-song set with guest vocalists Joan Jett, Kim Gordon, St. Vincent and Lorde. Novoselic, Grohl and Smear then performed a full show at Brooklyn&#x27;s St. Vitus Bar with Jett, Gordon, St. Vincent, J Mascis and John McCauley as guest vocalists. Grohl thanked Burckhard, Crover, Peters and Channing for their time in Nirvana. Everman also attended.

At Clive Davis&#x27; annual pre-Grammy party in 2016, Novoselic and Grohl reunited to perform the David Bowie song &quot;The Man Who Sold the World&quot;, which Nirvana had covered in their &quot;MTV Unplugged&quot; performance. Beck accompanied them on acoustic guitar and vocals. In October 2018, Novoselic and Grohl reunited during the finale of the Cal Jam festival at Glen Helen Amphitheater in San Bernardino County, California, joined by Jett and John McCauley on vocals. In January 2020, Novoselic and Grohl reunited for a performance at a benefit for the Art of Elysium at the Hollywood Palladium, joined by Beck, St Vincent, and Grohl&#x27;s daughter Violet.

For the 30th anniversary of &quot;Nevermind&quot;, in September 2021, the BBC broadcast the documentary &quot;When Nirvana Came to Britain,&quot; featuring interviews with Grohl and Novoselic. That month, a 30th-anniversary edition of &quot;Nevermind&quot; was announced, containing 70 previously unreleased live tracks from four concerts and a Blu-ray of &quot;Live in Amsterdam&quot;. For the 30th anniversary of &quot;In Utero&quot;, DGC reissued it in several formats on October 27, 2023, which included the full 1993 show at the Great Western Forum in Los Angeles and the 1994 show at the Seattle Centre Arena.

On January 30, 2025, Novoselic, Grohl and Smear reunited for the first time in five years to perform at the Fire Aid benefit concert in Los Angeles. They were joined by St. Vincent for &quot;Breed&quot;, Kim Gordon for &quot;School&quot;, Joan Jett for &quot;Territorial Pissings&quot;, and Violet Grohl for &quot;All Apologies&quot;. For the 50th anniversary celebrations for &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; on February 14, Novoselic, Grohl and Smear reunited to perform &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; with Post Malone.

== Artistry ==
===Musical style===
Nirvana&#x27;s musical style has been mainly described as grunge, alternative rock, and punk rock. They have also been labeled as hard rock. Characterized by their punk aesthetic, Nirvana often fused pop melodies with noise. &quot;Billboard&quot; described their work as a &quot;genius blend of Kurt Cobain&#x27;s raspy voice and gnashing guitars, Dave Grohl&#x27;s relentless drumming and Krist Novoselic&#x27;s uniting bass-work that connected with fans in a hail of alternately melodic and hard-charging songs&quot;.

Cobain described Nirvana&#x27;s initial sound as &quot;a Gang of Four and Scratch Acid ripoff&quot;. When Nirvana recorded &quot;Bleach&quot;, Cobain felt he had to fit the expectations of the Sub Pop grunge sound to build a fanbase, and suppressed his arty and pop songwriting in favor of a more rock sound. Nirvana biographer Michael Azerrad argued, &quot;Ironically, it was the restrictions of the Sub Pop sound that helped the band find its musical identity.&quot; Azerrad stated that by acknowledging that they had grown up listening to Black Sabbath and Aerosmith, they had been able to move on from their derivative early sound.

Nirvana used dynamic shifts that went from quiet to loud. Cobain sought to mix heavy and pop musical sounds, saying, &quot;I wanted to be totally Led Zeppelin in a way and then be totally extreme punk rock and then do real wimpy pop songs.&quot; When Cobain heard the Pixies&#x27; 1988 album, &quot;Surfer Rosa&quot;, after recording &quot;Bleach&quot;, he felt it had the sound he wanted to achieve but had been too intimidated to try. The Pixies&#x27; subsequent popularity encouraged Cobain to follow his instincts as a songwriter. Like the Pixies, Nirvana moved between &quot;spare bass-and-drum grooves and shrill bursts of screaming guitar and vocals&quot;. Near the end of his life, Cobain said the band had become bored of the &quot;limited&quot; formula, but expressed doubt that they were skilled enough to try other dynamics.
===Instrumentation===
Cobain&#x27;s rhythm guitar style, which relied on power chords, low-note riffs, and a loose left-handed technique, featured the key components to the band&#x27;s songs. Cobain would often initially play a song&#x27;s verse riff in a clean tone, then double it with distorted guitars when he repeated the part. In some verses, the guitar would be absent to allow the drums and bass guitar to support the vocals, or it would only play sparse melodies like the two-note pattern used in &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;. Cobain rarely played standard guitar solos, opting to play variations of the song&#x27;s melody as single-note lines. Cobain&#x27;s solos were mostly blues-based and discordant, which music writer Jon Chappell described as &quot;almost an iconoclastic parody of the traditional instrumental break&quot;, a quality typified by the note-for-note replication of the lead melody in &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; and the atonal solo for &quot;Breed&quot;. The band had no formal musical training; Cobain said: &quot;I have no concept of knowing how to be a musician at all whatsoever... I couldn&#x27;t even pass Guitar 101.&quot;

Grohl&#x27;s drumming &quot;took Nirvana&#x27;s sound to a new level of intensity&quot;. Azerrad stated that Grohl&#x27;s &quot;powerful drumming propelled the band to a whole new plane, visually as well as musically&quot;, noting, &quot;Although Dave is a merciless basher, his parts are also distinctly musical—it wouldn&#x27;t be difficult to figure out what song he was playing even without the rest of the music&quot;.

Until early 1992, the band had performed live in concert pitch. They began tuning down either a half step or full step as well as concert pitch. Sometimes all three tunings would be in the same show. By the summer of that year, the band had settled on the half step down tuning (E♭). Cobain said, &quot;We play so hard we can&#x27;t tune our guitars fast enough&quot;. The band made a habit of destroying its equipment after shows. Novoselic said he and Cobain created the &quot;shtick&quot; in order to get off the stage sooner. Cobain stated it began as an expression of his frustration with previous drummer Channing making mistakes and dropping out entirely during performances.

=== Songwriting and lyrics ===
Everett True said in 1989, &quot;Nirvana songs treat the banal and pedestrian with a unique slant&quot;. Cobain came up with the basic components of each song, usually writing them on an acoustic guitar, as well as the singing style and the lyrics. He emphasized that Novoselic and Grohl had a large part in deciding the lengths and parts of songs, and that he did not like to be considered the sole songwriter.

Cobain usually wrote lyrics for songs minutes before recording them. Cobain said, &quot;When I write a song the lyrics are the least important subject. I can go through two or three different subjects in a song and the title can mean absolutely nothing at all&quot;. Cobain told &quot;Spin&quot; in 1993 that he &quot;didn&#x27;t give a flying f–k&quot; what the lyrics on &quot;Bleach&quot; were about, figuring &quot;Let&#x27;s just scream negative lyrics, and as long as they&#x27;re not sexist and don&#x27;t get too embarrassing it&#x27;ll be okay&quot;, while the lyrics to &quot;Nevermind&quot; were taken from two years of poetry he had accumulated, which he cut up and chose lines he preferred from. In comparison, Cobain stated that the lyrics to &quot;In Utero&quot; were &quot;more focused, they&#x27;re almost built on themes&quot;. Cobain did not write in a linear fashion, instead relying on juxtapositions of contradictory images to convey emotions and ideas. Often in his lyrics, Cobain would present an idea then reject it; he said, &quot;I&#x27;m such a nihilistic jerk half the time and other times I&#x27;m so vulnerable and sincere [.. The songs are] like a mixture of both of them. That&#x27;s how most people my age are.&quot;

== Legacy ==
Combined with their themes of abjection and alienation, Nirvana became hugely popular during their short tenure and are credited with bringing alternative rock to the mainstream. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic wrote that prior to Nirvana, &quot;alternative music was consigned to specialty sections of record stores, and major labels considered it to be, at the very most, a tax write-off&quot;. Following the release of &quot;Nevermind&quot;, &quot;nothing was ever quite the same, for better and for worse&quot;. While other alternative bands had achieved hits, Nirvana &quot;broke down the doors forever&quot;, according to Erlewine; the breakthrough &quot;didn&#x27;t eliminate the underground&quot;, but rather &quot;just gave it more exposure&quot;. Erlewine also wrote that Nirvana &quot;popularized so-called &#x27;Generation X&#x27; and &#x27;slacker&#x27; culture&quot;. Following Cobain&#x27;s death, numerous headlines referred to Nirvana&#x27;s frontman as &quot;the voice of a generation&quot;, although he had rejected such labeling during his lifetime.

In 1992, Jon Pareles of &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that Nirvana had made other alternative acts impatient for similar success: &quot;Suddenly, all bets are off. No one has the inside track on which of dozens, perhaps hundreds, of ornery, obstreperous, unkempt bands might next appeal to the mall-walking millions.&quot; Record company executives offered large advances and record deals to bands, and previous strategies of building audiences for alternative rock groups were replaced by the opportunity to achieve mainstream popularity quickly.

Michael Azerrad argued in his Nirvana biography &quot;Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana&quot; (1993) that &quot;Nevermind&quot; marked an epochal generational shift in music similar to the rock-and-roll explosion in the 1950s and the end of the baby boomer generation&#x27;s dominance of the musical landscape. Azerrad wrote, &quot;&quot;Nevermind&quot; came along at exactly the right time. This was music by, for, and about a whole new group of young people who had been overlooked, ignored, or condescended to.&quot; Fugazi frontman Guy Picciotto said &quot;It was like our record could have been a hobo pissing in the forest for the amount of impact it had ... It felt like we were playing ukuleles all of a sudden because of the disparity of the impact of what they did.&quot;

Nirvana are one of the best-selling bands of all time, having sold more than 75 million records. With 32 million RIAA-certified units, they are also one of the bestselling music artists in the United States. They have achieved 10 Top 40 hits on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Alternative Songs chart, including five number-ones. Two of their studio albums and two of their live albums have reached the top spot on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. Nirvana have been awarded one diamond, three multiplatinum, seven platinum and two gold-certified albums in the United States by the RIAA, and four multiplatinum, four platinum, two gold and one silver-certified albums in the UK by the BPI. &quot;Nevermind&quot;, their most successful album, has sold more than 30 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best-selling albums ever. Their most successful song, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;, is among the bestselling singles of all time, having been certified diamond with sales of 10 million copies.

== Awards and accolades ==

Since their breakup, Nirvana have continued to receive acclaim. In 2003, they were selected as one of the inductees of the &quot;Mojo&quot; Hall of Fame 100. The band also received a nomination in 2004 from the UK Music Hall of Fame for the title of &quot;Greatest Artist of the 1990s&quot;. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; placed Nirvana at number 27 on their list of the &quot;100 Greatest Artists of All Time&quot; in 2004, and at number 30 on their updated list in 2011. In 2003, the magazine&#x27;s senior editor David Fricke picked Kurt Cobain as the 12th best guitarist of all time. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; later ranked Cobain as the 45th greatest singer in 2008 and 73rd greatest guitarist of all time in 2011. VH1 ranked Nirvana as the 42nd greatest artists of rock and roll in 1998, the 7th greatest hard rock artists in 2000, and the 14th greatest artists of all time in 2010.

Nirvana&#x27;s contributions to music have also received recognition. The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame has inducted two of Nirvana&#x27;s recordings, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; and &quot;All Apologies&quot;, into its list of &quot;The Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll&quot;. The museum also ranked &quot;Nevermind&quot; number 10 on its &quot;The Definitive 200 Albums of All Time&quot; list in 2007. In 2005, the Library of Congress added &quot;Nevermind&quot; to the National Recording Registry, which collects &quot;culturally, historically or aesthetically important&quot; sound recordings from the 20th century. In 2011, four of Nirvana&#x27;s songs appeared on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s updated list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time&quot;, with &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; ranking the highest at number 9. Three of the band&#x27;s albums were ranked on the magazine&#x27;s 2012 list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;, with &quot;Nevermind&quot; placing the highest at number 17. The same three Nirvana albums were also placed on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; 2011 list of &quot;The 100 Best Albums of the Nineties&quot;, with &quot;Nevermind&quot; ranking the highest at number 1, making it the greatest album of the decade. &quot;Time&quot; included &quot;Nevermind&quot; on its list of &quot;The All-TIME 100 Albums&quot; in 2006, labeling it &quot;the finest album of the 1990s&quot;. In 2011, the magazine also added &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; on its list of &quot;The All-TIME 100 Songs&quot;, and &quot;Heart-Shaped Box&quot; on its list of &quot;The 30 All-TIME Best Music Videos&quot;. Pitchfork ranked &quot;Nevermind&quot; and &quot;In Utero&quot; as the sixth and thirteenth greatest albums of the 1990s, describing the band as &quot;&quot;the&quot; greatest and most legendary band of the 1990s.&quot;

Nirvana was announced in their first year of eligibility as being part of the 2014 class of inductees into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on December 17, 2013. The induction ceremony was held April 10, 2014, in Brooklyn, New York, at the Barclays Center. As the accolade was only applied to Cobain, Novoselic and Grohl, former drummer Chad Channing was not included in the induction and was informed of his omission by text message. Channing attended the ceremony, where Grohl publicly thanked him for his contributions and noted that he had written some of Nirvana&#x27;s most recognized drum parts. In 2023, Nirvana (represented by Novoselic, Grohl, and Smear) were awarded a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2023 Grammy Awards.

== Band members ==

Final lineup
* Kurt Cobain – lead vocals, guitars (1987–1994; his death)
* Krist Novoselic – bass, occasional vocals (1987–1994; all reunion performances), accordion (1993–1994)
* Dave Grohl – drums, backing vocals (1990–1994; all reunion performances)

Former members
* Aaron Burckhard – drums (1987, 1988)
* Dale Crover – drums (1988, 1990), backing vocals (1988)
* Dave Foster – drums (1988)
* Chad Channing – drums (1988–1990)
* Jason Everman – rhythm guitar, backing vocals (1989)
* Dan Peters – drums (1990)

Touring musicians
* John Duncan – guitar (1993)
* Lori Goldston – cello (1993–1994)
* Pat Smear – rhythm guitar, backing vocals (1993–1994; all reunion performances) 
* Melora Creager – cello (1994)
Session musicians
* Mark Pickerel – drums (1989)
* Mark Lanegan – guitar (1989)
* Kirk Canning – cello (1991)
* Kera Schaley – cello (1993)
=== Timeline ===
== Discography ==
* &quot;Bleach&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Nevermind&quot; (1991)
* &quot;In Utero&quot; (1993) 
== See also ==

* List of alternative rock artists
* List of musicians from Seattle
* List of Nirvana concerts

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
* Azerrad, Michael. &quot;Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana&quot;. Doubleday, 1994. 
* Cross, Charles R. &quot;Heavier Than Heaven: A Biography of Kurt Cobain&quot;. Hyperion, 2001. 
* DeRogatis, Jim. &quot;Milk It!: Collected Musings on the Alternative Music Explosion of the 90&#x27;s&quot;. Da Capo, 2003. 
* Gaar, Gillian G. &quot;In Utero&quot;. Continuum, 2006. 
* Rocco, John (editor). &quot;The Nirvana Companion: Two Decades of Commentary&quot;. Schirmer, 1998. 
* True, Everett. &quot;Nirvana: The Biography&quot;. Da Capo, 2007. 

== External links ==
* 
* Live Nirvana – Guides to Nirvana studio sessions output and Nirvana live concerts
* Nirvana Live Guide – Guide to Nirvana&#x27;s live performances and recordings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="0" end="7" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="24" end="28" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q233808" start="44" end="64" title="Aberdeen, Washington" label="Aberdeen, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="112" end="123" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="136" end="151" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="214" end="227" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="247" end="257" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="302" end="318" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="377" end="389" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="604" end="611" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="612" end="618" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="659" end="665" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="706" end="713" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="866" end="877" title="DGC Records" label="DGC Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="942" end="965" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="1028" end="1037" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="1124" end="1131" title="Diamond certification" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="1177" end="1187" title="hair metal" label="hair metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="1209" end="1213" title="Punk subculture" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="1250" end="1253" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q726239" start="1268" end="1273" title="Noise music" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815580" start="1303" end="1312" title="abjection" label="abjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="1317" end="1334" title="social alienation" label="social alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q652087" start="1431" end="1442" title="Incesticide" label="Incesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645579" start="1462" end="1472" title="Hormoaning" label="Hormoaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="1547" end="1555" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="1678" end="1699" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="Cobain&amp;#x27;s suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="1797" end="1810" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q212326" start="1833" end="1858" title="MTV Unplugged in New York" label="MTV Unplugged in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="1876" end="1910" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Music Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542306" start="1918" end="1936" title="1996 Grammy Awards" label="1996 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="1957" end="1979" title="list of best-selling music artists" label="the best-selling bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q207601" start="2109" end="2129" title="American Music Awards" label="American Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="2131" end="2141" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2147" end="2159" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="2178" end="2199" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637268" start="2209" end="2219" title="NME Awards" label="NME Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="2273" end="2282" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="2289" end="2306" title="Alternative Songs" label="Alternative Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2347" end="2372" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2389" end="2402" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833781" start="2456" end="2488" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Artists of All Time" label="100 Greatest Artists of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="2533" end="2559" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="2640" end="2673" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="2757" end="2768" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="2781" end="2796" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713582" start="2817" end="2837" title="Aberdeen High School (Washington)" label="Aberdeen High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="2927" end="2934" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q931863" start="3073" end="3085" title="Fecal Matter (band)" label="Fecal Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192463" start="3276" end="3304" title="Creedence Clearwater Revival" label="Creedence Clearwater Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990978" start="3670" end="3685" title="Aaron Burckhard" label="Aaron Burckhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q543660" start="4456" end="4469" title="Angry Samoans" label="Angry Samoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855965" start="4526" end="4533" title="Nirvana (British band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="4618" end="4624" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="4639" end="4658" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q451088" start="4733" end="4744" title="Dale Crover" label="Dale Crover"/>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="5188" end="5201" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q588382" start="5606" end="5619" title="Shocking Blue" label="Shocking Blue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5633" end="5642" title="Love Buzz#Nirvana cover version" label="Love Buzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="5707" end="5714" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395065" start="5752" end="5761" title="John Robb (musician)" label="John Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="5771" end="5777" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="5903" end="5909" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q427917" start="5937" end="5948" title="Jack Endino" label="Jack Endino"/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="6047" end="6055" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="6071" end="6082" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="6086" end="6099" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q443395" start="6209" end="6222" title="Jason Everman" label="Jason Everman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="6657" end="6670" title="college radio" label="college radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q650884" start="7167" end="7171" title="Blew (EP)" label="Blew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798410" start="7195" end="7205" title="Steve Fisk" label="Steve Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="7589" end="7598" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962978" start="7602" end="7615" title="Smart Studios" label="Smart Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="7619" end="7637" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706908" start="7970" end="7976" title="Sliver (song)" label="Sliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q740145" start="8005" end="8015" title="Dan Peters" label="Dan Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="8107" end="8118" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q711367" start="8152" end="8164" title="Buzz Osborne" label="Buzz Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="8211" end="8221" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030697" start="8251" end="8257" title="Scream (band)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="8452" end="8453" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="9051" end="9062" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="9067" end="9082" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978629" start="9091" end="9103" title="Susan Silver" label="Susan Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="9426" end="9436" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="9456" end="9467" title="DGC Records" label="DGC Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="9512" end="9538" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="9732" end="9741" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855065" start="9907" end="9925" title="Sound City Studios" label="Sound City Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q769446" start="9929" end="9950" title="Van Nuys, Los Angeles" label="Van Nuys, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129976" start="10044" end="10052" title="In Bloom" label="In Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q611498" start="10161" end="10171" title="On a Plain" label="On a Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="10468" end="10474" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q527921" start="10481" end="10493" title="Andy Wallace (producer)" label="Andy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011916" start="10818" end="10821" title="Goo (album)" label="Goo"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="10862" end="10885" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="10965" end="10968" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="11352" end="11367" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44104" start="11381" end="11390" title="Dangerous (Michael Jackson album)" label="Dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="11424" end="11433" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="11911" end="11927" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="11957" end="11967" title="hair metal" label="hair metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="12787" end="12803" title="Reading Festival" label="Reading Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="13003" end="13025" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11127350" start="13102" end="13109" title="Rape Me" label="Rape Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="13200" end="13207" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q821010" start="13248" end="13270" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Alternative Video" label="Best Alternative Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q595693" start="13275" end="13290" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist" label="Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q652087" start="13433" end="13444" title="Incesticide" label="Incesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="13660" end="13668" title="Bootleg recording" label="bootlegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="13890" end="13931" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q763635" start="14027" end="14071" title="Puss / Oh, the Guilt" label="&amp;quot;Puss&amp;quot; / &amp;quot;Oh, the Guilt&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q475227" start="14093" end="14109" title="the Jesus Lizard" label="the Jesus Lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853623" start="14136" end="14150" title="Touch and Go Records" label="Touch &amp;amp; Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="14198" end="14210" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="14279" end="14290" title="Independent music" label="indie music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296873" start="14540" end="14556" title="Pachyderm Studio" label="Pachyderm Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q255736" start="14560" end="14583" title="Cannon Falls, Minnesota" label="Cannon Falls, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="14653" end="14668" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="14685" end="14693" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q869706" start="15071" end="15087" title="Heart-Shaped Box" label="Heart-Shaped Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q891196" start="15104" end="15117" title="All Apologies" label="All Apologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="15172" end="15178" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q4354218" start="15188" end="15198" title="Scott Litt" label="Scott Litt"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="15304" end="15312" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="15371" end="15375" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112643" start="15389" end="15412" title="Christopher John Farley" label="Christopher John Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q931544" start="15804" end="15817" title="Half Japanese" label="Half Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332134" start="15822" end="15834" title="the Breeders" label="the Breeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q353973" start="15865" end="15874" title="Pat Smear" label="Pat Smear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850698" start="15897" end="15902" title="Germs (band)" label="Germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10913761" start="16006" end="16019" title="MTV Unplugged" label="MTV Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119426" start="16058" end="16071" title="Lori Goldston" label="Lori Goldston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185874" start="16208" end="16212" title="Cris Kirkwood" label="Cris"/>
<link wikidata="Q327126" start="16217" end="16230" title="Curt Kirkwood" label="Curt Kirkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132613" start="16238" end="16250" title="Meat Puppets" label="Meat Puppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="16395" end="16401" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="16480" end="16493" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q62947" start="16625" end="16633" title="rohypnol" label="rohypnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="16801" end="16807" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q959298" start="16843" end="16855" title="Intervention (counseling)" label="intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260022" start="16883" end="16902" title="drug rehabilitation" label="drug rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17091" end="17106" title="List of Lollapalooza lineups by year#1994" label="Lollapalooza 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="17224" end="17291" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="Cobain was found dead of a self-inflicted shotgun wound to the head"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259147" start="17311" end="17323" title="Denny-Blaine, Seattle" label="Denny-Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239788" start="17839" end="17854" title="Brixton Academy" label="Brixton Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="17868" end="17879" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044487" start="18087" end="18101" title="Seattle Center" label="Seattle Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="18227" end="18239" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816763" start="18572" end="18590" title="Verse Chorus Verse (Nirvana album)" label="Verse Chorus Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q212326" start="18816" end="18841" title="MTV Unplugged in New York" label="MTV Unplugged in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="18931" end="18943" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="18948" end="18976" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Music Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542306" start="18984" end="18996" title="38th Annual Grammy Awards" label="1996 Grammys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929733" start="19072" end="19097" title="Live! Tonight! Sold Out!!" label="Live! Tonight! Sold Out!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q945101" start="19135" end="19170" title="From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah" label="From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q149789" start="19379" end="19404" title="limited liability company" label="limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128931" start="20222" end="20229" title="Nirvana (Nirvana album)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418630" start="20298" end="20324" title="You Know You&amp;#x27;re Right" label="You Know You&amp;#x27;re Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140480" start="20452" end="20471" title="With the Lights Out" label="With the Lights Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061127" start="20818" end="20830" title="Primary Wave (company)" label="Primary Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990678" start="21372" end="21387" title="Live at Reading" label="Live at Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632149" start="21589" end="21610" title="Live at the Paramount (video)" label="Live at the Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256894" start="21695" end="21708" title="Live and Loud (Nirvana video)" label="Live and Loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="21766" end="21780" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21784" end="21822" title="12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief" label="12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855067" start="21987" end="21997" title="Sound City (film)" label="Sound City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193117" start="22115" end="22127" title="Safeco Field" label="Safeco Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053626" start="22128" end="22149" title="Out There! Tour" label="&amp;quot;Out There&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="22322" end="22348" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="22451" end="22460" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="22462" end="22472" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="22474" end="22485" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476175" start="22490" end="22495" title="Lorde" label="Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q739681" start="22616" end="22624" title="J Mascis" label="J Mascis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182489" start="22629" end="22642" title="Deer Tick (band)" label="John McCauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="22865" end="22876" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341319" start="22888" end="22914" title="The Man Who Sold the World (song)" label="The Man Who Sold the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="22996" end="23000" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414785" start="23140" end="23163" title="Glen Helen Amphitheater" label="Glen Helen Amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q108053" start="23167" end="23200" title="San Bernardino County, California" label="San Bernardino County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182489" start="23221" end="23234" title="Deer Tick (band)" label="John McCauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806404" start="23331" end="23345" title="The Art of Elysium" label="Art of Elysium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244839" start="23353" end="23372" title="Hollywood Palladium" label="Hollywood Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q120238206" start="23428" end="23434" title="Violet Grohl" label="Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="23511" end="23514" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q108795498" start="23547" end="23575" title="When Nirvana Came to Britain" label="When Nirvana Came to Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="23971" end="23990" title="Great Western Forum" label="Great Western Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818257" start="24031" end="24051" title="Mercer Arena" label="Seattle Centre Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001362" start="24162" end="24170" title="Fire Aid" label="Fire Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="24223" end="24234" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="24258" end="24268" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="24293" end="24302" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="24437" end="24456" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621919" start="24567" end="24578" title="Post Malone" label="Post Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="24674" end="24680" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="24682" end="24698" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="24704" end="24713" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="24746" end="24755" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="24780" end="24784" title="Punk subculture" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="24816" end="24819" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q726239" start="24834" end="24839" title="Noise music" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130624" start="25194" end="25206" title="Gang of Four (band)" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q951819" start="25211" end="25223" title="Scratch Acid" label="Scratch Acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="25465" end="25480" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="25679" end="25692" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="25697" end="25706" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="25920" end="25932" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="26042" end="26048" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q571213" start="26073" end="26084" title="Surfer Rosa" label="Surfer Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130936" start="26684" end="26695" title="power chord" label="power chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571955" start="28261" end="28274" title="concert pitch" label="concert pitch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28491" end="28493" title="Guitar tunings#E♭ tuning" label="E♭"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417079" start="28927" end="28939" title="Everett True" label="Everett True"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="29625" end="29629" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815580" start="30635" end="30644" title="abjection" label="abjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="30784" end="30807" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="30811" end="30819" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="31433" end="31445" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q630800" start="31462" end="31469" title="slacker" label="slacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271357" start="31689" end="31700" title="Jon Pareles" label="Jon Pareles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="31710" end="31728" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="32239" end="32254" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32293" end="32330" title="Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana" label="Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="32432" end="32445" title="Rock and roll" label="rock-and-roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="32488" end="32499" title="Baby boomers" label="baby boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q277865" start="32763" end="32769" title="Fugazi" label="Fugazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640127" start="32779" end="32792" title="Guy Picciotto" label="Guy Picciotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="33045" end="33067" title="list of best-selling music artists" label="the best-selling bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="33139" end="33143" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607495" start="33175" end="33232" title="List of best-selling music artists in the United States" label="one of the bestselling music artists in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="33256" end="33262" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="33281" end="33290" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="33297" end="33314" title="Alternative Songs" label="Alternative Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="33439" end="33464" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="33554" end="33570" title="Music recording sales certification" label="certified albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="33702" end="33705" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="BPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="33828" end="33847" title="List of best-selling albums" label="best-selling albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472550" start="33928" end="33951" title="List of best-selling singles" label="the bestselling singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="34180" end="34213" title="The Mojo Collection" label="&amp;quot;Mojo&amp;quot; Hall of Fame 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q835142" start="34268" end="34289" title="UK Music Hall of Fame" label="UK Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833781" start="34430" end="34462" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Artists of All Time" label="100 Greatest Artists of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492894" start="34569" end="34581" title="David Fricke" label="David Fricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="34772" end="34775" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="35016" end="35042" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="35180" end="35215" title="500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll" label="The Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="35362" end="35381" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="35417" end="35444" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="35665" end="35699" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="35867" end="35902" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="36591" end="36600" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q807966" start="37050" end="37065" title="Barclays Center" label="Barclays Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="37490" end="37516" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q114708205" start="37524" end="37542" title="65th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2023 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="37580" end="37591" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="37640" end="37655" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="37745" end="37755" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990978" start="37836" end="37851" title="Aaron Burckhard" label="Aaron Burckhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q451088" start="37875" end="37886" title="Dale Crover" label="Dale Crover"/>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="37962" end="37975" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q443395" start="37998" end="38011" title="Jason Everman" label="Jason Everman"/>
<link wikidata="Q740145" start="38053" end="38063" title="Dan Peters" label="Dan Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639814" start="38100" end="38111" title="Big John Duncan" label="John Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119426" start="38130" end="38143" title="Lori Goldston" label="Lori Goldston"/>
<link wikidata="Q353973" start="38166" end="38175" title="Pat Smear" label="Pat Smear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041957" start="38249" end="38263" title="Melora Creager" label="Melora Creager"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890240" start="38299" end="38312" title="Mark Pickerel" label="Mark Pickerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="38330" end="38342" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="38462" end="38468" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="38490" end="38499" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="38521" end="38529" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322524" start="38562" end="38594" title="List of alternative rock artists" label="List of alternative rock artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630075" start="38597" end="38627" title="List of musicians from Seattle" label="List of musicians from Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592292" start="38630" end="38654" title="List of Nirvana concerts" label="List of Nirvana concerts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21232" wikidata="Q1855965" url="?curid=21232" title="Nirvana (British band)">
<text>Nirvana are a pop rock band formed in London in 1966. In 1985, the band reformed. Members of the band sued the American band Nirvana over the usage of the name, reaching an out-of-court settlement.

== History ==
===1966–1971: Early years===
Nirvana was created as the performing arm of the London-based songwriting partnership of Irish musician Patrick Campbell-Lyons and Greek composer Alex Spyropoulos (born George Alex Spyropoulos, 1941, Athens) and English producer Ray Singer (born 1946). On their recordings, Campbell-Lyons, Ray Singer and Spyropoulos supplied all the vocals. Campbell-Lyons contributed on guitars, and Spyropoulos contributed on some keyboards. Musically, Campbell-Lyons and Spyropoulos blended rock, pop, folk, jazz, Latin rhythms and classical music, primarily augmented by baroque chamber-style arrangements.

In October 1967, they released their first album, a concept album produced by Chris Blackwell titled &quot;The Story of Simon Simopath&quot;. The album was one of the first narrative concept albums ever released, predating story-driven concept albums such as Pretty Things&#x27;s &quot;S.F. Sorrow&quot; (December 1968), The Who&#x27;s &quot;Tommy&quot; (April 1969) and The Kinks&#x27;s &quot;Arthur&quot; (September 1969). Island Records launched Nirvana&#x27;s first album &quot;with a live show at the Saville Theatre, sharing a bill with fellow label acts Traffic, Spooky Tooth, and Jackie Edwards.&quot;

Unable to perform their songs live as a duo, Campbell-Lyons and Spyropoulos decided to create a live performing ensemble, the Nirvana Ensemble, and recruited four musicians. Though hired to be part of the live performance group rather than as band members, these four musicians were also included in the photograph alongside the core duo on the album cover of their first album to assist in projecting an image of a group rather than a duo. However, within a few months, Nirvana had reverted to its original two-person lineup. The four musicians who augmented Campbell-Lyons and Spyropoulos on their live appearances and television shows for those few months were Ray Singer (guitar), Brian Henderson (bass), Sylvia A. Schuster (cello) and Michael Coe (French horn, viola). Sue and Sunny also participated in providing their vocals. 

The band appeared on French television with Salvador Dalí, who splashed black paint on them during a performance of their third single, &quot;Rainbow Chaser&quot;. Campbell-Lyons kept the jacket but regretted that Dalí did not sign any of their paint-splashed clothes. Island Records allegedly sent the artist an invoice for the cleaning of Schuster&#x27;s cello.

Following the minor chart success of &quot;Rainbow Chaser&quot;, &quot;live appearances became increasingly rare&quot; and the songwriting duo at the core of Nirvana &quot;decided to disband the sextet&quot; and to rely on session musicians for future recordings. Spyropoulos cited Schuster&#x27;s departure due to pregnancy as the instigator for the band returning to its core membership. Campbell-Lyons also cited the high cost of having the additional members as a reason for their departure. Schuster later became the principal cellist of the BBC Symphony Orchestra.

In 1968, Nirvana recorded their second album, &quot;All of Us&quot;, which featured a similar broad range of musical styles as their first album. After the release of the album, Ray Singer left the group to produce Peter Sarstedt.

Their third album, &quot;Black Flower&quot;, was rejected by Blackwell, who compared it disparagingly to Francis Lai&#x27;s &quot;A Man and a Woman&quot;. Under the title &quot;To Markos III&quot; (supposedly named for a &quot;rich uncle&quot; of Spyropoulos who helped finance the album), it was released in the UK on the Pye label in May 1970, though reportedly only 250 copies were pressed and it was deleted shortly after. One track, &quot;Christopher Lucifer&quot;, was a jibe at Blackwell.

In 1971, the duo separated, with Campbell-Lyons the primary contributor to the next two Nirvana albums, &quot;Local Anaesthetic&quot; (1971), and &quot;Songs of Love And Praise&quot; (1972), the latter featuring the return of Sylvia Schuster. Campbell-Lyons subsequently worked as a solo artist and issued further albums: &quot;Me and My Friend&quot; (1973), &quot;The Electric Plough&quot; (1981), and &quot;The Hero I Might Have Been&quot; (1983).

===1985–present===
The duo reunited in 1985, touring Europe and releasing a compilation album, &quot;Black Flower&quot; (Bam-Caruso, 1987). (&quot;Black Flower&quot; had been the original planned title of their third album.) In the 1990s, two further albums were released. &quot;Secret Theatre&quot; (1994) and &quot;Orange and Blue&quot; (1996), which contained previously unreleased material, including a flower-power cover of the song &quot;Lithium&quot; originally recorded by the Seattle grunge band of the same name, Nirvana. According to the band&#x27;s official website, this was intended as part of a tongue-in-cheek album called &quot;Nirvana Sings Nirvana&quot; that was aborted when lead singer Kurt Cobain died. When the recording was presented on the &quot;Orange and Blue&quot; album, Campbell-Lyons&#x27;s liner notes treated it seriously and with allusion to Heathcliff from &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot;. Also, according to the website, the band still wanted to open for Hole even after Cobain&#x27;s death.

The original group filed a lawsuit in California against the Seattle grunge band in 1992. The matter was settled out of court on undisclosed terms that apparently allowed both bands to continue using the name and issuing new recordings without any packaging disclaimers or caveats to distinguish one Nirvana from the other. Music writer Everett True has claimed that Cobain&#x27;s record label paid $100,000 to the original Nirvana to permit Cobain band&#x27;s continued use of the name.

In 1999, they released a three-disc CD anthology titled &quot;Chemistry&quot;, including twelve previously unreleased tracks and some new material. Their first three albums were reissued on CD by Universal Records in 2003. In 2005, Universal (Japan) reissued &quot;Local Anaesthetic&quot; and &quot;Songs of Love And Praise&quot;. In 2018, a new album was released on the Island label &quot;Rainbow Chaser: The 60s Recordings (The Island Years)&quot;, which featured the first two albums in a double CD package, featuring 52 tracks with 27 previously unreleased outtakes, demos and alternative versions.

==Musical styles and techniques==
The group were in the school of baroque-flavoured, melodic pop-rock music typified by the Beach Boys of &quot;Pet Sounds&quot; and &quot;God Only Knows&quot;, the Zombies of &quot;Odessey and Oracle&quot; and &quot;Time of the Season&quot;. The majority of the tracks on Nirvana&#x27;s albums fell into the broad genre of contemporary popular music, sometime described as chamber strand of progressive rock, soft rock or orchestral pop and chamber pop.

The Nirvana song &quot;Rainbow Chaser&quot; is thought to be the first-ever British recording to feature the audio effect known as phasing or flanging throughout an entire track, as distinct from occasionally within a song such as the Small Faces in &quot;Itchycoo Park&quot;. Phasing was, by 1967, identified with psychedelia, and &quot;Rainbow Chaser&quot; achieved number 34 in UK Singles Chart during May 1968.

==Notable collaborators==
Nirvana&#x27;s producers, arrangers, engineers and mixers included:
*Chris Blackwell, Island Records&#x27; founder, produced the band before hitting his production stride in the 1970s with Bob Marley
*Tony Visconti, arranger and producer, worked with David Bowie, Marc Bolan, the Moody Blues and U2, among others
*Mike Vickers, a former Manfred Mann multi-instrumentalist who undertook arrangement work for Nirvana in 1967 and 1968
*Jimmy Miller, the US-born producer, worked with them immediately before starting his five-album streak producing the Rolling Stones, including the &quot;Beggars Banquet&quot;, &quot;Exile On Main Street&quot; and &quot;Goats Head Soup&quot; albums.
*Chris Thomas, the producer, whose credits include the Beatles, Procol Harum, Roxy Music, Pink Floyd (mixed &quot;The Dark Side of the Moon&quot;), the Sex Pistols and INXS.
*Guy Stevens, A&amp;R executive and producer, before his production work with Mott the Hoople.
*Brian Humphries, the recording engineer, started engineering Nirvana before going on to work with Traffic, Black Sabbath, McDonald and Giles and Pink Floyd (eventually engineering their acclaimed &quot;Wish You Were Here&quot; and &quot;Animals&quot; albums).
Mike Weighell also contributed at the beginning of the 1970s. Others who worked on production with Nirvana include Muff Winwood (formerly of the Spencer Davis Group); arranger/producer Mike Hurst, who worked with Jimmy Page, Cat Stevens, Manfred Mann, the Spencer Davis Group, Colin Blunstone; and arranger Johnny Scott, who arranged for the Hollies and subsequently scored films such as &quot;The Shooting Party&quot; and &quot;&quot;.

Top musicians who played on Nirvana sessions include Lesley Duncan, Big Jim Sullivan, Herbie Flowers, Billy Bremner (later of Rockpile/Dave Edmunds fame), Luther Grosvenor, Clem Cattini and the full lineup of rock band Spooky Tooth. Patrick Joseph Kelly (keyboards) also co-wrote the &quot;Modus Operandi&quot; track on the &quot;Local Anaesthetic&quot; album.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
*&quot;The Story of Simon Simopath&quot; (Island 1967)
*&quot;The existence of chance is everything and nothing while the greatest achievement is the living of life and so say ALL OF US&quot; (Island 1968)
*&quot;Dedicated to Markos III&quot; (Pye 1970) a.k.a. &quot;To Markos III&quot; a.k.a. &quot;Black Flower&quot;
*&quot;Local Anaesthetic&quot; (Vertigo 1971)
*&quot;Songs of Love and Praise&quot; (Philips 1972)
*&quot;Me And My Friend&quot; (1974) Patrick Campbell-Lyons&#x27;s first solo album, but marketed as a Nirvana album when released on CD (on which most of the tracks of &quot;Songs of Love and Praise&quot; were also included)
*&quot;Orange and Blue&quot; (Edsel 1996)
*&quot;Secrets&quot; (Madfish 2023)

===Compilations===
*&quot;Black Flower&quot; (Bam-Caruso 1987) (LP compilation)
*&quot;Travelling on a Cloud&quot; (Edsel 1992) (CD compilation)
*&quot;Secret Theatre&quot; (Edsel 1994) (CD compilation of rarities and outtakes)
*&quot;Chemistry&quot; (Edsel 1997) (3CD retrospective)
*&quot;Forever Changing - An Introduction To&quot; (Island 2003) (CD compilation)
*&quot;Cult&quot; (Burger 2012) (2LP compilation)
*&quot;Rainbow Chaser: The 60s Recordings (The Island Years)&quot; (Universal 2018) (2CD compilation)

===Singles===
*&quot;Tiny Goddess&quot; (July 1967) – UK No. 62
*&quot;Pentecost Hotel&quot; (October 1967) – UK No. 56
*&quot;Rainbow Chaser&quot; (March 1968) – UK No. 34
*&quot;Girl in the Park&quot; (July 1968)
*&quot;All of Us&quot; (November 1968)
*&quot;Wings of Love&quot; (January 1969)
*&quot;Oh! What a Performance&quot; (May 1969)
*&quot;The Picture of Dorian Gray&quot; (September 1981)

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Electric Roulette review of Markos III
*Marmalade Skies: Nirvana
*Trilogy Rock: Nirvana Interview to the band in 2010
*Myspace: Nirvana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1855965" start="0" end="7" title="Nirvana (British band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="14" end="22" title="pop rock" label="pop rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="38" end="44" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="125" end="132" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4219268" start="346" end="368" title="Patrick Campbell-Lyons" label="Patrick Campbell-Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298114" start="471" end="481" title="Ray Singer (record producer)" label="Ray Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="731" end="735" title="folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="737" end="741" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="761" end="776" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="801" end="808" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="809" end="816" title="chamber music" label="chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="890" end="903" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766798" start="945" end="972" title="The Story of Simon Simopath" label="The Story of Simon Simopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="1021" end="1034" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364657" start="1097" end="1110" title="Pretty Things" label="Pretty Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091327" start="1124" end="1135" title="S.F. Sorrow" label="S.F. Sorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="1159" end="1166" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q372055" start="1180" end="1185" title="Tommy (The Who album)" label="Tommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="1209" end="1218" title="The Kinks" label="The Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q672782" start="1232" end="1238" title="Arthur (Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire)" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="1263" end="1277" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048439" start="1399" end="1406" title="Traffic (band)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455057" start="1408" end="1420" title="Spooky Tooth" label="Spooky Tooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157397" start="1426" end="1440" title="Jackie Edwards (musician)" label="Jackie Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298114" start="2113" end="2123" title="Ray Singer (record producer)" label="Ray Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634348" start="2223" end="2236" title="Sue and Sunny" label="Sue and Sunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="2328" end="2341" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="2964" end="2973" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q795630" start="3196" end="3218" title="BBC Symphony Orchestra" label="BBC Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q223408" start="3558" end="3569" title="Francis Lai" label="Francis Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q261403" start="3583" end="3600" title="A Man and a Woman" label="A Man and a Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262957" start="3776" end="3779" title="Pye International Records" label="Pye"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4454" end="4460" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="4845" end="4852" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="4894" end="4900" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="4924" end="4931" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="5108" end="5119" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499865" start="5277" end="5287" title="Heathcliff (Wuthering Heights)" label="Heathcliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q202975" start="5299" end="5316" title="Wuthering Heights" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="5390" end="5394" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="5455" end="5462" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5466" end="5476" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q906118" start="5686" end="5696" title="disclaimer" label="disclaimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417079" start="5765" end="5777" title="Everett True" label="Everett True"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="6107" end="6109" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482872" start="6113" end="6130" title="Universal Records (defunct record label)" label="Universal Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="6607" end="6614" title="melody" label="melodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="6642" end="6656" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q212863" start="6666" end="6676" title="Pet Sounds" label="Pet Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q632342" start="6693" end="6707" title="God Only Knows" label="God Only Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163207" start="6715" end="6726" title="the Zombies" label="the Zombies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187585" start="6736" end="6754" title="Odessey and Oracle" label="Odessey and Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772309" start="6771" end="6789" title="Time of the Season" label="Time of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="6891" end="6904" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="6946" end="6962" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q217191" start="6964" end="6973" title="soft rock" label="soft rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719318" start="7119" end="7131" title="audio signal processing" label="audio effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323480" start="7152" end="7160" title="flanging" label="flanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q222628" start="7245" end="7256" title="Small Faces" label="Small Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q961446" start="7266" end="7279" title="Itchycoo Park" label="Itchycoo Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="7325" end="7336" title="psychedelic music" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="7391" end="7407" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q861129" start="7521" end="7536" title="Chris Blackwell" label="Chris Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="7538" end="7552" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="7641" end="7651" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q505994" start="7653" end="7666" title="Tony Visconti" label="Tony Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="7668" end="7676" title="music arranger" label="arranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="7681" end="7689" title="music producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="7703" end="7714" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q287514" start="7716" end="7726" title="Marc Bolan" label="Marc Bolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211965" start="7732" end="7743" title="Moody Blues" label="Moody Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="7748" end="7750" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849166" start="7766" end="7778" title="Mike Vickers" label="Mike Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q319265" start="7789" end="7801" title="Manfred Mann" label="Manfred Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q59477" start="7885" end="7897" title="Jimmy Miller (producer)" label="Jimmy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="8002" end="8016" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q339065" start="8038" end="8053" title="Beggars Banquet" label="Beggars Banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217248" start="8067" end="8087" title="Exile On Main Street" label="Exile On Main Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q938642" start="8104" end="8119" title="Goats Head Soup" label="Goats Head Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q924578" start="8135" end="8147" title="Chris Thomas (record producer)" label="Chris Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="8185" end="8196" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q214486" start="8198" end="8210" title="Procol Harum" label="Procol Harum"/>
<link wikidata="Q334648" start="8212" end="8222" title="Roxy Music" label="Roxy Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="8224" end="8234" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q150901" start="8248" end="8273" title="The Dark Side of the Moon" label="The Dark Side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="8286" end="8297" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q489801" start="8302" end="8306" title="INXS" label="INXS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262852" start="8309" end="8320" title="Guy Stevens" label="Guy Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126287" start="8386" end="8401" title="Mott the Hoople" label="Mott the Hoople"/>
<link wikidata="Q858200" start="8502" end="8509" title="Traffic (Traffic album)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q271787" start="8511" end="8524" title="Paranoid (album)" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110753" start="8526" end="8544" title="McDonald and Giles" label="McDonald and Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="8549" end="8559" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q200872" start="8606" end="8624" title="Wish You Were Here (Pink Floyd album)" label="Wish You Were Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q206216" start="8641" end="8648" title="Animals (Pink Floyd album)" label="Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q981603" start="8779" end="8791" title="Muff Winwood" label="Muff Winwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049145" start="8809" end="8828" title="Spencer Davis Group" label="Spencer Davis Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847350" start="8849" end="8859" title="Mike Hurst (producer)" label="Mike Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="8877" end="8887" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q154216" start="8889" end="8900" title="Cat Stevens" label="Cat Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q319265" start="8902" end="8914" title="Manfred Mann" label="Manfred Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049145" start="8920" end="8939" title="Spencer Davis Group" label="Spencer Davis Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108375" start="8941" end="8956" title="Colin Blunstone" label="Colin Blunstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276176" start="8971" end="8983" title="John Scott (composer)" label="Johnny Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q282925" start="9002" end="9013" title="the Hollies" label="the Hollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211385" start="9058" end="9076" title="The Shooting Party" label="The Shooting Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q675206" start="9155" end="9168" title="Lesley Duncan" label="Lesley Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205527" start="9170" end="9186" title="Big Jim Sullivan" label="Big Jim Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609413" start="9188" end="9202" title="Herbie Flowers" label="Herbie Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586012" start="9204" end="9217" title="Billy Bremner (musician)" label="Billy Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655009" start="9228" end="9236" title="Rockpile" label="Rockpile"/>
<link wikidata="Q545186" start="9237" end="9249" title="Dave Edmunds" label="Dave Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581205" start="9257" end="9273" title="Luther Grosvenor" label="Luther Grosvenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737890" start="9275" end="9287" title="Clem Cattini" label="Clem Cattini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455057" start="9321" end="9333" title="Spooky Tooth" label="Spooky Tooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766798" start="9507" end="9534" title="The Story of Simon Simopath" label="The Story of Simon Simopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730052" start="9562" end="9685" title="All of Us (album)" label="The existence of chance is everything and nothing while the greatest achievement is the living of life and so say ALL OF US"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="10796" end="10798" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21233" wikidata="Q42927" url="?curid=21233" title="Nirvana">
<text>Nirvana ( , , ; &quot;nirvāṇa&quot; ; Pali: &quot;nibbāna&quot;; Prakrit: &quot;ṇivvāṇa&quot;; literally, &quot;blown out&quot;, as in an oil lamp) is a concept in the Indian religions of Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, and Sikhism that refers to the extinguishing of the passions which is the ultimate state of salvational release and the liberation from duḥkha (&#x27;suffering&#x27;) and &quot;saṃsāra&quot;, the cycle of birth and rebirth.

In Indian religions, nirvana is synonymous with &quot;moksha&quot; and &quot;mukti&quot;. All Indian religions assert it to be a state of perfect quietude, freedom, highest happiness as well as the liberation from attachment and worldly suffering and the ending of &quot;samsara&quot;, the round of existence. However, non-Buddhist and Buddhist traditions describe these terms for liberation differently. In Hindu philosophy, it is the union of or the realization of the identity of Atman with Brahman, depending on the Hindu tradition. In Jainism, nirvana is also the soteriological goal, representing the release of a soul from karmic bondage and samsara. In Buddhism, &quot;nirvana&quot; refers to the abandonment of the 10 fetters, marking the end of rebirth by stilling the &quot;fires&quot; that keep the process of rebirth going.

== Etymology ==
The ideas of spiritual liberation, with the concept of soul and Brahman, appear in Vedic texts and Upanishads, such as in verse 4.4.6 of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad.

The term &quot;nirvana&quot; in the soteriological sense of &quot;blown out, extinguished&quot; state of liberation appears at many places in the Vedas and even more in the post-Buddhist Bhagavata Purana, however populist opinion does not give credit to either the Vedas or the Upanishads. Collins states, &quot;the Buddhists seem to have been the first to call it &quot;nirvana&quot;.&quot; This may have been deliberate use of words in early Buddhism, suggests Collins, since Atman and Brahman were described in Vedic texts and Upanishads with the imagery of fire, as something good, desirable and liberating. Collins says the word &quot;nirvāṇa&quot; is from the verbal root &quot;blow&quot; in the form of past participle &quot;blown&quot;, prefixed with the preverb meaning &quot;out&quot;. Hence the original meaning of the word is &quot;blown out, extinguished&quot;. (Sandhi changes the sounds: the &quot;v&quot; of causes to become , and then the &quot;r&quot; of causes retroflexion of the following &quot;n&quot;: &quot;+&quot; &gt; &quot;nirvāṇa&quot;). However the Buddhist meaning of nirvana also has other interpretations.

L. S. Cousins said that in popular usage nirvana was &quot;the goal of Buddhist discipline... the final removal of the disturbing mental elements which obstruct a peaceful and clear state of mind, together with a state of awakening from the mental sleep which they induce.&quot;

==Overview==
&quot;Nirvāṇa&quot; is a term found in the texts of all major Indian religions – Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, and Sikhism. It refers to the profound peace of mind that is acquired with &quot;moksha&quot;, liberation from samsara, or release from a state of suffering, after respective spiritual practice or sādhanā.

The liberation from Saṃsāra developed as an ultimate goal and soteriological value in the Indian culture, and called by different terms such as nirvana, moksha, mukti and kaivalya. This basic scheme underlies Hinduism, Jainism and Buddhism, where &quot;the ultimate aim is the timeless state of &quot;moksa&quot;, or, as the Buddhists first seem to have called it, nirvana.&quot; Although the term occurs in the literatures of a number of ancient Indian traditions, the concept is most commonly associated with Buddhism. Some writers believe the concept was adopted by other Indian religions after it became established in Buddhism, but with different meanings and description, for instance the use of (&quot;Moksha&quot;) in the Hindu text &quot;Bhagavad Gita&quot; of the &quot;Mahabharata&quot;.

The idea of &quot;moksha&quot; is connected to the Vedic culture, where it conveyed a notion of &quot;amrtam&quot;, &quot;immortality&quot;, and also a notion of a &quot;timeless&quot;, &quot;unborn&quot;, or &quot;the still point of the turning world of time&quot;. It was also its timeless structure, the whole underlying &quot;the spokes of the invariable but incessant wheel of time&quot;. The hope for life after death started with notions of going to the worlds of the Fathers or Ancestors and/or the world of the Gods or Heaven.

The earliest Vedic texts incorporate the concept of life, followed by an afterlife in heaven and hell based on cumulative virtues (merit) or vices (demerit). However, the ancient Vedic Rishis challenged this idea of afterlife as simplistic, because people do not live an equally moral or immoral life. Between generally virtuous lives, some are more virtuous; while evil too has degrees, and either permanent heaven or permanent hell is disproportionate. The Vedic thinkers introduced the idea of an afterlife in heaven or hell in proportion to one&#x27;s merit, and when this runs out, one returns and is reborn. The idea of rebirth following &quot;running out of merit&quot; appears in Buddhist texts as well. This idea appears in many ancient and medieval texts, as &quot;Saṃsāra&quot;, or the endless cycle of life, death, rebirth and redeath, such as section 6:31 of the &quot;Mahabharata&quot; and verse 9.21 of the &quot;Bhagavad Gita&quot;. The Saṃsara, the life after death, and what impacts rebirth came to be seen as dependent on karma.

== Buddhism ==

Nirvana (&quot;nibbana&quot;) literally means &quot;blowing out&quot; or &quot;quenching&quot;. It is the most used as well as the earliest term to describe the soteriological goal in Buddhism: the extinguishing of the passions, which also gives release from the cycle of rebirth (&quot;saṃsāra&quot;). Nirvana is part of the Third Truth on &quot;cessation of dukkha&quot; in the Four Noble Truths doctrine of Buddhism. It is the goal of the Noble Eightfold Path.

The Buddha is believed in the Buddhist scholastic tradition to have realized two types of nirvana, one at awakening, and another at his death. The first is called (nirvana with a remainder), the second &quot;parinirvana&quot; or (nirvana without remainder, or final nirvana).

In the Buddhist tradition, nirvana is described as the extinguishing of the &quot;fires&quot;, which are also said to cause rebirths and associated suffering. The Buddhist texts identify these &quot;three fires&quot; or &quot;three poisons&quot; as &quot;raga&quot; (greed, sensuality), &quot;dvesha&quot; (aversion, hate) and &quot;avidyā&quot; or &quot;moha&quot; (ignorance, delusion).

The state of nirvana is also described in Buddhism as cessation of all afflictions, cessation of all actions, cessation of rebirths and suffering that are a consequence of afflictions and actions, a fire going out for lack of fuel, abandoning weaving (&quot;vana&quot;) together of life after life, and the elimination of desire.

Liberation is described as identical to &quot;anatta&quot; (, non-self, lack of any self). In Buddhism, liberation is achieved when all things and beings are understood to be with no Self. Nirvana is also described as identical to achieving &quot;sunyata&quot; (emptiness), where there is no essence or fundamental nature in anything, and everything is empty. Yet, in Theravada Buddhism it is also seen as the only unconditioned existent, not just &quot;destruction of desire&quot; but a separate existent which is &quot;the object of the knowledge&quot; of the Buddhist path.

== Hinduism ==
The most ancient texts of Hinduism such as the Vedas and early Upanishads do not mention the soteriological term &quot;Nirvana&quot;. This term is found in texts such as the Bhagavad Gita and the Nirvana Upanishad, likely composed in the post-Buddha era. The concept of Nirvana is described differently in Buddhist and Hindu literature. Hinduism has the concept of Atman – the soul, self – asserted to exist in every living being, while Buddhism asserts through its &quot;anatman&quot; doctrine that there is no Atman in any being. Nirvana in Buddhism is &quot;stilling mind, cessation of desires, and action&quot; unto emptiness, states Jeaneane Fowler, while nirvana in post-Buddhist Hindu texts is also &quot;stilling mind but not inaction&quot; and &quot;not emptiness&quot;, rather it is the knowledge of true Self (Atman) and the acceptance of its universality and unity with Brahman.

=== Moksha ===

The ancient soteriological concept in Hinduism is moksha, described as the liberation from the cycle of birth and death through self-knowledge and the eternal connection of Atman (soul, self) and metaphysical Brahman. Moksha is derived from the root () which means free, let go, release, liberate; Moksha means &quot;liberation, freedom, emancipation of the soul&quot;. In the Vedas and early Upanishads, the word mucyate () appears, which means to be set free or release – such as of a horse from its harness.

The traditions within Hinduism state that there are multiple paths () to moksha: , the path of knowledge; , the path of devotion; and , the path of action.

=== Brahma-nirvana in the &quot;Bhagavad Gita&quot; ===
The term Brahma-nirvana appears in verses 2.72 and 5.24-26 of the Bhagavad Gita. It is the state of release or liberation; the union with the Brahman. According to Easwaran, it is an experience of blissful egolessness.

According to Zaehner, Johnson and other scholars, &quot;nirvana&quot; in the Gita is a Buddhist term adopted by the Hindus. Zaehner states it was used in Hindu texts for the first time in the Bhagavad Gita, and that the idea therein in verse 2.71–72 to &quot;suppress one&#x27;s desires and ego&quot; is also Buddhist. According to Johnson the term &quot;nirvana&quot; is borrowed from the Buddhists to confuse the Buddhists, by linking the Buddhist nirvana state to the pre-Buddhist Vedic tradition of metaphysical absolute called Brahman.

According to Mahatma Gandhi, the Hindu and Buddhist understanding of &quot;nirvana&quot; are different because the nirvana of the Buddhists is shunyata, emptiness, but the nirvana of the Gita means peace and that is why it is described as brahma-nirvana (oneness with Brahman).

== Jainism ==
The terms &quot;moksa&quot; and &quot;nirvana&quot; are often used interchangeably in the Jain texts.

Uttaradhyana Sutra provides an account of Sudharman – also called Gautama, and one of the disciples of Mahavira – explaining the meaning of nirvana to Kesi, a disciple of Parshva.

==Sikhism==
The concept of liberation as &quot;extinction of suffering&quot;, along with the idea of &quot;sansara&quot; as the &quot;cycle of rebirth&quot; is also part of Sikhism. Nirvana appears in Sikh texts as the term &quot;Nirban&quot;. However, the more common term is &quot;Mukti&quot; or &quot;Moksh&quot;, a salvation concept wherein loving devotion to God is emphasized for liberation from endless cycle of rebirths.
In Sikhism Nirvana is not an after life concept but a goal for the living. Furthermore, Sikh nirvana/mukti is achieved through devotion to satguru/truth who sets you free from reincarnation bharam/superstition/false belief.

==Manichaenism==
The term &quot;Nirvana&quot; (also mentioned is &quot;parinirvana&quot;) is in the 13th or 14th century Manichaean work &quot;The great song to Mani&quot; and &quot;The story of the Death of Mani&quot;, referring to the &quot;realm of light&quot;.

==See also==

* Ataraxia
* Baqaa
* Bodhi
* Dzogchen
* God in Buddhism
* Jannah (Islam)
* Jnana
* Monastic silence
* Nirguna
* Nirvana fallacy
* Satori
* Salvation
* Shangri-La
* Yoga
* Zen
== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
== External links ==
* Nibbana-The Mind Stilled Vol. I : Sermons on Nibbana (PDF)
* English translation of the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42927" start="0" end="7" title="Nirvana" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="38" end="42" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="65" end="72" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="168" end="184" title="Indian religions" label="Indian religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="188" end="196" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="198" end="206" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="208" end="215" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="221" end="228" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q326255" start="309" end="320" title="Soteriology" label="salvational"/>
<link wikidata="Q726297" start="353" end="359" title="duḥkha" label="duḥkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993736" start="394" end="401" title="Saṃsāra (Buddhism)" label="saṃsāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="445" end="461" title="Indian religions" label="Indian religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="496" end="502" title="moksha" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="850" end="866" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="925" end="930" title="Ātman (Hinduism)" label="Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="936" end="943" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="962" end="977" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="982" end="989" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256466" start="1119" end="1126" title="nirvana (Buddhism)" label="nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914995" start="1166" end="1176" title="Fetter (Buddhism)" label="10 fetters"/>
<link wikidata="Q545112" start="1437" end="1461" title="Brihadaranyaka Upanishad" label="Brihadaranyaka Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q682958" start="1651" end="1667" title="Bhagavata Purana" label="Bhagavata Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="1729" end="1733" title="Veda" label="Veda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="1742" end="1751" title="Upanishad" label="Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q206945" start="2340" end="2346" title="Sandhi" label="Sandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q267753" start="2444" end="2456" title="retroflexion" label="retroflexion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2585" end="2600" title="Nirvana_(Buddhism)#Etymology" label="interpretations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456621" start="2603" end="2616" title="L. S. Cousins" label="L. S. Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="2958" end="2974" title="Indian religions" label="Indian religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="2977" end="2985" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="2987" end="2994" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2996" end="3004" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="3010" end="3017" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q173324" start="3117" end="3124" title="samsara" label="samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q726297" start="3153" end="3162" title="Dukkha" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q507662" start="3203" end="3210" title="sādhanā" label="sādhanā"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="3960" end="3973" title="Bhagavad Gita" label="Bhagavad Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="3993" end="4004" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="4563" end="4574" title="Vedas" label="Vedic texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q755990" start="4735" end="4740" title="Rishi" label="Rishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173324" start="5325" end="5332" title="Saṃsāra" label="Saṃsāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="5432" end="5443" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="5591" end="5596" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993736" start="5902" end="5909" title="Saṃsāra (Buddhism)" label="saṃsāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q169010" start="5995" end="6012" title="Four Noble Truths" label="Four Noble Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q185514" start="6057" end="6077" title="Noble Eightfold Path" label="Noble Eightfold Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="6186" end="6195" title="Enlightenment in Buddhism" label="awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q375237" start="6288" end="6299" title="parinirvana" label="parinirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8228954" start="6612" end="6616" title="Raga (Buddhism)" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206724" start="6650" end="6656" title="dvesha" label="dvesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053923" start="6690" end="6696" title="Avidyā (Buddhism)" label="avidyā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672829" start="6712" end="6716" title="Moha (Buddhism)" label="moha"/>
<link wikidata="Q488506" start="7124" end="7130" title="anatta" label="anatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q546054" start="7325" end="7332" title="sunyata" label="sunyata"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435836" start="7867" end="7884" title="Nirvana Upanishad" label="Nirvana Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="8036" end="8041" title="atman (Hinduism)" label="Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="9446" end="9453" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="10079" end="10093" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q546054" start="10209" end="10217" title="shunyata" label="shunyata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175425" start="10375" end="10380" title="Moksa (Jainism)" label="moksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006151" start="10449" end="10459" title="Jain texts" label="Jain texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400271" start="10633" end="10640" title="Parshva" label="Parshva"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="10816" end="10823" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="11418" end="11428" title="Manichaenism" label="Manichaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192850" start="11534" end="11560" title="Pleroma" label="&amp;quot;realm of light&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q262568" start="11579" end="11587" title="Ataraxia" label="Ataraxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748624" start="11590" end="11595" title="Baqaa" label="Baqaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="11598" end="11603" title="Bodhi" label="Bodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q849734" start="11606" end="11614" title="Dzogchen" label="Dzogchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337894" start="11617" end="11632" title="God in Buddhism" label="God in Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q835143" start="11635" end="11641" title="Jannah" label="Jannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191096" start="11652" end="11657" title="Jnana" label="Jnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285990" start="11660" end="11676" title="Monastic silence" label="Monastic silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363102" start="11679" end="11686" title="Nirguna" label="Nirguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q898603" start="11689" end="11704" title="Nirvana fallacy" label="Nirvana fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q584580" start="11707" end="11713" title="Satori" label="Satori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11716" end="11725" title="Salvation#Indian religions" label="Salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q464520" start="11728" end="11738" title="Shangri-La" label="Shangri-La"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="11741" end="11745" title="Yoga" label="Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="11748" end="11751" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21238" wikidata="Q645" url="?curid=21238" title="Neva">
<text>The Neva ( , ; ) is a river in northwestern Russia flowing from Lake Ladoga through the western part of Leningrad Oblast (historical region of Ingria) to the Neva Bay of the Gulf of Finland. Despite its modest length of , it is the fourth-largest river in Europe in terms of average discharge (after the Volga, the Danube and the Rhine).

The Neva is the only river flowing from Lake Ladoga. It flows through the city of Saint Petersburg, the three smaller towns of Shlisselburg, Kirovsk and Otradnoye, and dozens of settlements. It is navigable throughout and is part of the Volga–Baltic Waterway and White Sea–Baltic Canal. It is the site of many major historical events, including the Battle of the Neva in 1240 which gave Alexander Nevsky his name, the founding of Saint Petersburg in 1703, and the Siege of Leningrad by the German army during World War II. The river played a vital role in trade between Byzantium and Scandinavia.

==Etymology==
The earliest people in recorded history known to have inhabited the area are the Finnic people. The word &quot;Neva&quot; is widespread in Finnic languages, having quite cognate meanings. In Finnish it means poor fen, in Karelian: watercourse and in Estonian (as &quot;nõva&quot;): waterway.

It has been postulated the name could derive from Indo-European adjective &quot;newā&quot; which means new – the river began its flow some time between 2000 BC and 1250 BC. However, the local place names with such influence coincide with Scandinavian traders and Slavs&#x27; first main settlement in the region, in the 8th century AD.

==Description==
===History of the delta===
In the Paleozoic, 300–400 million years ago, all the delta region was covered by a sea. Modern relief, eminences, were formed by glacial scouring. Its retreat formed the Littorina Sea, the level of which was higher than its successor the Baltic Sea. Then, the Tosna was flowing in the modern lower half of the Neva as today, into the Litorinal Sea. In the north of the Karelian Isthmus, the sea was united by a wide strait with Lake Ladoga. The Mga then flowed to the east, into Lake Ladoga, near the modern source of the Neva. Thus the Mga then was separate from the Tosna/lower-Neva basin.

Near the modern Lake Ladoga, by glacial rebound land rose faster, and an endorheic lake briefly formed. This overspilled, eventually the whole Mga valley and thus broke into the western valley (the valley of the Tosna/lower-Neva). The Ivanovo rapids of the modern Neva were created at the breakthrough. According to early books, the breakthrough may have been about 2000 BC, but according to more recent research, this happened at 1410–1250 BC, making the river rather young.

The valley is lined with glacial and post-glacial sediments and has changed little over 2,500 years. The delta was formed at that time, technically a pseudodelta, as not from accumulation of river material but by scouring past sediments.

===Topography and hydrography===
The Neva flows out of Lake Ladoga near Shlisselburg, flows through Neva&#x27;s lowlands and discharges into the Baltic Sea in the Gulf of Finland. It has a length of , and the shortest distance from the source to the mouth is . The river banks are low and steep, on average about and at the mouth. There are three sharp turns: the Ivanovskye rapids, at Nevsky Forest Park of the Ust-Slavyanka region (the so-called &quot;Crooked Knee&quot;), and near the Smolny Institute, below the mouth of the river Okhta. The river declines in elevation between source and mouth. At one point the river crosses a moraine ridge and forms the Ivanovskye rapids. There, at the beginning of the rapids, is the narrowest part of the river: . The average flow rate in the rapids is about . The average width along the river is . The widest places, at , are in the delta, near the gates of the marine trading port, at the end of the Ivanovskye rapids near the confluence of the river Tosna, and near the island Fabrinchny near the source. The average depth is ; the maximum of is reached above the Liteyny Bridge, and the minimum of is in Ivanovskye rapids.

In the Neva basin, rainfall greatly exceeds evaporation; the latter accounts for only 37.7 percent of the water consumption from the Neva and the remaining 62.3 percent is water runoff. Since 1859, the largest volume of was observed in 1924 and the lowest in 1900 at . The average annual discharge is or on average. Due to the uniform water flow from Lake Ladoga to the Neva over the whole year, there are almost no floods and corresponding water rise in the spring. The Neva freezes throughout from early December to early April. The ice thickness is within Saint Petersburg and in other areas. Ice congestion may form in winter in the upper reaches of the river, this sometimes causes upstream floods. Of the total ice volume of Lake Ladoga, , less than 5 percent enters the Neva. The average summer water temperature is , and the swimming season lasts only about 1.5 months. The water is fresh, with medium turbidity; the average salinity is 61.3 mg/L and the calcium bicarbonate content is 7 mg/L.

===Basin, tributaries and distributaries===
The basin area of Neva is 5,000 km2, including the pools of Lake Ladoga and Onega (281,000 km2). The basin contains 26,300 lakes and has a complex hydrological network of more than 48,300 rivers, however only 26 flow directly into Neva. The main tributaries are Mga, Tosna, Izhora, Slavyanka and Murzinka on the left, and Okhta and Chyornaya Rechka on the right side of Neva.

The hydrological network had been altered by the development of Saint Petersburg through its entire history. When it was founded in 1703, the area was low and swampy and required construction of canals and ponds for drainage. The earth excavated during their construction was used to raise the city. At the end of the 19th century, the delta of Neva consisted of 48 rivers and canals and 101 islands. The most significant distributaries of the delta are listed in the table. Before construction of the Obvodny Canal, the left tributary of that area was the Volkovka; its part at the confluence is now called Monastyrka. The Ladoga Canal starts at the root of Neva and connects it along the southern coast of Lake Ladoga with the Volkhov.

Some canals of the delta were filled over time, so that only 42 islands remained by 1972, all within the city limits of St. Petersburg. The largest islands are Vasilyevsky at , Petrogradsky at , Krestovsky at , and Dekabristov at ; others include Zayachy, Yelagin and Kamenny Islands. At the source of the Neva, near Shlisselburg, there are the two small islands of Orekhovy and Fabrichny. Island Glavryba lies up the river, above the town of Otradnoye.

=== Flora and fauna ===
There is almost no aquatic vegetation in Neva. The river banks mostly consist of sand, podsol, gleysols, peat, and boggy peat soils. Several centuries ago, the whole territory of the Neva lowland was covered by pine and spruce mossy forests. They were gradually reduced by the fires and cutting for technical needs. Extensive damage was caused during World War II: in Saint Petersburg, the forests were reduced completely, and in the upper reaches down to 40 to 50 percent. Forest were replanted after the war with spruce, pine, cedar, Siberian larch, oak, Norway maple, elm, America, ash, apple tree, mountain ash and other species. The shrubs include barberry, lilac, jasmine, hazel, honeysuckle, hawthorn, rose hip, viburnum, juniper, elder, shadbush and many others.

Nowadays, the upper regions of the river are dominated by birch and pine-birch grass-shrub forests and in the middle regions there are swampy pine forests.

In St. Petersburg, along the Neva, there are many gardens and parks, including the Summer Garden, Field of Mars, Rumyantsev, Smolny, Alexander Gardens, Garden of the Alexander Nevsky Lavra and many others.

Because of the rapid flow, cold water and lack of quiet pools and aquatic vegetation the diversity of fish species in Neva is small. Permanent residents include such undemanding to environment species as perch, ruffe and roaches. Many fish species are transitory, of which commercial value have smelt, vendace and partly salmon.

===Floods===

Floods in St. Petersburg are usually caused by the overflow of the delta of Neva and by surging water in the eastern part of Neva Bay. They are registered when the water rises above with respect to a gauge at the Mining Institute. More than 300 floods occurred after the city was founded in 1703. Three of them were catastrophic: on 7 November 1824, when water rose to ; on 23 September 1924 when it reached , and 10 September 1777 when it rose to . However, a much larger flood of was described in 1691.

Besides flooding as a result of tidal waves, in 1903, 1921 and 1956 floods were caused by the melting of snow.

===Ecological condition===
The Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of Russia classifies the Neva as a &quot;heavily polluted&quot; river. The main pollutants include copper, zinc, manganese, nitrites and nitrogen. The dirtiest tributaries of the Neva are the Mga, Slavyanka, Ohta, and Chernaya. Hundreds of factories pour wastewater into the Neva within St. Petersburg, and petroleum is regularly transported along the river. The annual influx of pollutants is 80,000 tonnes, and the heaviest polluters are Power-and-heating Plant 2 (), &quot;Plastpolymer&quot; and &quot;Obukhov State Plant&quot;. The biggest polluters in the Leningrad Oblast are the cities of Shlisselburg, Kirovsk and Otradnoye, as well as the Kirov thermal power station. More than 40 oil spills are registered on the river every year.

In 2008, the Federal Service of St. Petersburg announced that no beach of the Neva was fit for swimming.

Cleaning of wastewater in Saint Petersburg started in 1979; by 1997, about 74% was purified. This rose to 85% in 2005, to 91.7% by 2008, and Feliks Karamzinov expected it to reach almost 100% by 2011 with the completion of the expansion of the main sewerage plant.

== History ==

=== Before 1700 ===
Many sites of ancient people, up to nine thousand years old, were found within the territory of the Neva basin. It is believed that around twelve thousand years BC, Finnic people (Votes and Izhorians) moved to this area from the Ural Mountains.

In the 8th and 9th centuries AD, the area was inhabited by the East Slavs who were mainly engaged in slash and burn agriculture, hunting and fishing. From the 8th to 13th centuries, Neva provided a waterway from Scandinavia to the Byzantine Empire. In the 9th century, the area belonged to Veliky Novgorod. The Neva was already mentioned in the &quot;Life of Alexander Nevsky&quot; (13th century). At that time, Veliky Novgorod was engaged in nearly constant wars with Sweden. A major battle occurred on 15 July 1240 at the confluence of the Izhora and Neva Rivers. The Russian army, led by the 20-year-old Prince Alexander Yaroslavich, aimed to stop the planned Swedish invasion. The Swedish army was defeated; the prince showed personal courage in combat and received the honorary name of &quot;Nevsky&quot;.

As a result of the Russian defeat in the Ingrian War of 1610–17 and the concomitant Treaty of Stolbovo, the area of the Neva River became part of Swedish Ingria. Beginning in 1642, the capital of Ingria was Nyen, a city near the Nyenschantz fortress. Because of financial and religious oppression, much of the Orthodox population left the Neva region, emptying 60 percent of the villages by 1620. The abandoned areas became populated by people from the Karelian Isthmus and Savonia.
===Russian period===

As a result of the Great Northern War of 1700–21, the valley of Neva River became part of Russian Empire. On 16 May 1703, the city of St. Petersburg was founded in the mouth of Neva and became capital of Russia in 1712. Neva became the central part of the city. It was cleaned, intersected with canals and enclosed with embankments. In 1715, construction began of the first wooden embankment between the Admiralty building and the Summer Garden. In the early 1760s works started to cover it in granite and to build bridges across Neva and its canals and tributaries, such as the Hermitage Bridge.

From 1727 to 1916, the temporary Isaakievsky pontoon bridge was early constructed between the modern Saint Isaac&#x27;s Square and Vasilievsky Island. A similar, but much longer Trinity pontoon bridge, which spanned , was brought from the Summer Garden to Petrogradsky Island. The first permanent bridge across Neva, Blagoveshchensky Bridge, was opened in 1850, and the second, Liteyny Bridge, came into operation in 1879.

In 1858, a &quot;Joint-stock company St. Petersburg water supply&quot; was established, which built the first water supply network in the city. A two-stage water purification station was constructed in 1911. The development of the sewerage system began only in 1920, after the October Revolution, and by 1941, the sewerage network was long.

Every winter from 1895 to 1910, electric tramways were laid on the ice of the river, connecting the Senate Square, Vasilievsky island, Palace Embankment and other parts of the city. The power was supplied through the rails and a top cable supported by wooden piles frozen into the ice. The service was highly successful and ran without major accidents except for a few failures in the top electrical wires. The trams ran at the speed of and could carry 20 passengers per carriage. The carriages were converted from the used horsecars. About 900,000 passengers were transported over a regular season between 20 January and 21 March. The sparking of contacts at the top wires amused spectators in the night.
=== Soviet and modern periods ===
The first concrete bridge across Neva, the Volodarsky Bridge, was built in 1936. During World War II, from 8 September 1941 to 27 January 1944, Leningrad was in the devastating German Siege. On 30 August 1941, the German army captured Mga and came to Neva. On 8 September Germans captured Shlisselburg and cut all land communications and waterways to St. Petersburg (then Leningrad). The siege was partly relieved in January 1943, and ended on 27 January 1944.

A river station was built above the Volodarsky Bridge in 1970 which could accept 10 large ships at a time. Wastewater treatment plants were built in Krasnoselsk in 1978, on the Belyi Island in 1979–83, and in Olgino in 1987–94. The South-West Wastewater Treatment Plant was constructed in 2003–05.

== Commercial use ==
Neva has very few shoals and its banks are steep, making the river suited for navigation. Utkino Backwaters were constructed in the late 19th century to park unused ships. Neva is part of the major Volga–Baltic Waterway and White Sea – Baltic Canal, however it has relatively low transport capacity because of its width, depth and bridges. Neva is available for vessels with capacity below 5,000 tonnes. Major transported goods include timber from Arkhangelsk and Vologda; apatite, granite and diabase from Kola Peninsula; cast iron and steel from Cherepovets; coal from Donetsk and Kuznetsk; pyrite from Ural; potassium chloride from Solikamsk; oil from Volga region. There are also many passenger routes to Moscow, Astrakhan, Rostov, Perm, Nizhny Novgorod, Valaam and other destinations. Navigation season on the Neva River runs from late April to November.

To the west of Shlisselburg, an oil pipeline runs under the river. The pipeline is part of the Baltic Pipeline System, which provides oil from Timan-Pechora plate, West Siberia, Ural, Kazakhstan and Primorsk to the Gulf of Finland. The long pipeline lies below the river bottom and delivers about 42 million tonnes of oil a year.

Near the Ladozhsky Bridge there is an underwater tunnel to host a gas pipeline Nord Stream 1. The tunnel has a diameter of and a length of and is laid at a maximum depth of .

Neva is the main source of water (96 percent) of St. Petersburg and its suburbs. From 26 June 2009, St. Petersburg started processing the drinking water with ultraviolet light, abandoning the use of chlorine for disinfection. The Neva also has developed fishery, both commercial and recreational.

==Bridges==

Leningrad Oblast:
* Ladozhsky Bridge – built in 1981 as a movable multi-span metal bridge on stone piers.
* Kuzminsky Railway Bridge – built in 1940 as a movable three-segment railway bridge.
St. Petersburg:
* Big Obukhovsky Bridge – built in 2004 as a cable-stayed bridge connecting Obukhovsky Defense avenue with Oktyabrskaya Embankment.
* Volodarsky Bridge – built in 1936 as a movable concrete bridge connecting Narodnaya and Ivanovo streets.
* Finland Railway Bridge – built in 1912 as a movable, metallic, double-segment railway bridge.
St. Petersburg, Neva delta
* Alexander Nevsky Bridge – built in 1965 as a movable concrete bridge connecting Alexander Nevsky Square and Zanevsky Avenue.
* Peter the Great Bridge – built in 1911 as a movable, three-segment, metal bridge connecting the historic center of St. Petersburg with the Malaya Ohta district.
* Liteyny Bridge (formerly the bridge of Alexander II) – built in 1879 as a movable, six-segment, arch bridge connecting Liteyny Prospekt with Academician Lebedev Str. and Vyborg.
* Trinity Bridge (formerly the Kirov bridge) – built in 1903 as a five-segment movable metal bridge connecting Suvorov Square, Trinity Square and Kamennoostrovsky Prospekt.
* Palace Bridge – built in 1916 as a movable, five-segment, iron bridge. Its opened central span is one of the city symbols. Connects Nevsky Prospekt with the Exchange Square and Vasilievsky Island.
* Blagoveshchensky Bridge (formerly the Lieutenant Schmidt Bridge) – built in 1850 as a movable seven-segment iron bridge connecting Labour Square with the 7th Line of Vasilievsky Island.

Construction of the Novo-Admiralteisky Bridge, a movable drawbridge across the river, has been approved, but will not commence before 2011.

== Attractions ==
Whereas most tourist attractions of Neva are located within St. Petersburg, there are several historical places upstream, in the Leningrad Oblast. They include the fortress Oreshek, which was built in 1323 on the Orekhovy Island at the source of Neva River, south-west of the Petrokrepost Bay, near the city of Shlisselburg. The waterfront of Schlisselburg has a monument of Peter I. In the city, there are Blagoveshchensky Cathedral (1764–95) and a still functioning Orthodox church of St. Nicholas, built in 1739. On the river bank stands the Church of the Intercession. Raised in 2007, it is a wooden replica of a historical church which stood on the southern shore of Lake Onega. That church was constructed in 1708 and it burned down in 1963. It is believed to be the forerunner of the famous Kizhi Pogost.

Old Ladoga Canal, built in the first half of the 18th century, is a water transport route along the shore of Lake Ladoga which is connecting the River Volkhov and Neva. Some of its historical structures are preserved, such as a four-chamber granite sluice (1836) and a bridge (1832).

==Notable incidents==
On 21 August 1963, a Soviet twinjet Tu-124 airliner performed an emergency water landing on the Neva near the Finland Railway Bridge. The plane took off from Tallinn-Ülemiste Airport (TLL) at 08:55 on 21 August 1963 with 45 passengers and seven crew on board and was scheduled to land at Moscow-Vnukovo (VKO). After liftoff, the crew noticed that the nose gear undercarriage did not retract, and the ground control diverted the flight to Leningrad (LED) because of fog at Tallinn. While circling above St. Petersburg at the altitude of , under unclear circumstances (lack of fuel was one of the factors), both engines stalled. The crew performed an emergency landing on the Neva River, barely missing some of its bridges and an 1898-built steam tugboat. The tugboat rushed to the plane and towed it to the shore. The plane&#x27;s pilot was at first fired from his job but was later reinstated and awarded the Order of the Red Star.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Neva River </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645" start="4" end="8" title="Neva" label="Neva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="22" end="27" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="44" end="50" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15288" start="64" end="75" title="Lake Ladoga" label="Lake Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191" start="104" end="120" title="Leningrad Oblast" label="Leningrad Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688" start="143" end="149" title="Ingria" label="Ingria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27698" start="158" end="166" title="Neva Bay" label="Neva Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="174" end="189" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="256" end="262" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="283" end="292" title="Discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="304" end="309" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="315" end="321" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="330" end="335" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="421" end="437" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339" start="466" end="478" title="Shlisselburg" label="Shlisselburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273" start="480" end="487" title="Kirovsk, Leningrad Oblast" label="Kirovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15323" start="492" end="501" title="Otradnoye, Kirovsky District, Leningrad Oblast" label="Otradnoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q31263" start="576" end="597" title="Volga–Baltic Waterway" label="Volga–Baltic Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q461457" start="602" end="624" title="White Sea–Baltic Canal" label="White Sea–Baltic Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q521799" start="688" end="706" title="Battle of the Neva" label="Battle of the Neva"/>
<link wikidata="Q174044" start="726" end="742" title="Alexander Nevsky" label="Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="803" end="821" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="Siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="848" end="860" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="909" end="918" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="923" end="934" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745748" start="1032" end="1045" title="Baltic Finns" label="Finnic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="1090" end="1106" title="Finnic languages" label="Finnic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="1121" end="1128" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="1142" end="1149" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="1159" end="1167" title="poor fen" label="poor fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33557" start="1172" end="1180" title="Karelian language" label="Karelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="1201" end="1209" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="1294" end="1307" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="1401" end="1403" title="Before Christ" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="1630" end="1639" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006740" start="1793" end="1806" title="Littorina Sea" label="Littorina Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785181" start="1883" end="1888" title="Tosna" label="Tosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q209010" start="1992" end="2008" title="Karelian Isthmus" label="Karelian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15288" start="2051" end="2062" title="Lake Ladoga" label="Lake Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632968" start="2068" end="2071" title="Mga (river)" label="Mga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161410" start="2248" end="2263" title="glacial rebound" label="glacial rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q695793" start="2459" end="2465" title="rapids" label="rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339" start="3004" end="3016" title="Shlisselburg" label="Shlisselburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="3077" end="3087" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="3095" end="3110" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q728971" start="3420" end="3436" title="Smolny Institute" label="Smolny Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369669" start="3467" end="3472" title="Okhta" label="Okhta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="3565" end="3572" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865088" start="4043" end="4057" title="Liteyny Bridge" label="Liteyny Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q415144" start="5067" end="5086" title="calcium bicarbonate" label="calcium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632968" start="5413" end="5416" title="Mga (river)" label="Mga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785181" start="5418" end="5423" title="Tosna" label="Tosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q50844" start="5425" end="5431" title="Izhora" label="Izhora"/>
<link wikidata="Q50885" start="5433" end="5442" title="Slavyanka (river)" label="Slavyanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369669" start="5473" end="5478" title="Okhta" label="Okhta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970390" start="5483" end="5499" title="Chyornaya Rechka (Saint Petersburg)" label="Chyornaya Rechka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515754" start="6030" end="6043" title="Obvodny Canal" label="Obvodny Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551825" start="6152" end="6164" title="Ladoga Canal" label="Ladoga Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15245" start="6257" end="6264" title="Volkhov" label="Volkhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q27600" start="6427" end="6438" title="Vasilyevsky Island" label="Vasilyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582524" start="6444" end="6456" title="Petrogradsky Island" label="Petrogradsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445053" start="6462" end="6472" title="Krestovsky Island" label="Krestovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323647" start="6482" end="6493" title="Dekabristov Island" label="Dekabristov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588376" start="6514" end="6521" title="Zayachy Island" label="Zayachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211292" start="6535" end="6549" title="Kamenny Island" label="Kamenny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q15323" start="6710" end="6719" title="Otradnoye, Kirovsky District, Leningrad Oblast" label="Otradnoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q192813" start="6833" end="6839" title="podsol" label="podsol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485878" start="6841" end="6849" title="gleysols" label="gleysols"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="6851" end="6855" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="6957" end="6961" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145992" start="6966" end="6972" title="Norway spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="6973" end="6977" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7097" end="7109" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="7275" end="7280" title="Cedrus" label="cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q754765" start="7282" end="7296" title="Larix sibirica" label="Siberian larch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="7298" end="7301" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q26745" start="7303" end="7315" title="Acer platanoides" label="Norway maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="7317" end="7320" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="7331" end="7334" title="Fraxinus" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="7336" end="7341" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924866" start="7348" end="7360" title="mountain ash" label="mountain ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q158503" start="7399" end="7407" title="Berberis" label="barberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157449" start="7409" end="7414" title="Syringa" label="lilac"/>
<link wikidata="Q82014" start="7416" end="7423" title="jasmine" label="jasmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145889" start="7425" end="7430" title="hazel" label="hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156047" start="7432" end="7443" title="honeysuckle" label="honeysuckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q132557" start="7445" end="7453" title="Crataegus" label="hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q46740" start="7455" end="7463" title="rose hip" label="rose hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q158492" start="7465" end="7473" title="viburnum" label="viburnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="7475" end="7482" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131448" start="7484" end="7489" title="Sambucus" label="elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q156957" start="7491" end="7499" title="Amelanchier" label="shadbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="7576" end="7581" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229234" start="7758" end="7771" title="Summer Garden" label="Summer Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194336" start="7773" end="7786" title="Field of Mars (Saint Petersburg)" label="Field of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330130" start="7800" end="7806" title="Smolny Convent" label="Smolny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162435" start="7808" end="7824" title="Alexander Garden (Saint Petersburg)" label="Alexander Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q946428" start="7841" end="7863" title="Alexander Nevsky Lavra" label="Alexander Nevsky Lavra"/>
<link wikidata="Q600262" start="8086" end="8091" title="perch" label="perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q187981" start="8093" end="8098" title="ruffe" label="ruffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180447" start="8103" end="8110" title="Rutilus" label="roaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q840795" start="8177" end="8182" title="European smelt" label="smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q754061" start="8184" end="8191" title="Coregonus albula" label="vendace"/>
<link wikidata="Q184238" start="8203" end="8209" title="Salmonidae" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27698" start="8351" end="8359" title="Neva Bay" label="Neva Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495829" start="8439" end="8455" title="Saint Petersburg Mining Institute" label="Mining Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045317" start="8895" end="8911" title="Hydrometeorology" label="Hydrometeorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="9040" end="9046" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="9048" end="9052" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="9054" end="9063" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q72157355" start="9065" end="9072" title="nitrite" label="nitrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="9078" end="9086" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="9248" end="9257" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012301" start="9446" end="9465" title="Obukhov State Plant" label="Obukhov State Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q200297" start="9595" end="9616" title="thermal power station" label="thermal power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745748" start="10255" end="10268" title="Baltic Finnic peoples" label="Finnic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q836660" start="10270" end="10275" title="Votians" label="Votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q653956" start="10280" end="10289" title="Izhorians" label="Izhorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="10319" end="10333" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="10399" end="10409" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="10437" end="10451" title="slash and burn" label="slash and burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="10567" end="10583" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="10626" end="10641" title="Veliky Novgorod" label="Veliky Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980019" start="10687" end="10711" title="Life of Alexander Nevsky" label="Life of Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q174044" start="10950" end="10971" title="Alexander Nevsky" label="Alexander Yaroslavich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962709" start="11189" end="11200" title="Ingrian War" label="Ingrian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q928848" start="11232" end="11250" title="Treaty of Stolbovo" label="Treaty of Stolbovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564354" start="11294" end="11308" title="Swedish Ingria" label="Swedish Ingria"/>
<link wikidata="Q384167" start="11377" end="11388" title="Nyenschantz" label="Nyenschantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="11458" end="11466" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q209010" start="11601" end="11617" title="Karelian Isthmus" label="Karelian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q853706" start="11622" end="11629" title="Savonia (historical province)" label="Savonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="11672" end="11690" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="11743" end="11757" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q359185" start="12057" end="12075" title="Admiralty building, Saint Petersburg" label="Admiralty building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229234" start="12084" end="12097" title="Summer Garden" label="Summer Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="12147" end="12154" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562552" start="12232" end="12248" title="Hermitage Bridge" label="Hermitage Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562984" start="12284" end="12310" title="Isaakievsky Bridge" label="Isaakievsky pontoon bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352588" start="12352" end="12377" title="Saint Isaac&amp;#x27;s Square" label="Saint Isaac&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q27600" start="12382" end="12400" title="Vasilievsky Island" label="Vasilievsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582524" start="12507" end="12526" title="Petrogradsky Island" label="Petrogradsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q649396" start="12568" end="12591" title="Blagoveshchensky Bridge" label="Blagoveshchensky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865088" start="12629" end="12643" title="Liteyny Bridge" label="Liteyny Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="12952" end="12970" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="13058" end="13062" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995249" start="13117" end="13130" title="Senate Square (Saint Petersburg)" label="Senate Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q27600" start="13132" end="13150" title="Vasilievsky island" label="Vasilievsky island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317742" start="13152" end="13169" title="Palace Embankment" label="Palace Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q832003" start="13541" end="13549" title="horsecar" label="horsecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321236" start="13800" end="13817" title="Volodarsky Bridge" label="Volodarsky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="13934" end="13946" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="German Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334119" start="14428" end="14434" title="Olgino" label="Olgino"/>
<link wikidata="Q31263" start="14737" end="14758" title="Volga–Baltic Waterway" label="Volga–Baltic Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q461457" start="14763" end="14787" title="White Sea – Baltic Canal" label="White Sea – Baltic Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875" start="14987" end="14998" title="Arkhangelsk Oblast" label="Arkhangelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015" start="15003" end="15010" title="Vologda Oblast" label="Vologda"/>
<link wikidata="Q178397" start="15012" end="15019" title="apatite" label="apatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="15021" end="15028" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q753016" start="15033" end="15040" title="diabase" label="diabase"/>
<link wikidata="Q165608" start="15046" end="15060" title="Kola Peninsula" label="Kola Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="15062" end="15071" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="15076" end="15081" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144" start="15087" end="15098" title="Cherepovets" label="Cherepovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q43070" start="15110" end="15117" title="Donetsk" label="Donetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q155947" start="15122" end="15130" title="Kuznetsk" label="Kuznetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="15132" end="15138" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="15150" end="15168" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q196384" start="15174" end="15183" title="Solikamsk" label="Solikamsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="15194" end="15199" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="15248" end="15254" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927" start="15256" end="15265" title="Astrakhan" label="Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193342" start="15267" end="15273" title="Rostov, Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q915" start="15275" end="15279" title="Perm, Russia" label="Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q891" start="15281" end="15296" title="Nizhny Novgorod" label="Nizhny Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q673167" start="15298" end="15304" title="Valaam" label="Valaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q805798" start="15495" end="15517" title="Baltic Pipeline System" label="Baltic Pipeline System"/>
<link wikidata="Q856923" start="15564" end="15576" title="West Siberian economic region" label="West Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q690566" start="15578" end="15582" title="Ural economic region" label="Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="15584" end="15594" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307" start="15599" end="15607" title="Primorsk, Leningrad Oblast" label="Primorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562907" start="15740" end="15756" title="Ladozhsky Bridge" label="Ladozhsky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="15801" end="15809" title="pipeline transport" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q154125" start="15810" end="15823" title="Nord Stream 1" label="Nord Stream 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191" start="16218" end="16234" title="Leningrad Oblast" label="Leningrad Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562907" start="16238" end="16254" title="Ladozhsky Bridge" label="Ladozhsky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q787417" start="16276" end="16283" title="Moveable bridge" label="movable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494544" start="16428" end="16449" title="Big Obukhovsky Bridge" label="Big Obukhovsky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q158555" start="16471" end="16490" title="cable-stayed bridge" label="cable-stayed bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321236" start="16560" end="16577" title="Volodarsky Bridge" label="Volodarsky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562936" start="16667" end="16689" title="Finland Railway Bridge" label="Finland Railway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q838925" start="16790" end="16813" title="Alexander Nevsky Bridge" label="Alexander Nevsky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q891580" start="16917" end="16939" title="Peter the Great Bridge" label="Peter the Great Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865088" start="17080" end="17094" title="Liteyny Bridge" label="Liteyny Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007468" start="17199" end="17215" title="Liteyny Prospekt" label="Liteyny Prospekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="17250" end="17256" title="Vyborg" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060757" start="17260" end="17274" title="Trinity Bridge (Saint Petersburg)" label="Trinity Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211220" start="17404" end="17429" title="Kamennoostrovsky Prospekt" label="Kamennoostrovsky Prospekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q148970" start="17433" end="17446" title="Palace Bridge" label="Palace Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q382500" start="17565" end="17580" title="Nevsky Prospekt" label="Nevsky Prospekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27600" start="17610" end="17628" title="Vasilievsky Island" label="Vasilievsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q649396" start="17632" end="17655" title="Blagoveshchensky Bridge" label="Blagoveshchensky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562986" start="17839" end="17864" title="Novo-Admiralteisky Bridge" label="Novo-Admiralteisky Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23383" start="17876" end="17886" title="drawbridge" label="drawbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339" start="18151" end="18158" title="Shlisselburg" label="Oreshek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339" start="18289" end="18301" title="Shlisselburg" label="Shlisselburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q477462" start="18776" end="18788" title="Kizhi Pogost" label="Kizhi Pogost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551825" start="18791" end="18807" title="Ladoga Canal" label="Old Ladoga Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160469" start="19134" end="19140" title="Tupolev Tu-124" label="Tu-124"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164719" start="19173" end="19186" title="water landing" label="water landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562936" start="19208" end="19230" title="Finland Railway Bridge" label="Finland Railway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="19256" end="19263" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q630524" start="19282" end="19285" title="Lennart Meri Tallinn Airport" label="TLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="19386" end="19392" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q273462" start="19402" end="19405" title="Vnukovo International Airport" label="VKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="19498" end="19512" title="Air traffic control" label="ground control"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="19536" end="19545" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q690122" start="19547" end="19550" title="Pulkovo Airport" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="19563" end="19566" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="19843" end="19850" title="tugboat" label="tugboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q695106" start="20007" end="20028" title="Order of the Red Star" label="Order of the Red Star"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21240" wikidata="Q20165" url="?curid=21240" title="Nissan">
<text>, branded as Nissan Motor Corporation is a Japanese multinational automobile manufacturer headquartered in Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. The company sells its vehicles under the &quot;Nissan&quot; and &quot;Infiniti&quot; brands, and formerly the &quot;Datsun&quot; brand, with in-house performance tuning products (including cars) under the Nismo and Autech brands. The company traces back to the beginnings of the 20th century, with the Nissan &quot;zaibatsu&quot; or called Nissan Group.

Since 1999, Nissan has been part of the Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance (Mitsubishi joining in 2016), a partnership between Nissan and Mitsubishi Motors of Japan, with Renault of France. , Renault holds a 15% voting stake in Nissan, while Nissan holds the same stake in Renault. Since October 2016, Nissan held a 34% controlling stake in Mitsubishi Motors. In November 2024, Nissan reduced its stake in Mitsubishi Motors from 34% to 24%. Nissan planned to merge with Honda Motor Company in 2026, after an announcement in December 2024. However by February 2025, Nissan announced it would abandon merger plans as the automaker stated that it wanted to become an equal partner to Honda rather than a subsidary.

In 2017, Nissan was the sixth largest automaker in the world, after Toyota, Volkswagen Group, Hyundai Motor Group, General Motors and Ford. With a revenue of $78 billion in 2022, Nissan was the ninth largest automobile maker in the world.

==History==

===Beginnings of Datsun brand name from 1914===
Masujiro Hashimoto (橋本増治郎) founded the on 1 July 1911 in Azabu-Hiroo district of Tokyo. In 1914, the company produced its first car, called the DAT.

The new car&#x27;s model name was an acronym of the company&#x27;s investors&#x27; surnames:
* 

It was renamed to Kaishinsha Motorcar Co., Ltd. in 1918, and again to DAT Jidosha &amp; Co., Ltd. (DAT Motorcar Co.) in 1925. DAT Motors built trucks in addition to the DAT and Datsun passenger cars. The vast majority of its output were trucks, due to an almost non-existent consumer market for passenger cars at the time, and disaster recovery efforts as a result of the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake. Beginning in 1918, the first DAT trucks were produced for the military market. At the same time, Jitsuyo Jidosha Co., Ltd. (jitsuyo means practical use or utility) produced small trucks using parts, and materials imported from the United States.

Commercial operations were placed on hold during Japan&#x27;s participation in World War I, and the company contributed to the war effort.

In 1926, the Tokyo-based DAT Motors merged with the Osaka-based a.k.a. Jitsuyo Jidosha Seizo (established 1919 as a Kubota subsidiary) to become in Osaka until 1932. From 1923 to 1925, the company produced light cars and trucks under the name of Lila. In 1929, DAT Automobile Manufacturing Inc. merged with a separated part of the manufacturing business of IHI Corporation to become Automobile Industries Co., Ltd.

In 1931, DAT came out with a new smaller car, called the Datsun Type 11, the first &quot;Datson&quot;, meaning &quot;Son of DAT&quot;. Later in 1933, after Nissan Group &quot;zaibatsu&quot; took control of DAT Motors, the last syllable of Datson was changed to &quot;sun&quot;, because &quot;son&quot; also means &quot;loss&quot; in Japanese, hence the name .

In 1933, the company name was Nipponized to and was moved to Yokohama.

===Nissan name debut===
In 1928, Yoshisuke Aikawa (nickname: Gisuke/Guisuke Ayukawa) founded the holding company Nihon Sangyo (日本産業 Japan Industries or Nihon Industries). The name &#x27;Nissan&#x27; originated during the 1930s as an abbreviation used on the Tokyo Stock Exchange for Nihon Sangyo. This company was Nissan &quot;Zaibatsu&quot; which included Tobata Casting and Hitachi. At this time Nissan controlled foundries and auto parts businesses, but Aikawa did not enter automobile manufacturing until 1933.

The zaibatsu eventually grew to include 74 firms and became the fourth-largest in Japan during World War II. In 1931, DAT Jidosha Seizo became affiliated with Tobata Casting and was merged into Tobata Casting in 1933. As Tobata Casting was a Nissan company, this was the beginning of Nissan&#x27;s automobile manufacturing.

===Nissan Motor ===
In 1934, Aikawa separated the expanded automobile parts division of Tobata Casting and incorporated it as a new subsidiary, which he named . The shareholders of the new company; however, were not enthusiastic about the prospects of the automobile in Japan, so Aikawa bought out all the Tobata Casting shareholders (using capital from Nihon Industries) in June 1934. At this time, Nissan Motor effectively became owned by Nihon Sangyo and Hitachi.

In 1935, the construction of its Yokohama plant was completed. 44 Datsuns were shipped to Asia, Central and South America. In 1935, the first car manufactured by an integrated assembly system rolled off the line at the Yokohama plant. Nissan built trucks, airplanes, and engines for the Imperial Japanese Army. In November 1937 Nissan moved its headquarters to Xinjing, the capital of Manchukuo. In December the company changed its name to Manchuria Heavy Industries Developing Co (MHID).

In 1940, the first knockdown kits were shipped to Dowa Jidosha Kogyo (Dowa Automobile), one of MHID&#x27;s companies, for assembly. In 1944, the head office was moved to Nihonbashi, Tokyo, and the company name was changed to Nissan Heavy Industries, Ltd., which the company kept through 1949.

===American market and expansion===
DAT had inherited Kubota&#x27;s chief designer, American engineer William R. Gorham. This, along with Aikawa&#x27;s 1908 visit to Detroit, was to greatly affect Nissan&#x27;s future. Although it had always been Aikawa&#x27;s intention to use cutting-edge auto making technology from America, it was Gorham that carried out the plan. Most of the machinery and processes originally came from the United States. When Nissan started to assemble larger vehicles under the &quot;Nissan&quot; brand in 1937, much of the design plans and plant facilities were supplied by the Graham-Paige Company. Nissan also had a Graham license under which passenger cars, buses, and trucks were made.

In his 1986 book &quot;The Reckoning&quot;, David Halberstam states &quot;In terms of technology, Gorham was the founder of the Nissan Motor Company&quot; and that &quot;young Nissan engineers who had never met him spoke of him as a god and could describe in detail his years at the company and his many inventions.&quot;

===Austin Motor Company relations (1937–1960s)===

From 1934, Datsun began to build Austin 7s under license. This operation became the greatest success of Austin&#x27;s overseas licensing of its Seven and marked the beginning of Datsun&#x27;s international success.

In 1952, Nissan entered into a legal agreement with Austin, for Nissan to assemble 2,000 Austins from imported partially assembled sets and sell them in Japan under the Austin trademark. The agreement called for Nissan to make all Austin parts locally within three years, a goal Nissan met. Nissan produced and marketed Austins for seven years. The agreement also gave Nissan the rights to use Austin patents, which Nissan used in developing its own engines for its Datsun line of cars. In 1953, British-built Austins were assembled and sold, but by 1955, the Austin A50 – completely built by Nissan and featuring a new 1489 cc engine — was on the market in Japan. Nissan produced 20,855 Austins from 1953 to 1959.

Nissan leveraged the Austin patents to further develop its own modern engine designs beyond what Austin&#x27;s A- and B-family designs offered. The apex of the Austin-derived engines was the new design A series engine in 1966. In 1967, Nissan introduced its new highly advanced four-cylinder overhead cam (OHC) Nissan L engine, which while similar to Mercedes-Benz OHC designs was a totally new engine designed by Nissan. This engine powered the new Datsun 510, which gained Nissan respect in the worldwide sedan market. Then, in 1969, Nissan introduced the Datsun 240Z sports car which used a six-cylinder variation of the L series engine, developed under Nissan Machinery (Nissan Koki Co., Ltd. 日産工機) in 1964, a former remnant of another auto manufacturer Kurogane. The 240Z was an immediate sensation and lifted Nissan to world-class status in the automobile market.

During the Korean War, Nissan was a major vehicle producer for the U.S. Army. After the Korean War ended, significant levels of anti-communist sentiment existed in Japan. The union that organized Nissan&#x27;s workforce was strong and militant. Nissan was in financial difficulties, and when wage negotiations came, the company took a hard line. Workers were locked out, and several hundred were fired. The Japanese government and the U.S. occupation forces arrested several union leaders. The union ran out of strike funds and was defeated. A new labor union was formed, with Shioji Ichiro one of its leaders. Ichiro had studied at Harvard University on a U.S. government scholarship. He advanced an idea to trade wage cuts against saving 2,000 jobs. Ichiro&#x27;s idea was made part of a new union contract that prioritized productivity. Between 1955 and 1973, Nissan &quot;expanded rapidly on the basis of technical advances supported – and often suggested – by the union.&quot; Ichiro became president of the Confederation of Japan Automobile Workers&#x27; Unions and &quot;the most influential figure in the right wing of the Japanese labor movement.&quot;

===Merger with Prince Motor Company===
In 1966, Nissan merged with the Prince Motor Company, bringing more upmarket cars, including the Skyline and Gloria, into its selection. The Prince name was eventually abandoned, and successive Skylines and Glorias bore the Nissan name. &quot;Prince&quot; was used at the Japanese Nissan dealership &quot;Nissan Prince Shop&quot; until 1999, when &quot;Nissan Red Stage&quot; replaced it. Nissan Red Stage itself has been replaced as of 2007. The Skyline lives on as the G Series of Infiniti.

To capitalize on the renewed investment during 1964 Summer Olympics, Nissan established the gallery on the second and third floors of the San-ai building, located in Ginza, Tokyo. To attract visitors, Nissan started using beautiful female showroom attendants where Nissan held a competition to choose five candidates as the first class of Nissan Miss Fairladys, modeled after &quot;Datsun Demonstrators&quot; from the 1930s who introduced cars. The Fairlady name was used as a link to the popular Broadway play &quot;My Fair Lady&quot; of the era. Miss Fairladys became the marketers of the Datsun Fairlady 1500.

In April 2008, 14 more Miss Fairlady candidates were added, for a total of 45 Nissan Miss Fairlady pageants (22 in Ginza, 8 in Sapporo, 7 in Nagoya, 7 in Fukuoka).

In April 2012, 7 more Miss Fairlady candidates were added, for a total of 48 Nissan Miss Fairlady pageants (26 in Ginza, 8 in Sapporo, 7 in Nagoya, 7 in Fukuoka).

In April 2013, 6 more Miss Fairlady candidates were added to Ginza showroom, for a total of 27 48th Ginza Nissan Miss Fairlady pageants.

=== Expansion into foreign markets ===

In the 1950s Nissan decided to expand into worldwide markets. Nissan management realized, that their Datsun small car line would fulfill an unmet need in markets such as Australia and the world&#x27;s largest car market, the United States. Nissan first showcased the Datsun Bluebird at the 1958 Los Angeles Auto Show. Nissan had entered the Middle East market in 1957 when it sold its first car in Saudi Arabia. The company formed a US subsidiary, Nissan Motor Corporation U.S.A., in Gardena, California in 1960 headed by Yutaka Katayama. Nissan continued to improve the Sedan series with the latest technological advancements and chic Italianate styling for sporty cars such as the Datsun Fairlady roadsters, the race-winning 411 series, the Datsun 510 and the Datsun 240Z. By 1970 Nissan had become one of the world&#x27;s largest exporters of automobiles. In 1970 Teocar was established, which was a Greek assembly plant created in cooperation with Theoharakis.

Nissan Mexicana was established in the early-1960s and commenced manufacturing in 1966 at the Cuernavaca assembly facility, making it Nissan&#x27;s first North American assembly plant. In the wake of the 1973 oil crisis, consumers worldwide, especially in the lucrative US market, began turning to high-quality small economy cars. To meet the growing demand the new Nissan Sunny, the company built new factories in Mexico, Australia, New Zealand, Taiwan, United States, and South Africa. The &quot;Chicken Tax&quot; of 1964 placed a 25 percent tax on commercial vans imported to the United States. Nissan Motor Manufacturing Corporation USA was established in 1980. Nissan, Toyota Motor Corp., and Honda Motor Co. began establishing manufacturing plants in the US in the early-1980s. Nissan&#x27;s initial assembly plant Smyrna assembly plant broke ground in 1980 and at first only built trucks such as the Datsun 720 and the Nissan Hardbody Truck, but has since expanded to produce several car and SUV lines, including the Nissan Altima, the Nissan Maxima, as well as the Rogue, Pathfinder, Infiniti QX60, and the Nissan Leaf all-electric car. The addition of mass-market automobiles was in response to the 1981 Voluntary Export Restraints imposed by the US Government. An engine plant in Decherd, Tennessee followed. Most recently a second assembly plant was established in Canton, Mississippi.

By the early-1980s, Nissan Datsun had long been the best selling Japanese brand in Europe. The Greek manufacturing plant itself was closed. A joint venture with Italy&#x27;s then state-owned Alfa Romeo was also entered in 1980, leading to Italian production of the Nissan Cherry and an Alfa-badged and motorized version, the Alfa Romeo Arna.

In 2001 Nissan established a manufacturing plant in Brazil. In 2005 Nissan added operations in India, through its subsidiary Nissan Motor India Private Limited. With its global alliance partner Renault, Nissan invested $990 million to set up a manufacturing facility in Chennai, catering to the Indian market as well as a base for exports of small cars to Europe.

Nissan sold nearly 520,000 new vehicles in China in 2009 in a joint venture with Dongfeng Motor. To meet increased production targets, Dongfeng-Nissan expanded its production base in Guangzhou, which would become Nissan&#x27;s largest factory around the globe in terms of production capacity. Nissan also has moved and expanded its Nissan Americas Inc. headquarters, moving from Los Angeles to Franklin, Tennessee in the Nashville area.

In the United States, Nissan has been increasing its reliance on sales to daily-rental companies like Enterprise Rent-A-Car or Hertz. In 2016, Nissan&#x27;s rental sales jumped 37% and in 2017 Nissan became the only major automaker to boost rental sales when the Detroit Three cut back less profitable deliveries to daily-rental companies, which traditionally are the biggest customers of domestic automakers.

=== Project 901 ===
Project 901 was an initiative in the mid-1980s, and it represented a desire for Nissan to offer technologically advanced cars by 1990. Known by various names such as P901 Activity, 901 Activity, 901 Plan, 901 Operation, and Project 901, the project began under the leadership of Nissan President Yutaka Kume (1985–1992).

Project 901 was initiated in early 1985 in response to the growing demand for new, technically advanced cars from all Japanese manufacturers. With a market share of around 25% then, Nissan saw a decline to less than 20%, prompting the company to address its shortcomings. Under the banner of &#x27;Aiming to be the world&#x27;s best in technology by the 1990s,&#x27; the plan focused on the technological development of chassis, engines, suspensions, handling, design, and quality improvements for all car models to be introduced before 1990.

===Alliance with Renault===
In 1999, facing severe financial difficulties, Nissan entered an alliance with Renault of France. In June 2001, Renault executive Carlos Ghosn was named chief executive officer of Nissan. In May 2005, Ghosn was named president of Nissan&#x27;s partner company Renault. He was appointed president and CEO of Renault on 6 May 2009.

Under CEO Ghosn&#x27;s &quot;Nissan Revival Plan&quot; (NRP), the company has rebounded in what many leading economists consider to be one of the most spectacular corporate turnarounds in history, catapulting Nissan to record profits and a dramatic revitalization of both its Nissan and Infiniti model line-ups. Ghosn has been recognized in Japan for the company&#x27;s turnaround in the midst of an ailing Japanese economy. Ghosn and the Nissan turnaround were featured in Japanese manga and popular culture. His achievements in revitalizing Nissan were noted by the Japanese government, which awarded him the Japan Medal with Blue Ribbon in 2004.

On 1 April 2017, Ghosn stepped down as CEO of Nissan, while remaining chairman of the company. He was replaced as CEO by his then-deputy Hiroto Saikawa. On 19 November 2018, Ghosn was fired as chairman following his arrest for the alleged under-reporting of his income to Japanese financial authorities. After 108 days in detention, Ghosn was released on bail, but after 29 days he was again detained on new charges (4 April 2019). He had been due to hold a news conference, but instead, his lawyers released a video of Ghosn alleging this 2018-19 Nissan scandal is itself evidence of value destruction and Nissan corporate mismanagement. In September 2019, Saikawa resigned as CEO, following allegations of improper payments received by him. Yasuhiro Yamauchi was appointed as acting CEO. In October 2019, the company appointed Makoto Uchida as its next CEO. On 1 December 2019, Uchida became CEO.

In January 2023, Renault said it intended to transfer almost 30% of its controlling stake in Nissan to a French trust (pending approval by both companies), reducing its shares with voting rights to a minority 15% and, in doing so, matching Nissan shares in Renault to gain equal voting rights. The shareholding and voting ratio of both companies is set to be fixed in the future. The agreement also included Nissan investing in Ampere (a proposed Renault subsidiary for electric cars) and projects in various markets. In February 2023, both companies approved the going-ahead for the shareholding changes. Final details and regulatory clearances for the transaction were set to be completed by the first quarter of 2023 and it would be done by the fourth quarter. The companies also approved joint projects and Nissan&#x27;s Ampere investment. The share transfer was completed in November 2023.

=== Financial difficulties ===

Starting in late-July 2019, Nissan laid off 12,500 employees over three years, citing a 95% year on year net income fall. Hiroto Saikawa, CEO at the time, confirmed the majority of those cuts would be plant workers.

In May 2020, Nissan cut production capacity by 20% due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In mid-2020, the company shut down factories in Indonesia and Spain, and exited the South Korean car market. Nissan pulled out of South Korea by December due to worsening business environment amidst the pandemic and the 2019 boycott of Japanese products in South Korea. Service centers were managed to provide after-sales services such as vehicle quality assurance and parts management for eight years. In November 2020, Nissan reported a $421 million loss in the last quarter due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the scandal concerning Ghosn. According to a spokesperson of Nissan North America, the company had suffered from a strategy of &quot;volume at any cost&quot;, which has been attributed by analysts to Ghosn.

In November 2024, Nissan created an emergency turnaround plan which saw it cut its annual operating profit forecast by 70% to 150 billion yen ($975 million), marking its second downward revision after a 17% cut earlier this year. Nissan also planned to cut 9,000 jobs and cut global production capacity by 20%.

===Attempted merger with Honda===
On 23 December 2024, Nissan officially announced an MOU had been entered to merge with fellow Japanese automaker Honda to become the 3rd largest auto company by sales. Mitsubishi Motors, in which Nissan has 24% ownership, also agreed to join the talks of integration.

In February 2025, Honda and Nissan announced that their boards had voted to end talks to merge. Nissan reportedly backed out of the talks with larger rival Honda after negotiations were complicated by growing differences, including Honda’s proposal that Nissan become a subsidiary.

==Nissan technologies==
In 1982, Nissan&#x27;s first final assembly robots were installed in the Murayama plant, where the then-new March/Micra was assembled. In 1984, the Zama plant began to be robotized; this automation process then continued throughout Nissan&#x27;s factories.

Nissan electric vehicles have been produced intermittently since 1946. In 2010, the Nissan Leaf plug-in battery electric vehicle was introduced; it was the world&#x27;s most sold plug-in electric car for nearly a decade. It was preceded by the Altra and the Hypermini. Until surpassed by Tesla, Nissan was the world&#x27;s largest electric vehicle (EV) manufacturer, with global sales of more than 320,000 all-electric vehicles as of April 2018. In 2022, it was announced that Nissan was intending to create solid-state batteries for electric vehicles.

== Relationships with other car companies ==
In Australia, between 1989 and 1992, Nissan Australia shared models with Ford Australia under a government-backed rationalisation scheme known as the Button Plan, with a version of the Nissan Pintara being sold as the Ford Corsair and a version of the Ford Falcon as the Nissan Ute. A variant of the Nissan Patrol was sold as the Ford Maverick during the 1988–94 model years. In North America, Nissan partnered with Ford from 1993 to 2002 to market the Ohio-built Mercury Villager and the Nissan Quest. The two minivans were virtually identical aside from cosmetic differences. In 2002, Nissan and Ford announced the discontinuation of the arrangement. In Europe, Nissan and Ford Europe partnered to produce the Nissan Terrano II and the badge-engineered Ford Maverick, a mid-size SUV produced at the Nissan Motor Ibérica S.A (NMISA) plant in Barcelona, Spain. The Maverick/Terrano II was a popular vehicle sold throughout Europe and Australasia. It was also sold in Japan as a captive import, with the Nissan model marketed as the Nissan Mistral.

Nissan licensed the Volkswagen Santana. Production began in 1984, at Nissan&#x27;s Zama, Kanagawa plant, and ended in May 1990.

From 1983 to 1987, Nissan cooperated with Alfa Romeo to build the Arna. The goal was for Alfa to compete in the family hatchback market segment, and for Nissan to establish a foothold in the European market. After Alfa Romeo&#x27;s takeover by Fiat, both the car and cooperation were discontinued.

In Europe, General Motors (GM) and Nissan co-operated on the Nissan Primastar, a light commercial vehicle. The high roof version is built in the NMISA plant in Barcelona, Spain; while the low roof version is built at Vauxhall Motors/Opel&#x27;s Luton plant in Bedfordshire, UK.

In 2013, GM announced its intentions to rebadge the Nissan NV200 commercial van as the 2015 model year Chevrolet City Express, to be introduced by the end of 2014. Holden, GM&#x27;s Australian subsidiary, sold versions of the Nissan Pulsar as the Holden Astra between 1984 and 1989.

LDV Group sold a badge-engineered light commercial vehicle version of the Nissan Serena as the LDV Cub from 1996 to 2001. The Nissan equivalent was marketed as the Nissan Vanette Cargo.

In March 2023, Nissan and Honda signed a memorandum of understanding regarding a strategic partnership to collaborate on producing components for electric vehicles and artificial intelligence in automotive software platforms. The following year, talks between the two companies reportedly became deeper; media outlets suggested that a merger is being discussed.

=== Alliance with Renault and Mitsubishi ===

In 1999, facing severe financial difficulties, Nissan entered an alliance with Renault of France. Signed on 27 March 1999, the &quot;Renault-Nissan Alliance&quot; was the first of its kind involving a Japanese and French car manufacturer, each with its own distinct corporate culture and brand identity. Renault initially acquired a 36.8 percent stake in Nissan for $3.5 billion pending court approval and Nissan permanently vowed to buy into Renault when it was financially able. In 2001, after the company&#x27;s turnaround from near-bankruptcy, Nissan acquired a 15 percent share of Renault, which in turn increased its stake in Nissan to 43.4 percent.

The Renault-Nissan Alliance has evolved over the years to Renault holding 43.4 percent of Nissan shares, while Nissan held 15 percent of Renault shares. The alliance itself was incorporated as the Renault-Nissan B.V., founded on 28 March 2002 under Dutch law. Renault-Nissan B.V. is equally owned by Renault and Nissan.

On 7 April 2010, Daimler AG exchanged a 3.1 percent share of its holdings for 3.1 percent from both Nissan and Renault. This triple alliance allows for the increased sharing of technology and development costs, encouraging global cooperation and mutual development.

On 12 December 2012, the Renault–Nissan Alliance formed a joint venture with Russian Technologies (Alliance Rostec Auto BV) with the aim of becoming the long-term controlling shareholder of AvtoVAZ, Russia&#x27;s largest car company and owner of the country&#x27;s biggest selling brand, Lada. The takeover was completed in June 2014, and the two companies of the Renault-Nissan Alliance took a combined 67.1 percent stake of Alliance Rostec, which in turn acquired a 74.5 percent of AvtoVAZ, thereby giving Renault and Nissan indirect control over the Russian manufacturer. Ghosn was appointed chairman of the board of AvtoVAZ on 27 June 2013. In September 2017, Nissan sold its AvtoVAZ stake to Renault for Euro 45 million.

Taken together, in 2013 the Renault–Nissan Alliance sold one in ten cars worldwide, and would be the world&#x27;s fourth largest automaker with sales of 8,266,098 units.

Renault and Nissan has announced the change in stock share between two companies, in March 2023. With this announcement and change, both companies will be treated as economically independent entity.

=== Other alliances and joint ventures ===

* In 2003, Nissan and Dongfeng Motor Group formed a 50:50 joint venture with the name Dongfeng Motor Co., Ltd. (DFL). The company calls itself &quot;China&#x27;s first automotive joint venture enterprise with a complete series of trucks, buses, light commercial vehicles and passenger vehicles,&quot; and &quot;the largest joint-venture project of its scale.&quot;
* On 7 April 2010, Daimler AG exchanged a 3.1 percent share of its holdings for 3.1 percent from both Nissan and Renault. This triple alliance allows for the increased sharing of technology and development costs, encouraging global cooperation and mutual development.
* On 12 December 2012, the Renault–Nissan Alliance formed a joint venture with Russian Technologies (Alliance Rostec Auto BV) with the aim of becoming the long-term controlling shareholder of AvtoVAZ, Russia&#x27;s largest car company and owner of the country&#x27;s biggest selling brand, Lada. Carlos Ghosn was appointed chairman of the board of AvtoVAZ on 27 June 2013. Nissan exited the AvtoVAZ venture in September 2017.
* Nissan was in an alliance with Ashok Leyland in India, producing light commercial vehicles.
* Together with Mitsubishi Motors, Nissan develops mini cars which are produced at Mitsubishi&#x27;s Mizushima plant in Kurashiki, Okayama, Japan under the NMKV joint venture. In May 2016 Nissan bought a controlling stake in Mitsubishi Motors for an estimated US$2.3 billion.

==Branding and corporate identity==
===Brands===
&quot;Nissan:&quot; Nissan&#x27;s volume models are sold worldwide under the Nissan brand.

&quot;Datsun:&quot; Until 1983, Nissan automobiles in most export markets were sold under the Datsun brand. In 1984 the Datsun brand was phased out and the Nissan brand was phased in. All cars in 1984 had both the Datsun and Nissan branding on them and in 1985 the Datsun name was completely dropped. In July 2013, Nissan relaunched Datsun as a brand targeted at emerging markets. However, due to sluggish sales, Nissan ended sales of Datsun-badged vehicles in 2022.

&quot;Infiniti:&quot; Since 1989, Nissan has sold its luxury models under the Infiniti brand. In 2012, Infiniti changed its headquarters to Hong Kong, where it is incorporated as Infiniti Global Limited. Its president is former BMW executive Roland Krueger. From 2014 to 2020, the Japanese-market Skyline (rebadged Infiniti Q50) and Fuga (rebadged Infiniti Q70) were sold with Infiniti emblem.

&quot;Nismo:&quot; Nissan&#x27;s in-house tuning shop is Nismo, short for &quot;Nissan Motorsport International Limited.&quot; Nismo is being re-positioned as Nissan&#x27;s performance brand.

===Corporate identity===
For many years, Nissan used a red wordmark for the company, and car badges for the &quot;Nissan&quot; and &quot;Infiniti&quot; brands. At Nissan&#x27;s 2013 earnings press conference in Yokohama, Nissan unveiled &quot;a new steel-blue logo that spells out—literally—the distinction between Nissan the company and Nissan the brand.&quot; Using a blue-gray color scheme, the new corporate logo did read NISSAN MOTOR COMPANY. Underneath were the &quot;badge&quot; logos for the Nissan, Infiniti and Datsun brands.

Later in 2013, the Nissan &quot;Company&quot; logo changed to the Nissan &quot;Corporation&quot; logo. The latter was the logo used by Nissan Motor Co., Ltd. up to early 2020. In July 2020, Nissan introduced new corporate and brand logos, as part of an image revamp tied to the Ariya launch.

As of 2007 in Japan, Nissan sells its products with internationally recognized &quot;Nissan&quot; signage, using a chrome circle with &quot;Nissan&quot; across the front.

Previously, Nissan used two dealership names called , , and , established in 1999 after forming an alliance with Renault. Renault also exported cars to Japan and were available at &quot;Nissan Red Stage&quot; locations, and are still available at Nissan Japanese dealerships.

Nissan Red Stage was the result of combining an older sales channel of dealerships under the names , established in 1966 after the merger of Prince Motors by Nissan, which sold the Nissan Skyline. sold cars developed from the Nissan Sunny at its introduction in 1966. The word &quot;&quot; is Latin, which means &quot;ample&quot; or &quot;sufficient&quot;. was briefly known previously as &quot;Nissan Cony Store&quot; when they assumed operations of a small &quot;kei&quot; manufacturer called Aichi Machine Industry Co., Ltd. (愛知機械工業) who manufactured the &quot;Cony&quot;, &quot;Guppy&quot; and &quot;Giant&quot; brand of &quot;kei&quot; cars and trucks until 1970, when the network was renamed for the Nissan Cherry.

Nissan Blue Stage was the result of combining older sales channels, called in 1955 selling Nissan&#x27;s original post-war products called the Datsun Bluebird, Datsun Sports, Datsun Truck, Datsun Cablight, Datsun Cabstar, Nissan Junior and the Nissan Patrol. Select &quot;Nissan Store&quot; locations were renamed &quot;Nissan Cedric Store&quot; when the Nissan Cedric was introduced in 1960, then renamed &quot;Nissan Store&quot; in 1965 and offered luxury sedans like the Nissan President and the former Prince Motor Company developed Nissan Laurel. In 1970, Nissan also set up a separate sales chain which sold used cars including auctions, called , which they still maintain.

In the early days of Nissan&#x27;s dealership network, Japanese consumers were directed towards specific Nissan stores for cars that were of a specific size and pricepoint. Over time as sales progressed and the Japanese automotive industry became more prolific, vehicles that were dedicated to particular stores were badge engineered, given different names, and shared within the existing networks thereby selling the same platforms at different locations. The networks allowed Nissan to better compete with the network established earlier by Toyota at Japanese locations.
Starting in 1960, another sales distribution channel was established that sold diesel products for commercial use, called Nissan Diesel until the diesel division was sold in 2007 to Volvo. To encourage retail sales, Nissan passenger vehicles that were installed with diesel engines, like the Cedric, were available at Nissan Diesel locations.

All cars sold at Nissan Blue Stage (1999–2005):
:Fairlady Z, Serena, Cedric, Liberty, Cefiro, Laurel, President, Bluebird, Presage, Presea, Terrano, Leopard, Avenir, Nissan Truck, Safari, Hypermini, Caravan, Murano

All cars sold at Nissan Store, (1955–1999):
:Liberta Villa, Bluebird, C80, Caball, Datsun Junior, Datsun Truck, Cabstar, Caravan, Civilian, Patrol, Datsun Sports, Leopard, Maxima, Fairlady Z, Gazelle, Terrano, Avenir, Cefiro, Laurel, Laurel Spirit, Prairie, Cedric, President

All cars sold at Nissan Red Stage (1999–2005):
:X-Trail. Teana, Cima, Sylphy, Crew, Skyline, Civilian, Silvia, Tino, Gloria, Pulsar, Sunny, R&#x27;nessa, Rasheen, Bassara, Primera, Mistral, Stagea, ADvan, Cube, Largo, Vanette, Clipper, Homy, Elgrand, Safari, Wingroad, Atlas, Murano, Renault Twingo, Renault Symbol, Renault Clio, Renault Mégane, Renault Kangoo

All cars sold at Nissan Prince Store, Nissan Satio Store, Nissan Cherry Store (1966–1999):
:Cima, Gloria, Skyline, Primera, Auster, Stanza, Violet, Pulsar, Pulsar EXA, NX, Langley, Volkswagen Santana, Volkswagen Passat, 180SX, Safari, Mistral, Elgrand, Homy, Bassara, Largo, Serena, Stagea, Wingroad, Expert, AD van, Vanette, Clipper, Atlas, Homer (cabover truck), Cherry, Sunny, Lucino, Cherry Vanette, Be-1, Pao, Figaro, S-Cargo. Nissan had classified several vehicles as &quot;premium&quot; and select dealerships offer the &quot;Nissan Premium Factory&quot; catalog. Vehicles in this category were:
:Skyline, Fuga, Cima, Fairlady Z, Murano, and the Elgrand. As of 2024 only the Skyline, Fairlady Z, GT-R, and the Elgrand remain premium level vehicles.

==Products==

===Automotive products===
Nissan has produced an extensive range of mainstream cars and trucks, initially for domestic consumption but exported around the world since the 1950s. It also produced several memorable sports cars, including the Datsun Fairlady 1500, 1600 and 2000 Roadsters, the Z-car, an affordable sports car originally introduced in 1969; and the GT-R, a powerful all-wheel-drive sports coupe. In 1985, Nissan created a tuning division, &quot;Nismo&quot;, for competition and performance development of such cars. One of Nismo&#x27;s latest models is the 370Z Nismo.

Nissan also sells a range of kei cars, mainly as a joint venture with other Japanese manufacturers like Suzuki or Mitsubishi. Until 2013, Nissan rebadged kei cars built by other manufacturers. Beginning in 2013, Nissan and Mitsubishi shared the development of the Nissan DAYZ / Mitsubishi eK Wagon series. Nissan also has shared model development of Japanese domestic cars with other manufacturers, particularly Mazda, Subaru, Suzuki and Isuzu. In China, Nissan produces cars in association with the Dongfeng Motor Group including the 2006 Nissan Livina Geniss, the first in a range of a new worldwide family of medium-sized cars. In 2010, Nissan created another tuning division, &quot;IPL&quot;, this time for their premium/luxury brand Infiniti.

In 2011, after Nissan released the Nissan NV-Series in the United States, Canada, and Mexico, Nissan created a commercial sub-brand called &quot;Nissan Commercial Vehicles&quot; which focuses on commercial vans, pickup trucks, and fleet vehicles for the US, Canadian, and Mexican Markets. In 2013, Nissan launched the Qashqai SUV in South Africa, along with their new motorsport Qashqai Car Games. It is the same year when the Datsun brand was relaunched by Nissan after a 27-year hiatus.

Nissan launched their Nissan Intelligent Mobility vision in 2016 by revealing the IDS Concept at the 2016 Geneva Motor Show. Most Nissan vehicles like the Dayz, Rogue and Leaf are equipped with Nissan Intelligent Mobility technology. In 2018, Nissan launched the sixth-generation Altima at the 2018 New York Auto Show.

===Trucks===
Nissan Cabstar (日産・キャブスター &quot;Nissan Kyabusutā&quot;) is the name used in Japan for two lines of pickup trucks and light commercial vehicles sold by Nissan and built by UD Nissan Diesel, a Volvo AB company and by Renault-Nissan Alliance for the European market. The name originated with the 1968 Datsun Cabstar, but this was gradually changed over to &quot;Nissan&quot; badging in the early 1980s. The lighter range (1-1.5 tons) replaced the earlier Cabstar and Homer, while the heavier Caball and Clipper were replaced by the 2–4 ton range Atlas (日産・アトラス &quot;Nissan Atorasu&quot;). The nameplate was first introduced in December 1981. The Cabstar is known also as the Nissan Cabstar, Renault Maxity and Samsung SV110 depending on the location. The range has been sold across the world. It shares its platform with the Nissan Caravan.

The Nissan Titan was introduced in 2004, as a full-size pickup truck produced for the North American market, the truck shares the stretched Nissan F-Alpha platform with the Nissan Armada and Infiniti QX56 SUVs. It was listed by Edmunds.com as the best full-size truck. The second-generation Titan was revealed at the 2015 North American International Auto Show as a 2016 model year vehicle.

=== Electric vehicles ===

Nissan introduced its first battery electric vehicle, the Nissan Altra at the Los Angeles International Auto Show on 29 December 1997. Unveiled in 2009, the EV-11 prototype electric car was based on the Nissan Tiida (Versa in North America), with the conventional gasoline engine replaced with an all-electric drivetrain.

In 2010, Nissan introduced the first-generation LEAF as the first series produced, all-electric vehicle launched globally. As of 2014, the Nissan Leaf was the world&#x27;s best selling highway-capable all-electric car ever. Global sales totaled 100,000 Leafs by mid January 2014, representing a 45 percent market share of worldwide pure electric vehicles sold since 2010. Global Leaf sales passed the 200,000 unit milestone in December 2015, and the Leaf continued ranking as the all-time best selling all-electric car.

Nissan&#x27;s second all-electric vehicle, the Nissan e-NV200, was announced in November 2013. Series production at the Nissan Plan in Barcelona, Spain, began on 7 May 2014. The e-NV200 commercial van is based on the Nissan Leaf. Nissan plans to launch two additional battery electric vehicles by March 2017.

In June 2016, Nissan announced it will introduce its first range extender car in Japan before March 2017. The series plug-in hybrid will use a new hybrid system, dubbed e-Power, which debuted with the Nissan Gripz concept crossover showcased at the September 2015 Frankfurt Auto Show. , Nissan electric vehicles were sold in 48 world markets. Nissan global electric vehicle sales passed 275,000 units in December 2016.

In 2018 Nissan sold its battery unit AESC to Envision in order to focus on the production of vehicles. The second-generation Nissan Leaf was launched by Nissan in Japan in 2018. By December 2020, 10 years after its introduction, cumulative global deliveries had reached 500,000 Leaf cars.

In February 2023, Nissan announced its intent to produce electric vehicles with solid-state batteries by 2028. In November 2023, Nissan announced its intention to build electric versions of the Qashqai and Juke at its plant in Britain.

===Autonomous cars===
In August 2013 Nissan announced its plans to launch several driverless cars by 2020. The company is building a dedicated autonomous driving proving ground in Japan, to be completed in 2014. Nissan installed its autonomous car technology in a Nissan Leaf all-electric car for demonstration purposes. The car was demonstrated at Nissan 360 test drive event held in California in August 2013. In September 2013, the Leaf fitted with the prototype Advanced Driver Assistance System was granted a license plate that allows it to drive on Japanese public roads. The testing car will be used by Nissan engineers to evaluate how its in-house autonomous driving software performs in the real world. Time spent on public roads will help refine the car&#x27;s software for fully automated driving. The autonomous Leaf was demonstrated on public roads for the first time at a media event held in Japan in November 2013. The Leaf drove on the Sagami Expressway in Kanagawa Prefecture, near Tokyo. Nissan vice chairman Toshiyuki Shiga and the prefecture&#x27;s governor, Yuji Kuroiwa, rode in the car during the test.

===Non-automotive products===
Nissan has also had a number of ventures outside the automotive industry, most notably the Tu–Ka mobile phone service (est. 1994), which was sold to DDI and Japan Telecom (both now merged into KDDI) in 1999. Nissan offers a subscription-based telematics service in select vehicles to drivers in Japan, called CarWings. Nissan also owns Nissan Marine, a joint venture with Tohatsu Corp that produces motors for smaller boats and other maritime equipment.

Nissan also built solid rocket motors for orbital launch vehicles such as the Lambda 4S and M-V. The aerospace and defense division of Nissan was sold to IHI Corporation in 2000.

==Marketing activities==

Nismo is the motorsports division of Nissan, founded in 1984. Nismo cars have participated in the All Japan Sports Prototype Championship, Super GT, IMSA GT Championship, World Sportscar Championship, FIA World Endurance Championship, British Touring Car Championship, Supercars Championship and Blancpain GT Series. Also, they were featured at the World Series by Nissan from 1998 to 2004. Nissan sponsored the Los Angeles Open golf tournament from 1987 to 2007.

Beginning in 2015, Nissan became the naming rights sponsor for Nissan Stadium, the home of the Tennessee Titans and Tennessee State University football teams in Nashville. Nissan also became the official sponsor of the Heisman Trophy and UEFA Champions League. Since 2019, Nissan has been the naming rights sponsor for Nissan Arena, the home of the Brisbane Bullets basketball team and Queensland Firebirds netball team in Brisbane, Australia.

==Global sales figures==

== Research and development ==
Nissan&#x27;s central research is inside the Oppama Plant site, Yokosuka, which began its operation in 1961, at the former site of Imperial Japanese Navy&#x27;s Airborne Squadron base. In 1982, Nissan&#x27;s technical centers in Suginami, Tokyo and Tsurumi, Yokohama were combined into one: Nissan Technical Center (NTC) in Atsugi, Kanagawa, at the foot of Mount Ōyama of the Tanzawa Mountains. At its 30th anniversary, in 2012, NTC employed 9,500 employees in product development, design, production engineering, and purchasing.

Nissan Technical Center works closely with its overseas operations: Nissan Technical Center (NTC)/North America, NTC/Mexico, Nissan Design America, Nissan Silicon Valley Office, and Nissan Technical Centre Europe (NTCE).

In 2007, the company opened Nissan Advanced Technology Center (NATC), near the NTC site. It works in close contact with the central research, the Silicon Valley office, the technical office near the Nissan headquarters in central Yokohama, and the overseas offices in Detroit, Silicon Valley, and Moscow.

Nissan&#x27;s test courses are in Tochigi (two courses), Yokosuka and Hokkaido.

=== Nissan Digital Hubs ===
In mid-2018, Nissan launched its first of many planned software and information technology development centers in Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.

== Manufacturing locations ==
Data extracted from Nissan&#x27;s international corporate website.

=== East Asia ===
* Japan
** Yokosuka, Kanagawa (Oppama Plant &amp; Research Center)
** Kaminokawa, Tochigi (Tochigi Plant)
** Kanda, Fukuoka (Nissan Motor Kyushu &amp; Nissan Shatai Kyushu Plant)
** Kanagawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa (Yokohama Engine Plant, Nissan&#x27;s oldest factory)
** Iwaki, Fukushima (Iwaki Engine Plant)
** Hiratsuka, Kanagawa (Nissan Shatai Shonan Plant)
** Nagoya, Aichi (Aichi Machine Industry Atsuta &amp; Eitoku Plants)
** Matsusaka, Mie (Aichi Machine Industry Matsusaka Plant)
** Tsu, Mie (Aichi Machine Industry Tsu Plant)
** Uji, Kyoto (Auto Works Kyoto)
** Ageo, Saitama (Nissan Diesel Motor, currently owned by the Volvo Group)
** Samukawa, Kanagawa (Nissan Machinery)
** Zama, Kanagawa (Assembly lines in the Zama Plant were closed in 1995, currently Global Production Engineering Center and storage unit for its historic models. Automotive Energy Supply Corporation (AESC), a joint-venture between Nissan and NEC, produces lithium-ion batteries in Zama.)
** Musashimurayama, Tokyo (Assembly lines at the Musashimurayama facility were closed in 2001, and the facility has been repurposed as the Carest Murayama Megamall. It was formerly operated by the Prince Motor Company until 1966 when they merged with Nissan). It is now a museum called Carest Murayama Megamall occupying a 213,252 square foot facility.
* China mainland
** Wuhan, Hubei (Dongfeng Motor Co., Ltd., a joint venture)
** Huadu District, Guangzhou, Guangdong (Dongfeng Nissan Passenger Vehicle Company)
** Xiangyang, Hubei (Dongfeng Motor Co., Ltd.)
** Zhengzhou, Henan (Zhengzhou Nissan Automobile Co., Ltd., a joint venture)
** Dalian, Liaoning (Dongfeng Nissan Passenger Vehicle Company)
* Taiwan
** Miaoli

=== Southeast Asia ===
* Malaysia
** Segambut, Kuala Lumpur (Tan Chong Motor Assemblies Sdn Bhd)
** Serendah, Selangor (TCMA)
* Vietnam
** Hanoi, Hanoi
* Indonesia
** Cikampek, West Java
* Philippines (defunct 2021)
** Santa Rosa City, Laguna (defunct 2021)
* Thailand
** Bangna, Samutprakarn (Nissan Motors (Thailand))

=== South Asia ===
* India
** Chennai, Tamil Nadu

=== Americas ===
* United States
** Smyrna, Tennessee
** Canton, Mississippi 
** Decherd, Tennessee
* Mexico
** Aguascalientes, Aguascalientes (2 plants)
** Cuernavaca, Morelos
* Brazil
** São José dos Pinhais, Paraná (Renault-Nissan plant)
** Resende, Rio de Janeiro
* Argentina
** Santa Isabel (Renault-Nissan plant)

=== Africa ===
* Morocco
** Tangier
* Egypt
** 6th of October City, Giza Governorate
* Kenya
** Thika, Kiambu County
* South Africa
** Rosslyn, Pretoria, Gauteng

=== Europe ===
* Spain
** Ávila, Castilla y León
* United Kingdom
** Sunderland, North East England
* Russia (defunct 2022)
** St. Petersburg, Russia (defunct 2022)
* France
** Flins (Renault factory)

== See also ==
* Ashok Leyland Nissan Vehicles
* Autech
* Calsonic
* Datsun
* Dongfeng Motor Company
* Dongfeng Nissan-Diesel Company
* Impul
* Infiniti
* Jatco
* Laurence Hartnett
* Nissan Engine Museum
* Nissan Motor Car Carrier
* Nissan Proving Grounds
* Project Better Place
* Shinichiro Sakurai
* Yokohama F. Marinos
* Yulon
==Notes==
== References ==
==Bibliography==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="13" end="37" title="Nissan" label="Nissan Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="66" end="89" title="Automotive industry" label="automobile manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="107" end="125" title="Yokohama, Kanagawa" label="Yokohama, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29714" start="204" end="212" title="Infiniti" label="Infiniti"/>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="250" end="256" title="Datsun" label="Datsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543585" start="339" end="344" title="Nismo" label="Nismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q784450" start="349" end="355" title="Autech" label="Autech"/>
<link wikidata="Q144281" start="449" end="457" title="zaibatsu" label="zaibatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115848" start="474" end="486" title="Nissan Group" label="Nissan Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477864" start="529" end="563" title="Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance" label="Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="627" end="644" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="660" end="667" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="959" end="978" title="Honda Motor Company" label="Honda Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="1270" end="1276" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="1278" end="1294" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q59243" start="1296" end="1315" title="Hyundai Motor Group" label="Hyundai Motor Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="1317" end="1331" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1336" end="1340" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1523" end="1528" title=":ja:橋本増治郎" label="橋本増治郎"/>
<link wikidata="Q793432" start="1560" end="1571" title="Azabu" label="Azabu-Hiroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="1647" end="1650" title="Datsun" label="DAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="1690" end="1697" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="1736" end="1743" title="surname" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q274498" start="2122" end="2149" title="1923 Great Kantō earthquake" label="1923 Great Kantō earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q973422" start="2447" end="2488" title="Japan during World War I" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s participation in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="2590" end="2595" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514221" start="2654" end="2660" title="Kubota Corporation" label="Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653679" start="2895" end="2910" title="IHI Corporation" label="IHI Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q377180" start="3011" end="3025" title="Datsun Type 11" label="Datsun Type 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115848" start="3110" end="3122" title="Nissan Group" label="Nissan Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q144281" start="3129" end="3137" title="zaibatsu" label="zaibatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621450" start="3345" end="3355" title="Nipponized English terms" label="Nipponized"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="3376" end="3384" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q404867" start="3420" end="3436" title="Yoshisuke Aikawa" label="Yoshisuke Aikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="3484" end="3499" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q217475" start="3645" end="3665" title="Tokyo Stock Exchange" label="Tokyo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115848" start="3701" end="3707" title="Nissan Group" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q144281" start="3714" end="3722" title="Zaibatsu" label="Zaibatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="3763" end="3770" title="Hitachi, Ltd." label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3998" end="4010" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115848" start="4669" end="4693" title="Nissan Group" label="Nihon Sangyo and Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="4861" end="4887" title="Assembly line" label="integrated assembly system"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="4983" end="5005" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="5057" end="5064" title="Changchun" label="Xinjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="5081" end="5090" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364431" start="5136" end="5176" title="Manchurian Industrial Development Company" label="Manchuria Heavy Industries Developing Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089156" start="5236" end="5272" title="Dowa Automobile Company" label="Dowa Jidosha Kogyo (Dowa Automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141952" start="5356" end="5373" title="Nihonbashi" label="Nihonbashi, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514221" start="5534" end="5540" title="Kubota Corporation" label="Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580296" start="5582" end="5599" title="William Gorham (engineer)" label="William R. Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541900" start="6084" end="6096" title="Graham-Paige" label="Graham-Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759785" start="6220" end="6233" title="The Reckoning (1986 book)" label="The Reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q467156" start="6241" end="6257" title="David Halberstam" label="David Halberstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q781028" start="6604" end="6612" title="Austin 7" label="Austin 7"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6675" end="6681" title="Austin Motor Company#1919–1939: Interwar success" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="7253" end="7259" title="Datsun" label="Datsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q781054" start="7347" end="7357" title="Austin A50" label="Austin A50"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835940" start="7614" end="7616" title="BMC A-Series engine" label="A-"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835938" start="7621" end="7629" title="BMC B-Series engine" label="B-family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040902" start="7705" end="7720" title="Nissan A engine" label="A series engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040992" start="7814" end="7829" title="Nissan L engine" label="Nissan L engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="7854" end="7867" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489002" start="7953" end="7963" title="Datsun 510" label="Datsun 510"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="8010" end="8015" title="sedan (car)" label="sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575681" start="8061" end="8072" title="Datsun 240Z" label="Datsun 240Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040992" start="8127" end="8135" title="Nissan L engine" label="L series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8200" end="8204" title=":ja:日産工機" label="日産工機"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446295" start="8261" end="8269" title="Tokyu Kogyo Kurogane" label="Kurogane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575681" start="8275" end="8279" title="Datsun 240Z" label="240Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="8385" end="8395" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="9007" end="9025" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390241" start="9387" end="9441" title="Confederation of Japan Automobile Workers&amp;#x27; Unions" label="Confederation of Japan Automobile Workers&amp;#x27; Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110378" start="9608" end="9628" title="Prince Motor Company" label="Prince Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q643635" start="9673" end="9680" title="Nissan Skyline" label="Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993722" start="9685" end="9691" title="Nissan Gloria" label="Gloria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9881" end="9899" title="Nissan Motor Company#Japan" label="Nissan Prince Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q29714" start="10059" end="10067" title="Infiniti" label="Infiniti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="10117" end="10137" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q746052" start="10236" end="10248" title="Ginza, Tokyo" label="Ginza, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="10587" end="10599" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172693" start="10661" end="10681" title="Datsun 1500, 1600, 2000 Roadster" label="Datsun Fairlady 1500"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11458" end="11473" title="Datsun Bluebird#310/311/312 series" label="Datsun Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187258" start="11486" end="11507" title="Los Angeles Auto Show" label="Los Angeles Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403931" start="11639" end="11670" title="Nissan Motor Corporation U.S.A." label="Nissan Motor Corporation U.S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q3656272" start="11713" end="11728" title="Yutaka Katayama" label="Yutaka Katayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172693" start="11874" end="11889" title="Datsun Fairlady" label="Datsun Fairlady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324018" start="11918" end="11928" title="Nissan Bluebird" label="411 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489002" start="11934" end="11944" title="Datsun 510" label="Datsun 510"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575681" start="11953" end="11964" title="Datsun 240Z" label="Datsun 240Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124244" start="12251" end="12279" title="Civac" label="Cuernavaca assembly facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="12361" end="12376" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132451" start="12523" end="12535" title="Nissan Sunny" label="Nissan Sunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963394" start="12655" end="12666" title="Chicken Tax" label="Chicken Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="12831" end="12849" title="Toyota Motor Corp." label="Toyota Motor Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="12855" end="12870" title="Honda" label="Honda Motor Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q43383953" start="12978" end="12999" title="Nissan Smyrna Assembly Plant" label="Smyrna assembly plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q846552" start="13064" end="13074" title="Datsun 720" label="Datsun 720"/>
<link wikidata="Q846552" start="13083" end="13104" title="Nissan Hardbody Truck" label="Nissan Hardbody Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q636791" start="13181" end="13194" title="Nissan Altima" label="Nissan Altima"/>
<link wikidata="Q377287" start="13200" end="13213" title="Nissan Maxima" label="Nissan Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q911323" start="13272" end="13283" title="Nissan Leaf" label="Nissan Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="13284" end="13300" title="all-electric car" label="all-electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957230" start="13447" end="13465" title="Decherd, Tennessee" label="Decherd, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998325" start="13533" end="13552" title="Canton, Mississippi" label="Canton, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="13746" end="13756" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476157" start="13820" end="13833" title="Nissan Cherry" label="Nissan Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541700" start="13880" end="13895" title="Alfa Romeo Arna" label="Alfa Romeo Arna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041008" start="14023" end="14057" title="Nissan Motor India Private Limited" label="Nissan Motor India Private Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="14092" end="14099" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="14168" end="14175" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138452" start="14344" end="14358" title="Dongfeng Motor" label="Dongfeng Motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="14446" end="14455" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085454" start="14803" end="14824" title="Enterprise Rent-A-Car" label="Enterprise Rent-A-Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543874" start="14828" end="14833" title="The Hertz Corporation" label="Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q859399" start="14964" end="14977" title="Detroit Three" label="Detroit Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="16105" end="16112" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q356719" start="16156" end="16168" title="Carlos Ghosn" label="Carlos Ghosn"/>
<link wikidata="Q29714" start="16644" end="16652" title="Infiniti" label="Infiniti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141122" start="16757" end="16780" title="Lost Decade (Japan)" label="ailing Japanese economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="16840" end="16845" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300246" start="16968" end="16996" title="Medals of Honour (Japan)" label="Japan Medal with Blue Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30923926" start="17144" end="17158" title="Hiroto Saikawa" label="Hiroto Saikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="19114" end="19131" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65771074" start="19353" end="19401" title="2019 boycott of Japanese products in South Korea" label="2019 boycott of Japanese products in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="20310" end="20315" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="20365" end="20382" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q738470" start="20881" end="20892" title="Nissan March" label="March/Micra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041092" start="21031" end="21055" title="Nissan electric vehicles" label="Nissan electric vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q38278176" start="21115" end="21126" title="Nissan Leaf (first generation)" label="Nissan Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="21135" end="21159" title="battery electric vehicle" label="battery electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205234" start="21210" end="21230" title="plug-in electric car" label="plug-in electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260338" start="21275" end="21280" title="Nissan Altra" label="Altra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535876" start="21289" end="21298" title="Nissan Hypermini" label="Hypermini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="21362" end="21383" title="electric vehicle" label="electric vehicle (EV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993724" start="21667" end="21683" title="Nissan Australia" label="Nissan Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436934" start="21703" end="21717" title="Ford Australia" label="Ford Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955803" start="21780" end="21791" title="Button car plan" label="Button Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516427" start="21815" end="21829" title="Nissan Pintara" label="Nissan Pintara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21848" end="21860" title="Ford Corsair#Ford Corsair UA - Australia" label="Ford Corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468004" start="21882" end="21893" title="Ford Falcon (XF)" label="Ford Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21901" end="21911" title="Ford XF Falcon#Nissan Ute" label="Nissan Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="22046" end="22050" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806924" start="22094" end="22110" title="Mercury Villager" label="Mercury Villager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430887" start="22119" end="22131" title="Nissan Quest" label="Nissan Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q523437" start="22342" end="22359" title="Nissan Terrano II" label="Nissan Terrano II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="22473" end="22482" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="22484" end="22489" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036945" start="22608" end="22622" title="captive import" label="captive import"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506352" start="22699" end="22717" title="Volkswagen Santana" label="Volkswagen Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q145333" start="22762" end="22776" title="Zama, Kanagawa" label="Zama, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541700" start="22874" end="22878" title="Alfa Romeo Arna" label="Arna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140952" start="23168" end="23184" title="Nissan Primastar" label="Nissan Primastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="23267" end="23276" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q59187" start="23324" end="23339" title="Vauxhall Motors" label="Vauxhall Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="23340" end="23344" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="23367" end="23379" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394779" start="23438" end="23450" title="Nissan NV200" label="Nissan NV200"/>
<link wikidata="Q29281" start="23550" end="23556" title="Holden" label="Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993801" start="23612" end="23625" title="Nissan Pulsar" label="Nissan Pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030898" start="23633" end="23645" title="Holden Astra" label="Holden Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126555" start="23670" end="23679" title="LDV Group" label="LDV Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q934829" start="23744" end="23757" title="Nissan Serena" label="Nissan Serena"/>
<link wikidata="Q934829" start="23765" end="23772" title="LDV Cub" label="LDV Cub"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="23883" end="23888" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="24025" end="24048" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="24345" end="24352" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="25261" end="25271" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309" start="25701" end="25708" title="AvtoVAZ" label="AvtoVAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q35676" start="25799" end="25803" title="Lada" label="Lada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104175" start="26675" end="26695" title="Dongfeng Motor Group" label="Dongfeng Motor Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295889" start="26739" end="26763" title="Dongfeng Motor Co., Ltd." label="Dongfeng Motor Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="27037" end="27047" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840188" start="27365" end="27385" title="Russian Technologies" label="Russian Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309" start="27478" end="27485" title="AvtoVAZ" label="AvtoVAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q35676" start="27576" end="27580" title="Lada" label="Lada"/>
<link wikidata="Q726193" start="27745" end="27758" title="Ashok Leyland" label="Ashok Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="27822" end="27839" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="27857" end="27866" title="Kei car" label="mini cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q467487" start="27926" end="27944" title="Kurashiki, Okayama" label="Kurashiki, Okayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235747" start="27962" end="27966" title="NMKV" label="NMKV"/>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="28318" end="28324" title="Datsun" label="Datsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29714" start="28770" end="28778" title="Infiniti" label="Infiniti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="28832" end="28841" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q643635" start="28989" end="28996" title="Nissan Skyline" label="Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999061" start="29007" end="29019" title="Infiniti Q50" label="Infiniti Q50"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366053" start="29025" end="29029" title="Nissan Fuga" label="Fuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662407" start="29040" end="29052" title="Infiniti Q70" label="Infiniti Q70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543585" start="29144" end="29149" title="Nismo" label="Nismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q86674790" start="30095" end="30100" title="Nissan Ariya" label="Ariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477864" start="30395" end="30402" title="Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110378" start="30700" end="30713" title="Prince Motors" label="Prince Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q643635" start="30740" end="30754" title="Nissan Skyline" label="Nissan Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132451" start="30785" end="30797" title="Nissan Sunny" label="Nissan Sunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q94094" start="31054" end="31095" title="Aichi Kokuki" label="Aichi Machine Industry Co., Ltd. (愛知機械工業)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31123" end="31127" title=":ja:コニー・360" label="Cony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302315" start="31141" end="31146" title="Cony Guppy" label="Guppy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31157" end="31174" title=":ja:ヂャイアント" label="&amp;quot;Giant&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="31190" end="31193" title="Kei car" label="kei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476157" start="31265" end="31278" title="Nissan Cherry" label="Nissan Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324018" start="31424" end="31439" title="Nissan Bluebird" label="Datsun Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172693" start="31441" end="31454" title="Datsun Sports" label="Datsun Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q846552" start="31456" end="31468" title="Datsun Truck" label="Datsun Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446295" start="31470" end="31485" title="Tokyu Kogyo Kurogane" label="Datsun Cablight"/>
<link wikidata="Q10801450" start="31487" end="31501" title="Nissan Cabstar" label="Datsun Cabstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122264" start="31503" end="31516" title="Nissan Junior" label="Nissan Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141487" start="31525" end="31538" title="Nissan Patrol" label="Nissan Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468193" start="31636" end="31649" title="Nissan Cedric" label="Nissan Cedric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993793" start="31755" end="31771" title="Nissan President" label="Nissan President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810996" start="31818" end="31831" title="Nissan Laurel" label="Nissan Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="32279" end="32295" title="badge engineered" label="badge engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q11321679" start="32505" end="32511" title="Toyota dealerships (Japan)" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241339" start="32657" end="32670" title="Nissan Diesel" label="Nissan Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="32717" end="32722" title="Volvo" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q338545" start="32928" end="32938" title="Nissan Fairlady Z" label="Fairlady Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q934829" start="32940" end="32946" title="Nissan Serena" label="Serena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468193" start="32948" end="32954" title="Nissan Cedric" label="Cedric"/>
<link wikidata="Q669213" start="32956" end="32963" title="Nissan Liberty" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q672060" start="32965" end="32971" title="Nissan Cefiro" label="Cefiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810996" start="32973" end="32979" title="Nissan Laurel" label="Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993793" start="32981" end="32990" title="Nissan President" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324018" start="32992" end="33000" title="Nissan Bluebird" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584101" start="33002" end="33009" title="Nissan Presage" label="Presage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624452" start="33011" end="33017" title="Nissan Presea" label="Presea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419007" start="33019" end="33026" title="Nissan Terrano" label="Terrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993739" start="33028" end="33035" title="Nissan Leopard" label="Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670279" start="33037" end="33043" title="Nissan Avenir" label="Avenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q846552" start="33045" end="33057" title="Nissan Hardbody Truck" label="Nissan Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535876" start="33067" end="33076" title="Nissan Hypermini" label="Hypermini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993662" start="33078" end="33085" title="Nissan Caravan" label="Caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278086" start="33087" end="33093" title="Nissan Murano" label="Murano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33140" end="33153" title="Nissan Pulsar#N12" label="Liberta Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13472800" start="33165" end="33168" title="Nissan C80" label="C80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269983" start="33170" end="33176" title="Nissan Caball" label="Caball"/>
<link wikidata="Q122264" start="33178" end="33191" title="Nissan Junior" label="Datsun Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q846552" start="33193" end="33205" title="Datsun Truck" label="Datsun Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q10801450" start="33207" end="33214" title="Nissan Cabstar" label="Cabstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993662" start="33216" end="33223" title="Nissan Caravan" label="Caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550202" start="33225" end="33233" title="Nissan Civilian" label="Civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141487" start="33235" end="33241" title="Nissan Patrol" label="Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172693" start="33243" end="33256" title="Datsun Sports" label="Datsun Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480095" start="33287" end="33294" title="Nissan Gazelle" label="Gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q669213" start="33344" end="33351" title="Nissan Prairie" label="Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135638" start="33420" end="33427" title="Nissan X-Trail" label="X-Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068935" start="33429" end="33434" title="Nissan Teana" label="Teana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675830" start="33436" end="33440" title="Nissan Cima" label="Cima"/>
<link wikidata="Q422004" start="33442" end="33448" title="Nissan Bluebird Sylphy" label="Sylphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514711" start="33450" end="33454" title="Nissan Crew" label="Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q643635" start="33456" end="33463" title="Nissan Skyline" label="Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550202" start="33465" end="33473" title="Nissan Civilian" label="Civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480095" start="33475" end="33481" title="Nissan Silvia" label="Silvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092725" start="33483" end="33487" title="Nissan Almera Tino" label="Tino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993722" start="33489" end="33495" title="Nissan Gloria" label="Gloria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993801" start="33497" end="33503" title="Nissan Pulsar" label="Pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132451" start="33505" end="33510" title="Nissan Sunny" label="Sunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260338" start="33512" end="33524" title="Nissan R&amp;#x27;nessa" label="R&amp;#x27;nessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312050" start="33526" end="33533" title="Nissan Rasheen" label="Rasheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312105" start="33535" end="33542" title="Nissan Bassara" label="Bassara"/>
<link wikidata="Q824588" start="33544" end="33551" title="Nissan Primera" label="Primera"/>
<link wikidata="Q523437" start="33553" end="33560" title="Nissan Mistral" label="Mistral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783568" start="33562" end="33568" title="Nissan Stagea" label="Stagea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11509793" start="33570" end="33575" title="Nissan Advan" label="ADvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165443" start="33577" end="33581" title="Nissan Cube" label="Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q934829" start="33583" end="33588" title="Nissan Largo" label="Largo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814517" start="33590" end="33597" title="Nissan Vanette" label="Vanette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110299" start="33599" end="33606" title="Nissan Clipper" label="Clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993662" start="33608" end="33612" title="Nissan Homy" label="Homy"/>
<link wikidata="Q956356" start="33614" end="33621" title="Nissan Elgrand" label="Elgrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141487" start="33623" end="33629" title="Nissan Safari" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11509793" start="33631" end="33639" title="Nissan Wingroad" label="Wingroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q257673" start="33641" end="33646" title="Nissan Atlas" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278086" start="33648" end="33654" title="Nissan Murano" label="Murano"/>
<link wikidata="Q720634" start="33656" end="33670" title="Renault Twingo" label="Renault Twingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702123" start="33672" end="33686" title="Renault Symbol" label="Renault Symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q309258" start="33688" end="33700" title="Renault Clio" label="Renault Clio"/>
<link wikidata="Q222764" start="33702" end="33716" title="Renault Mégane" label="Renault Mégane"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="33718" end="33732" title="Renault Kangoo" label="Renault Kangoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q375074" start="33866" end="33872" title="Nissan Violet" label="Stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q375074" start="33874" end="33880" title="Nissan Violet" label="Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993667" start="33890" end="33900" title="Nissan EXA" label="Pulsar EXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757442" start="33902" end="33904" title="Nissan NX" label="NX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506352" start="33915" end="33933" title="Volkswagen Santana" label="Volkswagen Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q216754" start="33935" end="33952" title="Volkswagen Passat" label="Volkswagen Passat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110299" start="34060" end="34067" title="Nissan Clipper" label="Clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q922072" start="34076" end="34081" title="Prince Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q370704" start="34083" end="34090" title="cabover" label="cabover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476157" start="34099" end="34105" title="Nissan Cherry" label="Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070434" start="34114" end="34120" title="Nissan Lucino" label="Lucino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993648" start="34138" end="34142" title="Nissan Be-1" label="Be-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446836" start="34144" end="34147" title="Nissan Pao" label="Pao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193794" start="34149" end="34155" title="Nissan Figaro" label="Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q915512" start="34157" end="34164" title="Nissan S-Cargo" label="S-Cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="34718" end="34728" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172693" start="34745" end="34790" title="Datsun 1500, 1600, 2000 Roadster" label="Datsun Fairlady 1500, 1600 and 2000 Roadsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q338545" start="34796" end="34801" title="Nissan Z-car" label="Z-car"/>
<link wikidata="Q499109" start="34867" end="34871" title="Nissan GT-R" label="GT-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q12211810" start="34884" end="34899" title="all-wheel-drive" label="all-wheel-drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543585" start="34963" end="34968" title="Nismo" label="Nismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q936668" start="35075" end="35079" title="Nissan 370Z" label="370Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="35117" end="35124" title="kei car" label="kei car"/>
<link wikidata="Q181642" start="35192" end="35198" title="Suzuki" label="Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="35202" end="35212" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939899" start="35352" end="35392" title="Mitsubishi eK" label="Nissan DAYZ / Mitsubishi eK Wagon series"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="35500" end="35505" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q172741" start="35507" end="35513" title="Subaru" label="Subaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q181642" start="35515" end="35521" title="Suzuki" label="Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q29803" start="35526" end="35531" title="Isuzu" label="Isuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104175" start="35588" end="35608" title="Dongfeng Motor Group" label="Dongfeng Motor Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993748" start="35628" end="35648" title="Nissan Livina Geniss" label="Nissan Livina Geniss"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614451" start="35774" end="35777" title="Infiniti Performance Line" label="IPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993750" start="35872" end="35888" title="Nissan NV (North America)" label="Nissan NV-Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q926124" start="36155" end="36162" title="Nissan Qashqai" label="Qashqai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36428" end="36450" title="Geneva Motor Show#2016" label="2016 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939899" start="36482" end="36486" title="Mitsubishi eK" label="Dayz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993846" start="36488" end="36493" title="Nissan Rogue" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q911323" start="36498" end="36502" title="Nissan Leaf" label="Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q636791" start="36607" end="36613" title="Nissan Altima" label="Altima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36621" end="36644" title="New York Auto Show#2018" label="2018 New York Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820396" start="37504" end="37516" title="Nissan Titan" label="Nissan Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q611158" start="37673" end="37686" title="Nissan Armada" label="Nissan Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q19888560" start="37691" end="37704" title="Infiniti QX56" label="Infiniti QX56"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="37705" end="37708" title="SUV" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339985" start="37728" end="37739" title="Edmunds.com" label="Edmunds.com"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37817" end="37860" title="North American International Auto Show#2015" label="2015 North American International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="37947" end="37971" title="battery electric vehicle" label="battery electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260338" start="37977" end="37989" title="Nissan Altra" label="Nissan Altra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37997" end="38032" title="Los Angeles International Auto Show#1997" label="Los Angeles International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="38082" end="38091" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="38092" end="38104" title="electric car" label="electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q530013" start="38122" end="38134" title="Nissan Tiida" label="Nissan Tiida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="38216" end="38239" title="battery electric vehicle" label="all-electric drivetrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q38278176" start="38273" end="38294" title="Nissan Leaf (first generation)" label="first-generation LEAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q828814" start="38548" end="38560" title="market share" label="market share"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394779" start="38810" end="38824" title="Nissan e-NV200" label="Nissan e-NV200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="38898" end="38907" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="38909" end="38914" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130879" start="39132" end="39146" title="range extender (vehicle)" label="range extender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953345" start="39183" end="39189" title="series hybrid" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483388" start="39190" end="39204" title="plug-in hybrid" label="plug-in hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q850270" start="39287" end="39294" title="concept car" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39337" end="39356" title="Frankfurt Auto Show#2015" label="Frankfurt Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q787901" start="39530" end="39534" title="Automotive Energy Supply Corporation" label="AESC"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910394" start="39538" end="39546" title="Envision Energy" label="Envision"/>
<link wikidata="Q911323" start="39618" end="39629" title="Nissan Leaf" label="Nissan Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="40102" end="40116" title="driverless car" label="driverless car"/>
<link wikidata="Q911323" start="40284" end="40295" title="Nissan Leaf" label="Nissan Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="40296" end="40312" title="all-electric car" label="all-electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q127513" start="40993" end="41012" title="Kanagawa Prefecture" label="Kanagawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532645" start="41047" end="41062" title="Toshiyuki Shiga" label="Toshiyuki Shiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q971946" start="41370" end="41374" title="KDDI" label="KDDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q485669" start="41420" end="41430" title="telematics" label="telematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037198" start="41486" end="41494" title="CarWings" label="CarWings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041006" start="41513" end="41526" title="Nissan Marine" label="Nissan Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234815" start="41549" end="41556" title="Tohatsu" label="Tohatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241097" start="41710" end="41719" title="Lambda 4S" label="Lambda 4S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332896" start="41724" end="41727" title="M-V" label="M-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653679" start="41786" end="41801" title="IHI Corporation" label="IHI Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543585" start="41838" end="41843" title="Nismo" label="Nismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q636146" start="41936" end="41975" title="All Japan Sports Prototype Championship" label="All Japan Sports Prototype Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379527" start="41977" end="41985" title="Super GT" label="Super GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573157" start="41987" end="42007" title="IMSA GT Championship" label="IMSA GT Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684565" start="42009" end="42037" title="World Sportscar Championship" label="World Sportscar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q945048" start="42039" end="42071" title="FIA World Endurance Championship" label="FIA World Endurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q849783" start="42073" end="42105" title="British Touring Car Championship" label="British Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="42107" end="42129" title="Supercars Championship" label="Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q20806997" start="42134" end="42153" title="Blancpain GT Series" label="Blancpain GT Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077544" start="42187" end="42209" title="World Series by Nissan" label="World Series by Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602686" start="42250" end="42266" title="Los Angeles Open" label="Los Angeles Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189307" start="42340" end="42353" title="naming rights" label="naming rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142992" start="42366" end="42380" title="Nissan Stadium" label="Nissan Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="42398" end="42414" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700197" start="42419" end="42445" title="Tennessee State Tigers football" label="Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="42464" end="42473" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="42522" end="42536" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="42541" end="42562" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q60463336" start="42622" end="42634" title="Nissan Arena" label="Nissan Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925638" start="42652" end="42668" title="Brisbane Bullets" label="Brisbane Bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270942" start="42689" end="42709" title="Queensland Firebirds" label="Queensland Firebirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="42710" end="42717" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="42726" end="42745" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="42869" end="42877" title="Yokosuka" label="Yokosuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="42936" end="42958" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q232631" start="43034" end="43049" title="Suginami, Tokyo" label="Suginami, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202820" start="43054" end="43071" title="Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama" label="Tsurumi, Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q389711" start="43129" end="43145" title="Atsugi, Kanagawa" label="Atsugi, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q386518" start="43162" end="43173" title="Mount Ōyama (Kanagawa)" label="Mount Ōyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q493093" start="43181" end="43198" title="Tanzawa Mountains" label="Tanzawa Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="43491" end="43505" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="43788" end="43796" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="43826" end="43833" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="43855" end="43861" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q44843" start="43898" end="43905" title="Tochigi Prefecture" label="Tochigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="43921" end="43929" title="Yokosuka" label="Yokosuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="43934" end="43942" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="44087" end="44105" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="44250" end="44268" title="Yokosuka, Kanagawa" label="Yokosuka, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345604" start="44309" end="44328" title="Kaminokawa, Tochigi" label="Kaminokawa, Tochigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206876" start="44348" end="44362" title="Kanda, Fukuoka" label="Kanda, Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q372967" start="44390" end="44403" title="Nissan Shatai" label="Nissan Shatai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143712" start="44421" end="44432" title="Kanagawa-ku, Yokohama" label="Kanagawa-ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="44434" end="44452" title="Yokohama, Kanagawa" label="Yokohama, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q274384" start="44510" end="44526" title="Iwaki, Fukushima" label="Iwaki, Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q502199" start="44551" end="44570" title="Hiratsuka, Kanagawa" label="Hiratsuka, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204742" start="44586" end="44592" title="Shonan" label="Shonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="44603" end="44616" title="Nagoya, Aichi" label="Nagoya, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q94094" start="44618" end="44640" title="Aichi Kokuki" label="Aichi Machine Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q460829" start="44672" end="44686" title="Matsusaka, Mie" label="Matsusaka, Mie"/>
<link wikidata="Q94094" start="44688" end="44710" title="Aichi Kokuki" label="Aichi Machine Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q203027" start="44731" end="44739" title="Tsu, Mie" label="Tsu, Mie"/>
<link wikidata="Q94094" start="44741" end="44763" title="Aichi Kokuki" label="Aichi Machine Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q326956" start="44778" end="44788" title="Uji, Kyoto" label="Uji, Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q163888" start="44811" end="44824" title="Ageo, Saitama" label="Ageo, Saitama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241339" start="44826" end="44845" title="UD Trucks" label="Nissan Diesel Motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="44870" end="44881" title="Volvo Group" label="Volvo Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342787" start="44886" end="44904" title="Samukawa, Kanagawa" label="Samukawa, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446295" start="44906" end="44922" title="Tokyu Kogyo Kurogane" label="Nissan Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q145333" start="44927" end="44941" title="Zama, Kanagawa" label="Zama, Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q787901" start="45086" end="45122" title="Automotive Energy Supply Corporation" label="Automotive Energy Supply Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q390806" start="45215" end="45237" title="Musashimurayama, Tokyo" label="Musashimurayama, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110378" start="45409" end="45429" title="Prince Motor Company" label="Prince Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="45585" end="45590" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="45592" end="45597" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295889" start="45599" end="45623" title="Dongfeng Motor Co., Ltd." label="Dongfeng Motor Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q498004" start="45645" end="45659" title="Huadu District" label="Huadu District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="45661" end="45670" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="45672" end="45681" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q71284" start="45729" end="45738" title="Xiangyang" label="Xiangyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="45740" end="45745" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q30340" start="45776" end="45785" title="Zhengzhou" label="Zhengzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="45787" end="45792" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295879" start="45794" end="45831" title="Dongfeng Automobile Company" label="Zhengzhou Nissan Automobile Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="45853" end="45859" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="45861" end="45869" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q701651" start="45926" end="45932" title="Miaoli" label="Miaoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446206" start="45971" end="45979" title="Segambut" label="Segambut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="45981" end="45993" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232843" start="46034" end="46042" title="Serendah" label="Serendah"/>
<link wikidata="Q189710" start="46044" end="46052" title="Selangor" label="Selangor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46054" end="46058" title="Tan Chong Motor#Serendah, Selangor" label="TCMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="46073" end="46078" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="46080" end="46085" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q841625" start="46101" end="46109" title="Cikampek" label="Cikampek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724" start="46111" end="46120" title="West Java" label="West Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q76010" start="46153" end="46168" title="Santa Rosa, Laguna" label="Santa Rosa City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="46170" end="46176" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q271529" start="46214" end="46226" title="Samut Prakan Province" label="Samutprakarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="46285" end="46292" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="46294" end="46304" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43383953" start="46342" end="46359" title="Nissan Smyrna Assembly Plant" label="Smyrna, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998325" start="46363" end="46382" title="Canton, Mississippi" label="Canton, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957230" start="46387" end="46405" title="Decherd, Tennessee" label="Decherd, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q200805" start="46418" end="46448" title="Aguascalientes, Aguascalientes" label="Aguascalientes, Aguascalientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q204245" start="46463" end="46482" title="Cuernavaca, Morelos" label="Cuernavaca, Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q478818" start="46495" end="46515" title="São José dos Pinhais" label="São José dos Pinhais"/>
<link wikidata="Q913390" start="46550" end="46557" title="Resende, Rio de Janeiro" label="Resende"/>
<link wikidata="Q44210" start="46589" end="46601" title="Santa Isabel, Córdoba" label="Santa Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="46654" end="46661" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q335708" start="46673" end="46692" title="6th of October City" label="6th of October City"/>
<link wikidata="Q30832" start="46694" end="46710" title="Giza Governorate" label="Giza Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q589616" start="46722" end="46727" title="Thika" label="Thika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575594" start="46729" end="46742" title="Kiambu County" label="Kiambu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q10657170" start="46761" end="46768" title="Rosslyn, Gauteng" label="Rosslyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="46770" end="46778" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15688" start="46815" end="46820" title="Ávila, Spain" label="Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739" start="46822" end="46837" title="Castilla y León" label="Castilla y León"/>
<link wikidata="Q822406" start="46858" end="46868" title="Nissan Motor Manufacturing UK" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="46870" end="46888" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="46916" end="46938" title="St. Petersburg, Russia" label="St. Petersburg, Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q726193" start="47008" end="47037" title="Ashok Leyland Nissan Vehicles" label="Ashok Leyland Nissan Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q784450" start="47040" end="47046" title="Autech" label="Autech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023967" start="47049" end="47057" title="Calsonic" label="Calsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="47060" end="47066" title="Datsun" label="Datsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295889" start="47069" end="47091" title="Dongfeng Motor Company" label="Dongfeng Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11528758" start="47094" end="47124" title="Dongfeng Nissan-Diesel Company" label="Dongfeng Nissan-Diesel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149513" start="47127" end="47132" title="Impul" label="Impul"/>
<link wikidata="Q29714" start="47135" end="47143" title="Infiniti" label="Infiniti"/>
<link wikidata="Q10851180" start="47146" end="47151" title="Jatco" label="Jatco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500638" start="47154" end="47171" title="Laurence Hartnett" label="Laurence Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040952" start="47174" end="47194" title="Nissan Engine Museum" label="Nissan Engine Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11509869" start="47197" end="47221" title="Nissan Motor Car Carrier" label="Nissan Motor Car Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262400" start="47224" end="47246" title="Nissan Proving Grounds" label="Nissan Proving Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q832434" start="47249" end="47269" title="Better Place (company)" label="Project Better Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513101" start="47272" end="47290" title="Shinichiro Sakurai" label="Shinichiro Sakurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q854932" start="47293" end="47312" title="Yokohama F. Marinos" label="Yokohama F. Marinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q711523" start="47315" end="47320" title="Yulon" label="Yulon"/>
</links>
</doc>
