<doc id="20798" wikidata="Q110223" url="?curid=20798" title="Mennonites">
<text>Mennonites are a group of Anabaptist Christian communities tracing their roots to the epoch of the Radical Reformation. The name &quot;Mennonites&quot; is derived from the cleric Menno Simons (1496–1561) of Friesland, part of the Holy Roman Empire, present day Netherlands. Menno Simons became a prominent leader within the wider Anabaptist movement and was a contemporary of Martin Luther (1483–1546) and Philip Melanchthon (1497–1560). Through his writings about the Reformation Simons articulated and formalized the teachings of earlier Swiss Anabaptist founders as well as early teachings of the Mennonites founded on the belief in both the mission and ministry of Jesus. Formal Mennonite beliefs were codified in the Dordrecht Confession of Faith (1632), which affirmed &quot;the baptism of believers only, the washing of the feet as a symbol of servanthood, church discipline, the shunning of the excommunicated, the non-swearing of oaths, marriage within the same church&quot;, nonresistance, and in general, more emphasis on &quot;true Christianity&quot; involving &quot;being Christian and obeying Christ&quot; as they interpret it from the Holy Bible.

The majority of the early Mennonite followers, rather than fighting, survived by fleeing to neighboring states where ruling families were tolerant of their belief in believer&#x27;s baptism. Over the years, Mennonites have become known as one of the historic peace churches, due to their commitment to pacifism. Mennonites seek to emphasize the teachings of early Christianity in their beliefs, worship and lifestyle.

Congregations worldwide embody various approaches to Mennonite practice, ranging from Old Order Mennonites (who practice a lifestyle without certain elements of modern technology) to Conservative Mennonites (who hold to traditional theological distinctives, wear plain dress and use modern conveniences) to mainline Mennonites (those who are indistinguishable in dress and appearance from the general population). Mennonites can be found in communities in 87 countries on six continents. Seven ordinances have been taught in many traditional Mennonite churches, which include &quot;baptism, communion, footwashing, marriage, anointing with oil, the holy kiss, and the prayer covering.&quot; The largest populations of Mennonites are found in Canada, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, India, and the United States. There are Mennonite settlements in Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Colombia. The Mennonite Church in the Netherlands still continues where Simons was born.

Though Mennonites are a global denomination with church membership from Europe, Asia, Africa and the Americas, certain Mennonite communities with ethno-cultural origins in Switzerland and the Netherlands bear the designation of ethnic Mennonites. Across Latin America, Mennonite colonization has been seen as a driver of environmental damage, notably deforestation of the Amazon rainforest through land clearance for agriculture.

== History ==

The early history of the Mennonites starts with the Anabaptists in the German and Dutch-speaking regions of central Europe. The German term is &quot;Täufer&quot; (Baptist) or &quot;Wiedertäufer&quot; (&quot;re-Baptizers&quot; or &quot;Anabaptists&quot; using the Greek &quot;ana&quot; [&quot;again&quot;]), as their persecutors called them. These forerunners of modern Mennonites were part of the Protestant Reformation, a broad reaction against the practices and theology of the Roman Catholic Church. Its most distinguishing feature is the rejection of infant baptism, an act that had both religious and political meaning since almost every infant born in western Europe was baptized in the Roman Catholic Church. Other significant theological views of the Mennonites developed in opposition to Roman Catholic views or to the views of Protestant reformers such as Martin Luther and Huldrych Zwingli.

Some of the followers of Zwingli&#x27;s Reformed church thought that requiring church membership beginning at birth was inconsistent with the New Testament example. They believed that the church should be completely removed from government (the proto–free church tradition), and that individuals should join only when willing to publicly acknowledge belief in Jesus and the desire to live in accordance with his teachings. At a small meeting in Zurich on 21 January 1525, Conrad Grebel, Felix Manz, and George Blaurock, along with twelve others, baptized each other. This meeting marks the beginning of the Anabaptist movement. In the spirit of the times, other groups came to preach about reducing hierarchy, relations with the state, eschatology, and sexual license, running from utter abandon to extreme chastity. These movements are together referred to as the &quot;Radical Reformation&quot;.

Many government and religious leaders, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, considered voluntary church membership to be dangerous—the concern of some deepened by reports of the Münster Rebellion, led by a violent sect of Anabaptists. They joined forces to fight the movement, using methods such as banishment, torture, burning, drowning or beheading.

Despite strong repressive efforts of the state churches, the movement spread slowly around western Europe, primarily along the Rhine. Officials killed many of the earliest Anabaptist leaders in an attempt to purge Europe of the new sect. By 1530, most of the founding leaders had been killed for refusing to renounce their beliefs. Many believed that God did not condone killing or the use of force for any reason and were, therefore, unwilling to fight for their lives. The non-resistant branches often survived by seeking refuge in neutral cities or nations, such as Strasbourg. Their safety was often tenuous, as a shift in alliances or an invasion could mean resumed persecution. Other groups of Anabaptists, such as the Batenburgers, were eventually destroyed by their unwillingness to fight. This played a large part in the evolution of Anabaptist theology. They believed that Jesus taught that any use of force to get back at anyone was wrong, and taught to forgive.
In the early days of the Anabaptist movement, Menno Simons, a Catholic priest in the Low Countries, heard of the movement and started to rethink his Catholic faith. He questioned the doctrine of transubstantiation but was reluctant to leave the Roman Catholic Church. His brother, a member of an Anabaptist group, was killed when he and his companions were attacked and refused to defend themselves. In 1536, at the age of 40, Simons left the Roman Catholic Church. He soon became a leader within the Anabaptist movement and was wanted by authorities for the rest of his life. His name became associated with scattered groups of nonviolent Anabaptists whom he helped to organize and consolidate.

=== Fragmentation and variation ===
During the 16th century, the Mennonites and other Anabaptists were relentlessly persecuted. This period of persecution has had a significant impact on Mennonite identity. &quot;Martyrs Mirror&quot;, published in 1660, documents much of the persecution of Anabaptists and their predecessors, including accounts of over 4,000 burnings of individuals, and numerous stonings, imprisonments, and live burials. Today, the book is still the most important book besides the Bible for many Mennonites and Amish, in particular for the Swiss-South German branch of the Mennonites. Persecution was still going on until 1710 in various parts of Switzerland.

In 1693, Jakob Ammann led an effort to reform the Mennonite church in Switzerland and South Germany to include shunning, to hold communion more often, and other differences. When the discussions fell through, Ammann and his followers split from the other Mennonite congregations. Ammann&#x27;s followers became known as the Amish Mennonites or just Amish. In later years, other schisms among Amish resulted in such groups as the Old Order Amish, New Order Amish, Kauffman Amish Mennonite, Swartzentruber Amish, Conservative Mennonite Conference and Biblical Mennonite Alliance. For instance, near the beginning of the 20th century, some members in the Amish church wanted to begin having Sunday schools and participate in progressive Protestant-style para-church evangelism. Unable to persuade the rest of the Amish, they separated and formed a number of separate groups including the Conservative Mennonite Conference. Mennonites in Canada and other countries typically have independent denominations because of the practical considerations of distance and, in some cases, language. Many times these divisions took place along family lines, with each extended family supporting its own branch.

Political rulers often admitted the Menists or Mennonites into their states because they were honest, hardworking and peaceful. When their practices upset the powerful state churches, princes would renege on exemptions for military service, or a new monarch would take power, and the Mennonites would be forced to flee again, usually leaving everything but their families behind. Often, another monarch in another state would grant them welcome, at least for a while.

While Mennonites in Colonial America were enjoying considerable religious freedom, their counterparts in Europe continued to struggle with persecution and temporary refuge under certain ruling monarchs. They were sometimes invited to settle in areas of poor soil that no one else could farm. By contrast, in the Netherlands, the Mennonites enjoyed a relatively high degree of tolerance. Because the land still needed to be tended, the ruler would not drive out the Mennonites but would pass laws to force them to stay, while at the same time severely limiting their freedom. Mennonites had to build their churches facing onto back streets or alleys, and they were forbidden from announcing the beginning of services with the sound of a bell.

A strong emphasis on &quot;community&quot; was developed under these circumstances. It continues to be typical of Mennonite churches. As a result of frequently being required to give up possessions in order to retain individual freedoms, Mennonites learned to live very simply. This was reflected both in the home and at church, where their dress and their buildings were plain. The music at church, usually simple German chorales, was performed &quot;a cappella&quot;. This style of music serves as a reminder to many Mennonites of their simple lives, as well as their history as a persecuted people. Some branches of Mennonites have retained this &quot;plain&quot; lifestyle into modern times.

=== Statistics ===
The Mennonite World Conference was founded at the first conference in Basel, Switzerland, in 1925 to celebrate the 400th anniversary of Anabaptism. In 2022, the organization had 109 member denominations in 59 countries, and 1.47 million baptized members in 10,300 churches.

== Beliefs and practices ==

The beliefs of the movement are those of the Believers&#x27; Church.

One of the earliest expressions of Mennonite Anabaptist faith was the Schleitheim Confession, adopted on 24 February 1527. Its seven articles covered:
* The Ban (excommunication)
* Breaking of bread (Communion)
* Separation from and shunning of the abomination (the Roman Catholic Church and other &quot;worldly&quot; groups and practices)
* Believer&#x27;s baptism
* Pastors in the church
* Renunciation of the sword (Christian pacifism)
* Renunciation of the oath (swearing as proof of truth)

The Dordrecht Confession of Faith was adopted on 21 April 1632, by Dutch Mennonites, by Alsatian Mennonites in 1660, and by North American Mennonites in 1725. It has been followed by many Mennonite groups over the centuries. With regard to salvation, Mennonites believe:
Traditionally, Mennonites sought to continue the beliefs of early Christianity and thus practice the lovefeast (which includes footwashing, the holy kiss and communion), headcovering, nonresistance, the sharing of possessions and nonconformity to the world; these things are heavily emphasized in Old Order Mennonite and Conservative Mennonite denominations.

Seven ordinances have been taught in many traditional Mennonite churches, which include &quot;baptism, communion, footwashing, marriage, anointing with oil, the holy kiss, and the prayer covering.&quot;

In 1911, the Mennonite church in the Netherlands () was the first Dutch church to have a female pastor authorized; she was Anne Zernike.

There is a wide scope of worship, doctrine and traditions among Mennonites today. This section shows the &quot;main&quot; types of Mennonites as seen from North America. It is far from a specific study of all Mennonite classifications worldwide but it does show a somewhat representative sample of the complicated classifications within the Mennonite faith worldwide.

Moderate Mennonites include the largest denominations, the Mennonite Brethren and the Mennonite Church. In most forms of worship and practice, they differ very little from many Protestant congregations. There is no special form of dress and no restrictions on use of technology. Worship styles vary greatly between different congregations. There is no formal liturgy; services typically consist of singing, scripture reading, prayer and a sermon. Some churches prefer hymns and choirs; others make use of contemporary Christian music with electronic instruments. Mennonite congregations are self-supporting and appoint their own ministers. There is no requirement for ministers to be approved by the denomination, and sometimes ministers from other denominations will be appointed. A small sum, based on membership numbers, is paid to the denomination, which is used to support central functions such as the publication of newsletters and interactions with other denominations and other countries.

The distinguishing characteristics of moderate Mennonite churches tend to be ones of emphasis rather than rule. There is an emphasis on peace, community and service. However, members do not live in a separate community—they participate in the general community as &quot;salt and light&quot; to the world (Matthew 5:13,14). The main elements of Menno Simons&#x27; doctrine are retained but in a moderated form. Banning is rarely practiced and would, in any event, have much less effect than in those denominations where the community is more tightly knit. Excommunication can occur and was notably applied by the Mennonite Brethren to members who joined the military during the Second World War. Service in the military is generally not permitted, but service in the legal profession or law enforcement is acceptable. Outreach and help to the wider community at home and abroad is encouraged. The Mennonite Central Committee (MCC) is a leader in foreign aid provision.

Traditionally, very modest dress was expected, particularly in Conservative Mennonite circles. As the Mennonite population has become urbanized and more integrated into the wider culture, this visible difference has disappeared outside of Conservative Mennonite groups.

The Reformed Mennonite Church, with members in the United States and Canada, represents the first division in the original North American Mennonite body. Called the &quot;First Keepers of the Old Way&quot; by author Stephen Scott, the Reformed Mennonite Church formed in the very early 19th century. Reformed Mennonites see themselves as true followers of Menno Simons&#x27; teachings and of the teachings of the New Testament. They have no church rules, but they rely solely on the Bible as their guide. They insist on strict separation from all other forms of worship and dress in conservative plain garb that preserves 18th century Mennonite details. However, they refrain from forcing their Mennonite faith on their children, allow their children to attend public schools, and have permitted the use of automobiles. They are notable for being the church of Milton S. Hershey&#x27;s mother and famous for the long and bitter ban of Robert Bear, a Pennsylvania farmer who rebelled against what he saw as dishonesty and disunity in the leadership.

The Church of God in Christ, Mennonite, a group often called Holdeman Mennonites after their founder John Holdeman, was founded from a schism in 1859. They emphasize Evangelical conversion and strict church discipline. They stay separate from other Mennonite groups because of their emphasis on the one-true-church doctrine and their use of avoidance toward their own excommunicated members. The Holdeman Mennonites do not believe that the use of modern technology is a sin in itself, but they discourage too intensive a use of the Internet and avoid television, cameras and radio. The group had 24,400 baptized members in 2013.
Old Order Mennonites cover several distinct groups. Some groups use horse and buggy for transportation and speak German while others drive cars and speak English. What most Old Orders share in common is conservative doctrine, dress, and traditions, common roots in 19th-century and early 20th-century schisms, and a refusal to participate in politics and other so-called &quot;sins of the world&quot;. Most Old Order groups also school their children in Mennonite-operated schools.
* Horse and Buggy Old Order Mennonites came from the main series of Old Order schisms that began in 1872 and ended in 1901 in Ontario, Pennsylvania, and the U.S. Midwest, as conservative Mennonites fought the radical changes that the influence of 19th century American Revivalism had on Mennonite worship. Most Horse and Buggy Old Order Mennonites allow the use of tractors for farming, although some groups insist on steel-wheeled tractors to prevent tractors from being used for road transportation. Like the Stauffer or Pike Mennonites (origin 1845 in Lancaster, Pennsylvania), the Groffdale Conference, and the Old Order Mennonite Conference of Ontario, they stress separation from the world, excommunication, and the wearing of plain clothes. Some Old Order Mennonite groups are unlike the Stauffer or Pike Mennonites in that their form of the ban is less severe because the ex-communicant is not shunned, and is therefore not excluded from the family table, shunned by their spouse, or cut off from business dealings.
* Automobile Old Order Mennonites, also known as Weaverland Conference Mennonites (having their origins in the Weaverland District of the Lancaster Conference—also calling &quot;Horning&quot;), or Wisler Mennonites in the U.S. Midwest, or the Markham-Waterloo Mennonite Conference having its origins from the Old Order Mennonites of Ontario, Canada, also evolved from the main series of Old Order schisms from 1872 to 1901. They often share the same meeting houses with, and adhere to almost identical forms of Old Order worship as their Horse and Buggy Old Order brethren with whom they parted ways in the early 20th century. Although this group began using cars in 1927, the cars were required to be plain and painted black. The largest group of Automobile Old Orders are still known today as &quot;Black Bumper&quot; Mennonites because some members still paint their chrome bumpers black.

Stauffer Mennonites, or Pike Mennonites, represent one of the first and most conservative forms of North American Horse and Buggy Mennonites. They were founded in 1845, following conflicts about how to discipline children and spousal abuse by a few Mennonite Church members. They almost immediately began to split into separate churches themselves. Today these groups are among the most conservative of all Swiss Mennonites outside the Amish. They stress strict separation from &quot;the world&quot;, adhere to &quot;strict withdrawal from and shunning of apostate and separated members&quot;, forbid and limit cars and technology and wear plain clothing.

Conservative Mennonites are generally considered those Mennonites who maintain somewhat conservative dress, although carefully accepting other technology. They are not a unified group and are divided into various independent conferences and fellowships such as the Eastern Pennsylvania Mennonite Church Conference. Despite the rapid changes that precipitated the Old Order schisms in the last quarter of the 19th century, most Mennonites in the United States and Canada retained a core of traditional beliefs based on a literal interpretation of the New Testament scriptures as well as more external &quot;plain&quot; practices into the beginning of the 20th century. However, disagreements in the United States and Canada between conservative and progressive (i.e. less emphasis on literal interpretation of scriptures) leaders began in the first half of the 20th century and continue to some extent today.

Following World War II, a conservative movement emerged from scattered separatist groups as a reaction to the Mennonite churches drifting away from their historical traditions. &quot;Plain&quot; became passé as open criticisms of traditional beliefs and practices broke out in the 1950s and 1960s. The first conservative withdrawals from the progressive group began in the 1950s. These withdrawals continue to the present day in what is now the growing Conservative Movement formed from Mennonite schisms and from combinations with progressive Amish groups. While moderate and progressive Mennonite congregations have dwindled in size, the Conservative Movement congregations continue to exhibit considerable growth. Other conservative Mennonite groups descended from the former Amish-Mennonite churches which split, like the Wisler Mennonites, from the Old Order Amish in the latter part of the 19th century. (The Wisler Mennonites are a grouping descended from the Old Mennonite Church.) Other Conservative Mennonite churches descended from more recent groups that have left the Amish, like the Beachy Amish or the Tennessee Brotherhood Churches.

In North America, there are structures and traditions taught as in the Confession of Faith in a Mennonite Perspective of Mennonite Church Canada and Mennonite Church USA.

Many Progressive Mennonite churches allow LGBTQ+ members to worship as church members. In some more conservative congregations and conferences, people who identify as LGBTQ+ have been banned from membership, and leading worship. The Germantown Mennonite Church in Germantown, Pennsylvania is one example of such a progressive Mennonite church.

Most progressive Mennonite Churches place a great emphasis on the Mennonite tradition&#x27;s teachings on pacifism and non-violence. Some progressive Mennonite Churches are part of moderate Mennonite denominations (such as the Mennonite Church USA) while others are independent congregations.

=== Sexuality, marriage, and family mores ===
Most Mennonite denominations hold a conservative position on homosexuality.

The Brethren Mennonite Council for LGBT Interests was founded in 1976 in the United States and has member churches of different denominations in the United States and Canada.

The Mennonite Church Canada leaves the choice to each church for same-sex marriage.

The Mennonite Church in the Netherlands and the Mennonite Church USA which had 62,000 members in 2021, about 12% of American Mennonites, permit same-sex marriage.

== Russian Mennonites ==

The &quot;Russian Mennonites&quot; (German: &quot;Russlandmennoniten&quot;) today are descended from Dutch Anabaptists, who came from the Netherlands and started around 1530 to settle around Danzig and in West Prussia, where they lived for about 250 years. Starting in 1791 they established colonies in the south-west of the Russian Empire and beginning in 1854 also in Volga region and Orenburg Governorate. Their ethno-language is Plautdietsch, a Germanic dialect of the East Low German group, with some Dutch admixture. Today, many traditional Russian Mennonites use Standard German in church and for reading and writing.

In the 1770s Catherine the Great of the Russian Empire acquired a great deal of land north of the Black Sea (in present-day Ukraine) following the Russo-Turkish War and the takeover of the Ottoman vassal, the Crimean Khanate. Russian government officials invited Mennonites living in the Kingdom of Prussia to farm the Ukrainian steppes depopulated by Tatar raids in exchange for religious freedom and military exemption. Over the years Mennonite farmers and businesses were very successful.

In 1854, according to the new Russian government official invitation, Mennonites from Prussia established colonies in Russia&#x27;s Volga region, and later in Orenburg Governorate (Neu Samara Colony).

Between 1874 and 1880 some 16,000 Mennonites of approximately 45,000 left Russia. About nine thousand departed for the United States (mainly Kansas and Nebraska) and seven thousand for Canada (mainly Manitoba). In the 1920s, Russian Mennonites from Canada started to migrate to Latin America (Mexico and Paraguay), soon followed by Mennonite refugees from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Further migrations of these Mennonites led to settlements in Peru, Brazil, Uruguay, Belize, Bolivia and Argentina.

By the beginning of the 20th century, the Mennonites in Russia owned large agricultural estates and some had become successful as industrial entrepreneurs in the cities, employing wage labor. After the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the Russian Civil War (1917–1921), all of these farms (whose owners were called Kulaks) and enterprises were expropriated by local peasants or the Soviet government. Beyond expropriation, Mennonites suffered severe persecution during the course of the Civil War, at the hands of workers, the Bolsheviks and, particularly, the Anarcho-Communists of Nestor Makhno, who considered the Mennonites to be privileged foreigners of the upper class and targeted them. During expropriation, hundreds of Mennonite men, women and children were murdered in these attacks. After the Ukrainian–Soviet War and the takeover of Ukraine by the Soviet Bolsheviks, people who openly practiced religion were in many cases imprisoned by the Soviet government. This led to a wave of Mennonite emigration to the Americas (U.S., Canada and Paraguay).

When the German army invaded the Soviet Union in the summer of 1941 during World War II, many in the Mennonite community perceived them as liberators from the communist regime under which they had suffered. Many Russian Mennonites actively collaborated with the Nazis, including in the rounding up and extermination of their Jewish neighbors, although some also resisted them. When the tide of war turned, many of the Mennonites fled with the German army back to Germany where they were accepted as &quot;Volksdeutsche&quot;. The Soviet government believed that the Mennonites had &quot;collectively collaborated&quot; with the Germans. After the war, many Mennonites in the Soviet Union were forcibly relocated to Siberia and Kazakhstan. Many were sent to gulags as part of the Soviet program of mass internal deportations of various ethnic groups whose loyalty was seen as questionable. Many German-Russian Mennonites who lived to the east (not in Ukraine) were deported to Siberia before the German army&#x27;s invasion and were also often placed in labor camps. In the decades that followed, as the Soviet regime became less brutal, a number of Mennonites returned to Ukraine and Western Russia where they had formerly lived. In the 1990s the governments of Kazakhstan, Russia and Ukraine gave these people the opportunity to emigrate, and the vast majority emigrated to Germany. The Russian Mennonite immigrants in Germany from the 1990s outnumber the pre-1989 community of Mennonites by three to one.

By 2015, the majority of Russian Mennonites and their descendants live in Latin America, Germany and Canada.

The world&#x27;s most conservative Mennonites (in terms of culture and technology) are the Mennonites affiliated with the Lower and Upper Barton Creek Colonies in Belize. Lower Barton is inhabited by Plautdietsch speaking Russian Mennonites, whereas Upper Barton Creek is mainly inhabited by Pennsylvania Dutch language-speaking Mennonites from North America. Neither group uses motors or paint.

== North America ==


Persecution and the search for employment forced Mennonites out of the Netherlands eastward to Germany in the 17th century. As Quaker Evangelists moved into Germany they received a sympathetic audience among the larger of these German-Mennonite congregations around Krefeld, Altona, Hamburg, Gronau and Emden. It was among this group of Quakers and Mennonites, living under ongoing discrimination, that William Penn solicited settlers for his new colony. The first permanent settlement of Mennonites in the American colonies consisted of one Mennonite family and twelve Mennonite-Quaker families of German extraction who arrived from Krefeld, Germany, in 1683 and settled in Germantown, Pennsylvania. Among these early settlers was William Rittenhouse, a lay minister and owner of the first American paper mill. Jacob Gottschalk was the first bishop of this Germantown congregation. Four members of that early group of Mennonites and Mennonite-Quaker, Francis Daniel Pastorius, Abraham op den Graeff, Derick op den Graeff (both cousins to William Penn) and Garret Hendericks signed the first formal protest against slavery in the United States in 1688. The treatise was addressed to slave-holding Quakers in an effort to persuade them to change their ways.

In the early 18th century, 100,000 Germans from the Palatinate emigrated to Pennsylvania, where they became known collectively as the Pennsylvania Dutch (from the Anglicization of &quot;Deutsch&quot;, which now means German but used to mean West Germanic). The Palatinate region had been repeatedly overrun by the French in religious wars, and Queen Anne had invited the Germans to go to the British colonies. Of these immigrants, around 2,500 were Mennonites and 500 were Amish. This group settled farther west than the first group, choosing less expensive land in the Lancaster area. The oldest Mennonite meetinghouse in the United States is the Hans Herr House in West Lampeter Township. A member of this second group, Christopher Dock, authored &quot;Pedagogy&quot;, the first American monograph on education. Today, Mennonites also reside in Kishacoquillas Valley (also known as Big Valley), a valley in Huntingdon and Mifflin counties in Pennsylvania.

During Colonial America, Mennonites were distinguished from other Pennsylvania Germans in three ways: their opposition to the American Revolutionary War in which other German settlers participated on both sides; their resistance to public education; and their disapproval of religious revivalism. Contributions of Mennonites during their period include the idea of separation of church and state and opposition to slavery.

From 1812 to 1860, another wave of Mennonite immigrants settled farther west in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri. These Swiss-German speaking Mennonites, along with Amish, came from Switzerland and Alsace-Lorraine, along with the Amish of northern New York State, formed the nucleus of the Apostolic Christian Church in the United States.

There were also Mennonite settlements in Canada from those who emigrated there chiefly from the United States (Upstate New York, Maryland, and Pennsylvania):
* Niagara region (Bertie, Willoughby, and Humberstone townships), Ontario c. 1780s–1790s 
* St. Jacobs, Ontario c.1819
* Kitchener, Ontario/Waterloo, Ontario c. 1800s
* Cambridge, Ontario c. 1830s
* Markham, Ontario, c. 1800–1820s
* Stouffville, Ontario c. 1803–1805

According to a 2017 report,
&quot;there are two basic strains of Mennonites in Canada: the Swiss-South German Mennonites came via Pennsylvania, and the Dutch-North German Mennonites came via Russia (Ukraine). In the late 1700s and early 1800s &quot;Swiss&quot; Mennonites from Pennsylvania settled in southern Ontario. In the 1870s, a large group of &quot;Russian&quot; Mennonites from Ukraine moved to southern Manitoba. Further waves of &quot;Russian&quot; Mennonites came to Canada in the 1920s and 1940s&quot;. In the last 50 years, Mennonites have been coming to Canada from Mexico. 

During the 1880s, smaller Mennonite groups settled as far west as California, especially around the Paso Robles area.

Old Order Mennonites and Amish are often grouped together in the popular press. That is incorrect, according to a 2017 report by Canadian Mennonite magazine: The customs of Old Order Mennonites, the Amish communities and Old Colony Mennonites have a number of similarities, but the cultural differences are significant enough so that members of one group would not feel comfortable moving to another group. The Old Order Mennonites and Amish have the same European roots and the language spoken in their homes is the same German dialect. Old Colony Mennonites use Low German, a different German dialect.

=== Moderate to progressive Mennonites ===
==== &quot;Old&quot; Mennonite Church (MC) ====
The Swiss-German Mennonites who immigrated to North America in the 18th and 19th centuries and settled first in Pennsylvania, then across the midwestern states (initially Ohio, Indiana, and Kansas), are the root of the former Mennonite Church denomination (MC), colloquially called the &quot;Old Mennonite Church&quot;. This denomination had offices in Elkhart, Indiana, and was the most populous progressive Mennonite denomination before merging with the General Conference Mennonite Church (GCMC) in 2002.

==== Mennonite Brethren Church ====
The Mennonite Brethren Church was established among Plautdietsch-speaking Russian Mennonites in 1860, and has congregations in more than 20 countries, representing about 500,000 members as of 2019.

==== Mennonite Church USA ====
The Mennonite Church USA (MCUSA) and the Mennonite Church Canada are the resulting denominations of the 2002 merger of the (General Assembly) Mennonite Church and the General Conference Mennonite Church. Total membership in Mennonite Church USA denominations decreased from about 133,000, before the merger in 1998, to a total membership of 120,381 in the Mennonite Church USA in 2001. In 2013, membership had fallen to 97,737 members in 839 congregations. In 2016, it had fallen to 78,892 members after the withdrawal of the Lancaster Mennonite Conference. In May 2021 the main page of their website stated a membership of about 62,000.

Pennsylvania remains the hub of the denomination but there are also large numbers of members in Ohio, Indiana, Kansas, and Illinois.

In 1983, the &quot;General Assembly of the Mennonite Church&quot; met jointly with the &quot;General Conference Mennonite Church&quot; in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, in celebration of 300 years in the Americas. Beginning in 1989, a series of consultations, discussions, proposals, and sessions (and a vote in 1995 in favor of merger) led to the unification of these two major North American Mennonite bodies into one denomination organized on two fronts – the Mennonite Church USA and the Mennonite Church Canada. The merger was &quot;finalized&quot; at a joint session in St. Louis, Missouri in 1999, and the Canadian branch moved quickly ahead. The United States branch did not complete their organization until the meeting in Nashville, Tennessee in 2001, which became effective 1 February 2002.

The merger of 1999–2002 at least partially fulfilled the desire of the founders of the General Conference Mennonite Church to create an organization under which all Mennonites could unite. Yet not all Mennonites favored the merger. The Alliance of Mennonite Evangelical Congregations represents one expression of the disappointment with the merger and the events that led up to it.

==== Mennonite Church Canada ====
Mennonite Church Canada is a conference of Mennonites in Canada, with head offices in Winnipeg, Manitoba. As of 2003, the body had about 35,000 members in 235 churches. Beginning in 1989, a series of consultations, discussions, proposals, and sessions led to the unification of two North American bodies (the &quot;Mennonite Church &amp; General Conference Mennonite Church&quot;) and the related Canadian Conference of Mennonites in Canada into the Mennonite Church USA and the Mennonite Church Canada in 2000.

The organizational structure is divided into five regional conferences. Denominational work is administered through a board elected by the delegates to the annual assembly. MC Canada participates in the Canadian Council of Churches, the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada, and the Mennonite World Conference.

=== Conservative Mennonites ===
Conservative Mennonites include numerous groups that identify with the more conservative or traditional element among Mennonite or Anabaptist groups but not necessarily Old Order groups. The majority of Conservative Mennonite churches historically has an Amish and not a Mennonite background. They emerged mostly from the middle group between the Old Order Amish and Amish Mennonites. For more, see Amish Mennonite: Division 1850–1878.

Those identifying with this group drive automobiles, have telephones and use electricity, and some may have personal computers. They also have Sunday school, hold revival meetings, and operate their own Christian schools/parochial schools.

According to a University of Waterloo report, &quot;of the estimated 59,000 Mennonites in Ontario, only about twenty percent are members of conservative groups&quot;. The same report estimated that &quot;there are about 175,000 Mennonites in Canada&quot;.

=== Old Colony Mennonites ===
Old Colony Mennonites are conservative Mennonite groups who are the majority of German speaking so-called Russian Mennonites that originated in the Chortitza Colony in Russia, including the Chortitza, Reinlander, and Sommerfelder groups, which are now most common in Latin America and Canada. There are some 400,000 Russian Mennonites in the world, including children and not yet baptized young people. They should not be confused with Old Order Mennonites with whom they have some similarities.

=== Old Order Mennonites ===
The Old Order Mennonite are living a lifestyle similar to or a bit more liberal than the Old Order Amish. There were more than 27,000 adult, baptized members of Old Order Mennonites in North America and Belize in 2008/9. The total population of Old Order Mennonites groups including children and adults not yet baptized normally is two to three times larger than the number of baptized, adult members, which indicates that the population of Old Order Mennonites was roughly between 60,000 and 80,000 in 2008/9.

=== Alternative service ===
During World War II, Mennonite conscientious objectors were given the options of noncombatant military service, serving in the medical or dental corps under military control, or working in parks and on roads under civilian supervision. Over 95% chose the latter and were placed in Alternative Service camps. Initially the men worked on road building, forestry and firefighting projects. After May 1943, as a labor shortage developed within the nation, men were shifted into agriculture, education and industry. The 10,700 Canadian objectors were mostly Mennonites (63%) and Doukhobors (20%).

In the United States, Civilian Public Service (CPS) provided an alternative to military service during World War II. From 1941 to 1947, 4,665 Mennonites, Amish and Brethren in Christ were among nearly 12,000 conscientious objectors who performed &quot;work of national importance&quot; in 152 CPS camps throughout the United States and Puerto Rico. The draftees worked in areas such as soil conservation, forestry, fire fighting, agriculture, social services and mental health.

The CPS men served without wages and with minimal support from the federal government. The cost of maintaining the CPS camps and providing for the needs of the men was the responsibility of their congregations and families. Mennonite Central Committee coordinated the operation of the Mennonite camps. CPS men served longer than regular draftees, not being released until well past the end of the war. Initially skeptical of the program, government agencies learned to appreciate the men&#x27;s service and requested more workers from the program. CPS made significant contributions to forest fire prevention, erosion and flood control, medical science and reform of the mental health system.

=== Schisms ===

Prior to emigration to America, Anabaptists in Europe were divided between those of Dutch/North German and Swiss/South German background. At first, the Dutch/North German group took their name from Menno Simons, who led them in their early years. Later the Swiss/South German group also adopted the name &quot;Mennonites&quot;. A third group of early Anabaptists, mainly from south-east Germany and Austria were organized by Jakob Hutter and became the Hutterites. The vast majority of Anabaptists of Swiss/South German ancestry today lives in the US and Canada, while the largest group of Dutch/North German Anabaptists are the Russian Mennonites, who live today mostly in Latin America.

A trickle of North German Mennonites began the migration to America in 1683, followed by a much larger migration of Swiss/South German Mennonites beginning in 1707. The Amish are an early split from the Swiss/South German, that occurred in 1693. Over the centuries many Amish individuals and whole churches left the Amish and became Mennonites again.

After immigration to America, many of the early Mennonites split from the main body of North American Mennonites and formed their own separate and distinct churches. The first schism in America occurred in 1778 when Bishop Christian Funk&#x27;s support of the American Revolution led to his excommunication and the formation of a separate Mennonite group known as Funkites. In 1785 the Orthodox Reformed Mennonite Church was formed, and other schisms occurred into the 21st century. Many of these churches were formed as a response to deep disagreements about theology, doctrine, and church discipline as evolution both inside and outside the Mennonite faith occurred. Many of the modern churches are descended from those groups that abandoned traditional Mennonite practices.

Larger groups of Dutch/North German Mennonites came to North America from the Russian Empire after 1873, especially to Kansas and Manitoba. While the more progressive element of these Mennonites assimilated into mainstream society, the more conservative element emigrated to Latin America. Since then there has been a steady flow of Mennonite emigrants from Latin America to North America.

These historical schisms have had an influence on creating the distinct Mennonite denominations, sometimes using mild or severe shunning to show its disapproval of other Mennonite groups.

Some expelled congregations were affiliated both with the Mennonite Church and the General Conference Mennonite Church. The latter did not expel the same congregations. When these two Mennonite denominations formally completed their merger in 2002 to become the new Mennonite Church USA and Mennonite Church Canada denominations, it was still not clear, whether the congregations that were expelled from one denomination, yet included in the other, are considered to be &quot;inside&quot; or &quot;outside&quot; of the new merged denomination. Some Mennonite conferences have chosen to maintain such &quot;disciplined&quot; congregations as &quot;associate&quot; or &quot;affiliate&quot; congregations in the conferences, rather than to expel such congregations. In virtually every case, a dialogue continues between the disciplined congregations and the denomination, as well as their current or former conferences.

== Schools ==

Several Mennonite groups established schools, universities and seminaries. Conservative groups, like the Holdeman, have not only their own schools, but their own curriculum and teaching staff (usually, but not exclusively, young unmarried women).
== Ethnic Mennonites ==
Though Mennonites are a global denomination with church membership from Europe, Asia, Africa and the Americas, certain Mennonite communities that are descended from émigrés from Switzerland and Russia bear the designation of ethnic Mennonites.

In contemporary society, Mennonites are described either as a religious denomination with members of different ethnic origins, or as both an ethnic group and a religious denomination. There is controversy among Mennonites about this issue, with some insisting that they are simply a religious group, while others argue that they form a distinct ethnic group. Historians and sociologists have increasingly started to treat Mennonites as an ethno-religious group, while others have begun to challenge that perception. Discussion also exists as to the term &quot;ethnic Mennonite&quot;; conservative Mennonite groups, who speak Pennsylvania Dutch, Plautdietsch (Low German), or Bernese German fit well into the definition of an ethnic group, while more liberal groups and converts in developing countries do not.

== List of Mennonites surnames ==
This is a list of surnames common among Mennonites in Canada originating (indirectly) from Russia, in descending frequency. The number in brackets indicates the number of places they are higher than on a 20-entry list of surnames of Mennonites in Canada originating (indirectly) from Russia. This list only includes surnames higher on the list concerning West Prussian Mennonites than on the list of surnames of Mennonites in Canada.
*Penner (4) 
*Wiens*
*Janzen (12)
*Enns (6)
*Janz*
*Froese*
*Regehr*
*Harder (8)
*Ewert*
*Pauls*
*Fast*
*Franz*
*Epp*
*Fieguth*
*Albrecht*
* name not on the 20-entry list

Surnames of Frisians include Abrahams, Arens, Behrends, Cornelius, Daniels, Dirksen, Doercksen, Frantzen, Goertzen, Gossen, Harms, Heinrichs, Jantzen, Pauls, Peters, Siemens, and Woelms. Surnames that mostly occur in Frisian congregations include Adrian, Brandt, Buller, Caspar, Flaming, Hamm, Harms, Isaak, Kettler, Kliewer, Knels, Stobbe, Teus, Töws, and Toews, additionally, Pauls, Peters, Unruh, and Fransen and Schmidt. Nickel also is a name mainly of Frisian Mennonites denomination. Unger is a name in congregation of Frisian Mennonites denomination. Foth/Vodt and Arentsen are most likely of Frisian congregations.

==Environmental impacts==

Across Latin America, Mennonite colonization has been seen as a driver of environmental damage associated with land clearance in countries including Belize, Bolivia, Colombia, Mexico, Paraguay, and Peru, while indigenous peoples in Suriname have expressed similar concerns. Since the early- to mid-twentieth century, Mennonite colonization has brought a characteristic, religious approach to cultivation (not generally found in either peasant or corporate farming) and the potential to impact a range of different biomes. Mennonite farmers have cleared large areas of wilderness (greater than the size of the Netherlands) across major transnational regions of Latin America such as the Gran Chaco, the Chiquitano, and the Amazon rainforest. In the process, they have unintentionally devastated many precious natural habitats, often leading to conflict with indigenous peoples. Their commercial success in transforming previously wild lands to make way for soybean production and cattle ranching appears to have provided inspiration for others, including some conglomerates that have reproduced the model on a massive scale. While habitat destruction by Mennonite colonies has been on a smaller scale overall than that recently inflicted by a few very large corporations, the environmental damage is increasingly being contested, sometimes in the form of legal challenges.

The Monitoring of the Andean Amazon Project (MAAP), conducted by the Amazon Conservation Association, has identified Mennonite colonization as a new driver of deforestation in Bolivia and Peru. In Peru, MAAP has identified over 7,000 hectares (27 square miles) of rainforest lost to deforestation between 2017 and 2023 following the arrival of Mennonite settlers, and their colonies have been charged with illegal deforestation.

On the Yucatán Peninsula in Mexico, agricultural expansion following Mennonite settlement has been a driver of deforestation of the native tropical rainforest. In July 2018, Mexican Mennonites were fined $500,000 for unauthorized logging on 1,445 hectares (5½ square miles) of forested ejidos (shared ownership lands) in Quintana Roo.

== Controversies ==
As of 2007, the Quebec government imposed a standard curriculum on all schools (public and private). While private schools may add optional material to the compulsory curriculum, they may not replace it. The Quebec curriculum was unacceptable to the parents of the only Mennonite school in the province. They said they would leave Quebec after the Education Ministry threatened legal actions. The province threatened to invoke youth protection services if the Mennonite children were not registered with the Education Ministry; they either had to be home-schooled using the government-approved material, or attend a &quot;sanctioned&quot; school. The local population and its mayor supported the local Mennonites. The Evangelical Fellowship of Canada wrote that year to the Quebec government to express its concerns about this situation. By September 2007, some Mennonite families had already left Quebec.

Between 2005 and 2009, more than 100 girls and women in the Manitoba Colony of Bolivia were raped at night in their homes by a group of colony men who sedated them with animal anesthetic. Girls and women, including elderly women and relatives to the perpetrators, reported these attacks, but were at first dismissed as &quot;wild female imagination&quot;, or else attributed to ghosts or demons. Eventually a group of colony men were caught in the act. The colony elders, deciding that the case was too difficult to handle themselves, called local police to take the perpetrators into custody in 2011. The youngest victim was three years old, and the oldest was 65. The offenders used a type of gas used by veterinarians to sedate animals during medical procedures. Despite long custodial sentences for the convicted men, an investigation in 2013 reported continuing cases of similar assaults and other sexual abuses. Canadian author Miriam Toews has made these crimes the center of her 2018 novel &quot;Women Talking&quot;.
Connections between farmers and Mexican drug cartels in the state of Chihuahua have seen their parallels across Mexico throughout the Mexican drug war.

===Sexual misconduct cases===
== Service projects ==

The Mennonite Disaster Service, based in North America, is a volunteer network of Anabaptist churches which provide both immediate and long-term responses to hurricanes, floods, and other disasters in the U.S. and Canada.

Mennonite Central Committee (MCC), founded on 27 September 1920, in Chicago, Illinois, provides disaster relief around the world alongside their long-term international development programs. In 1972, Mennonites in Altona, Manitoba, established the MCC Thrift Shops which has grown to become a worldwide source of assistance to the needy.

Since the latter part of the 20th century, some Mennonite groups have become more actively involved with peace and social justice issues, helping to found Christian Peacemaker Teams and Mennonite Conciliation Service.

== Membership ==

According to a 2018 census by the Mennonite World Conference (MWC), it has 107 member denominations in 58 countries, and 1.47 million baptized members. Their membership in 2023 included 108 denominations from 60 countries, and around 1.45 million baptized members in over 10,180 congregations. As of 2023, 84% of baptized members in MWC member churches were African, Asian or Latin American, and 16% were located in Europe and North America.

Africa has the highest membership growth rate by far, with an increase of 10% to 12% every year, particularly in Ethiopia due to new conversions. African Mennonite churches underwent a dramatic 228% increase in membership during the 1980s and 1990s, attracting thousands of new converts in Tanzania, Kenya, and the Congo. Programs were also founded in Botswana and Swaziland during the 1960s. Mennonite organizations in South Africa, initially stifled under apartheid due to the Afrikaner government&#x27;s distrust of foreign pacifist churches, have expanded substantially since 1994. In recognition of the dramatic increase in the proportion of African adherents, the Mennonite World Conference held its assembly in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, in 2003.

In Latin America growth is not as high as in Africa, but strong because of the high birth rates of traditional Mennonites of German ancestry. Growth in Mennonite membership is steady and has outpaced total population growth in North America, the Asia/Pacific region and Caribbean region. Europe has seen a slow and accelerating decline in Mennonite membership since about 1980.

=== Organization worldwide ===

The most basic unit of organization among Mennonites is the church. There are hundreds or thousands of Mennonite churches and groups, many of which are separate from all others. Some churches are members of regional or area conferences. And some regional or area conferences are affiliated with larger national or international conferences. There is no single world authority on among Mennonites, however there is a Mennonite World Committee (MWC) includes Mennonites from 60 countries. The MWC does not make binding decisions on behalf of members but coordinates Mennonite causes aligning with the MWC&#x27;s shared convictions.

For the most part, there is a host of independent Mennonite churches along with a myriad of separate conferences with no particular responsibility to any other group. Independent churches can contain as few as fifty members or as many as 20,000 members. Similar size differences occur among separate conferences. Worship, church discipline and lifestyles vary widely between progressive, moderate, conservative, Old Order and orthodox Mennonites in a vast panoply of distinct, independent, and widely dispersed classifications. There is no central authority that claims to speak for all Mennonites, as the 20th century passed, cultural distinctiveness between Mennonite groups has decreased.

The largest Mennonite/Anabaptist groups are:

# Mennonite Brethren (426,581 members in 2010 worldwide)
# Old Order Amish (383,565 members in 2023 worldwide)
# Meserete Kristos Church in Ethiopia (295,500 members in 2017; over 500,000 attendance)
# Old Colony Mennonite Church (120,000 in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, Bolivia, Paraguay, Belize and Argentina)
# &quot;Communauté Mennonite au Congo&quot; (86,600 members)
# Old Order Mennonites (60,000 to 80,000 members in the U.S., Canada and Belize)
# Mennonite Church USA (about 62,000 members in the United States)
# &quot;Kanisa La Mennonite&quot; Tanzania (50,000 members in 240 congregations)
# Conservative Mennonites (30,000 members in over 500 U.S. churches)
# Mennonite Church Canada (26,000 members in 2018)
# Church of God in Christ, Mennonite (24,400 members, of whom 14,804 (2013 data) were in U.S., 5,081 in Canada, and the remainder in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, the Caribbean, and Europe)

=== Organization: North America ===
In 2015, there were 538,839 baptized members organized into 41 bodies in the United States, according to the Mennonite World Conference. The largest group of that number is the Old Order Amish. According to the Association of Religion Data Archives, in 2001 there were 80,820 Old Order Amish church members living in the United States. The U.S. Conference of Mennonite Brethren Churches comprises 34,500 members. 27,000 are part of a larger group known collectively as Old Order Mennonites. Another 78,892 of that number are from the Mennonite Church USA.

Total membership in Mennonite Church USA denominations decreased from about 133,000, before the MC-GC merger in 1998, to about 114,000 after the merger in 2003. In 2016 it had fallen to under 79,000. Membership of the Mennonite Church USA is on the decline.

Canada had 143,720 Mennonites in 16 organized bodies as of 2015. Of that number, the Canadian Conference of Mennonite Brethren Churches had 37,508 baptized members and the Mennonite Church Canada had 31,000 members.

As of 2012, there were an estimated 100,000 Old Colony Mennonites in Mexico. These Mennonites descend from a mass migration in the 1920s of roughly 6,000 Old Colony Mennonites from the Canadian provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan. In 1921, a Canadian Mennonite delegation arriving in Mexico received a &quot;privilegium&quot;, a promise of non-interference, from the Mexican government. This guarantee of many freedoms was the impetus that created the two original Old Colony settlements near Patos Nuevo Ideal, Durango, Cuauhtémoc, Chihuahua and La Honda, Zacatecas.

On the other hand, the Mennonite World Conference cites only 33,881 Mennonites organized into 14 bodies in Mexico.

=== Organization: Africa ===
=== Organization: Europe ===
Germany has the largest contingent of Mennonites in Europe. The Mennonite World Conference counts 47,202 baptized members within 7 organized bodies in 2015. The largest group is the &quot;Bruderschaft der Christengemeinde in Deutschland&quot; (Mennonite Brethren), which had 20,000 members in 2010. Another such body is the Union of German Mennonite Congregations or &quot;Vereinigung der Deutschen Mennonitengemeinden&quot;. Founded in 1886, it has 27 Congregations with 5,724 members and is part of the larger &quot;Arbeitsgemeinschaft Mennonitischer Gemeinden in Deutschland&quot; or AMG (Assembly/Council of Mennonite Churches in Germany), which claims 40,000 overall members from various groups. Other AMG member groups include: &quot;Rußland-Deutschen Mennoniten&quot;, &quot;Mennoniten-Brüdergemeinden&quot;(Independent Mennonite Brethren congregations), &quot;WEBB-Gemeinden&quot;, and the &quot;Mennonitischen Heimatmission&quot;. However, not all German Mennonites belong to this larger AMG body. Upwards of 40,000 Mennonites emigrated from Russia to Germany starting in the 1970s.

The Mennonite presence remaining in the Netherlands, &quot;Algemene Doopsgezinde Societeit&quot; or ADS (translated as &quot;General Mennonite Society&quot;), maintains a seminary, as well as organizing relief, peace, and mission work, the latter primarily in Central Java and New Guinea. They have 121 congregations with 10,200 members according to the World Council of Churches, although the Mennonite World Conference cites only 7680 members.

Switzerland had 1800 Mennonites belonging to 14 Congregations which are part of the &quot;Konferenz der Mennoniten der Schweiz (Alttäufer), Conférence mennonite suisse (Anabaptiste)&quot; (Swiss Mennonite Conference). 

In 2015, there were 2078 Mennonites in France. The country&#x27;s 32 autonomous Mennonite congregations have formed the &quot;Association des Églises Évangéliques Mennonites de France&quot;.

While Ukraine was once home to tens of thousands of Mennonites, in 2015 the number totalled just 499. They are organized among three denominations: &quot;Association of Mennonite Brethren Churches of Ukraine&quot;, &quot;Church of God in Christ, Mennonite (Ukraine)&quot;, and &quot;Evangelical Mennonite Churches of Ukraine (Beachy Amish Church – Ukraine)&quot;.

The U.K. had but 326 members within two organized bodies as of 2015. There is the Nationwide Fellowship Churches (UK) and the larger Brethren in Christ Church United Kingdom. Additionally, there is the registered charity, &quot;The Mennonite Trust&quot; (formerly known as &quot;London Mennonite Centre&quot;), which seeks to promote understanding of Mennonite and Anabaptist practices and values.

== In popular culture ==

Mennonites have been portrayed in many areas of popular culture, especially literature, film, and television. Notable novels about or written by Mennonites include &quot;A Complicated Kindness&quot; by Miriam Toews, &quot;Peace Shall Destroy Many&quot; by Rudy Wiebe, &quot;The Salvation of Yasch Siemens&quot; by Armin Wiebe, &quot;The Russlander&quot; by Sandra Birdsell, &quot;A Year of Lesser&quot; by David Bergen, &quot;A Dream of a Woman&quot; by Casey Plett, and &quot;Once Removed&quot; by Andrew Unger. Rhoda Janzen&#x27;s memoir &quot;Mennonite in a Little Black Dress&quot; was a best-seller. In 1975 Victor Davies composed the Mennonite Piano Concerto and in 1977 composer Glenn Gould featured Manitoba Mennonites in his experimental radio documentary &quot;The Quiet in the Land&quot;, part three of his Solitude Trilogy. In the 1990s, photographer Larry Towell documented the lives of Canadian and Mexican Mennonites, subsequently published in a volume by Phaidon Press. In 2007, Mexican director Carlos Reygadas directed &quot;Silent Light&quot;, the first ever feature film in the Russian Mennonite dialect of Plautdietsch. Other films depicting Mennonites include &quot;I Propose We Never See Each Other Again After Tonight&quot;, as well as &quot;All My Puny Sorrows&quot; and the Oscar-winning &quot;Women Talking&quot;, both based on Miriam Toews novels. Mennonites have also been depicted on television, including the show &quot;Pure&quot;, and in episodes of &quot;Schitt&#x27;s Creek&quot;, &quot;Letterkenny&quot; and &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, which was created by Matt Groening, himself of Russian Mennonite descent. Andrew Unger&#x27;s satirical news website &quot;The Unger Review&quot; (formerly called &quot;The Daily Bonnet&quot;) pokes fun at Mennonite culture and traditions.

== See also ==
* Bible Mennonite Fellowship
* Bruderhof Communities
* Church of God in Christ, Mennonite
* Eastern Mennonite Missions
* Vincent Harding
* Guy Hershberger
* List of Mennonites
* Mennonite Church USA Archives
* Mennonite cuisine
* Mennonite denominations
* Mennonites in Argentina
* Mennonites in Belize
* Mennonites in Bolivia
* Mennonites in Mexico
* Mennonites in Paraguay
* Mennonites in Russia
* Mennonites in Uruguay
* Mennonite literature
* Mennonite settlements of Altai
* &quot;More-with-Less Cookbook&quot;
* &quot;Portrait of a Man in a Wide-Brimmed Hat&quot;
* Rot-Front, Kazakhstan
* Simple living
* Virginia Mennonite Missions

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
== Further reading ==
* Epp, Marlene &quot;Mennonites in Ontario.&quot; Mennonite Historical Society of Ontario, 2012. 
* Epp, Marlene &quot;Mennonite Women in Canada: A History&quot; (Winnipeg, University of Manitoba Press, 2008. xiii + 378 pp.) 
* Epp, Marlene &quot;Women without Men: Mennonite Refugees of the Second World War.&quot; University of Toronto Press, 2000. 
* Epp, Maureen. &quot;Sound in the Lands: Mennonite Music Across Borders&quot; (Kitchener, ON: Pandora Press, 2011).
* Gingerich, Melvin (1949), &quot;Service for Peace, A History of Mennonite Civilian Public Service&quot;, Mennonite Central Committee.
* Harder, Helmut and Miller, Larry, &quot;Mennonite Engagement in International Ecumenical Conversations: Experiences, Perspectives, and Guiding Principles,&quot; &quot;Mennonite Quarterly Review&quot; 90(3) (2016), 345–71.
* Heisey, M. J. Mennonite Religion was a Family Religion&#x27;: A Historiography,&quot; &quot;Journal of Mennonite Studies&quot; (2005), Vol. 23 pp. 9–22.
* Hinojosa, Felipe (2014). &quot;Latino Mennonites: Civil Rights, Faith, and Evangelical Culture.&quot; Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
* Horsch, James E. (Ed.) (1999), &quot;Mennonite Directory&quot;, Herald Press. 
* Kinberg, Clare. &quot;Mennonites.&quot; om &quot;Gale Encyclopedia of Multicultural America,&quot; edited by Thomas Riggs, (3rd ed., vol. 3, Gale, 2014), pp. 171–182. Online
* Klassen, Pamela E. &quot;Going by the Moon and the Stars: Stories of Two Russian Mennonite Women&quot;. Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1994. 
* Krahn, Cornelius, Gingerich, Melvin &amp; Harms, Orlando (Eds.) (1955). &quot;The Mennonite Encyclopedia&quot;, Volume I, pp. 76–78. Mennonite Publishing House.
* Kraybill, D. B. &quot;Concise Encyclopedia of Amish, Brethren, Hutterites, and Mennonites&quot; (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010).
* Mennonite &amp; Brethren in Christ World Directory 2003. Available On-line at MWC – World Directory
* Pannabecker, Samuel Floyd (1975), &quot;Open Doors: A History of the General Conference Mennonite Church&quot;, Faith and Life Press. 
* Scott, Stephen (1995), &quot;An Introduction to Old Order and Conservative Mennonite Groups&quot;, Good Books, 
* Smith, C. Henry (1981), &quot;Smith&#x27;s Story of the Mennonites&quot; (5th ed. Faith and Life Press). 
* Van Braght, Thielman J. (1660), &quot;Martyrs Mirror&quot; (2nd English ed. Herald Press) 

== External links ==

* Lancaster Mennonite Historical Society, in Pennsylvania 
* Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online (GAMEO) 
* Global Anabaptist Wiki 
* Mennonite World Conference 
* Pilgrim Ministry: Conservative Mennonite church directory 
* The Swiss Mennonite Cultural and Historical Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="0" end="10" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="26" end="36" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="37" end="46" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786655" start="99" end="118" title="Radical Reformation" label="Radical Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q335171" start="179" end="191" title="Menno Simons" label="Menno Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="207" end="216" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="230" end="247" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="261" end="272" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="376" end="389" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="406" end="424" title="Philip Melanchthon" label="Philip Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="469" end="480" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q749771" start="657" end="674" title="ministry of Jesus" label="ministry of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q957109" start="722" end="751" title="Dordrecht Confession of Faith" label="Dordrecht Confession of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049575" start="985" end="998" title="nonresistance" label="nonresistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1150" end="1160" title="Holy Bible" label="Holy Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532651" start="1329" end="1352" title="believer&amp;#x27;s baptism" label="believer&amp;#x27;s baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12371246" start="1422" end="1436" title="peace churches" label="peace churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="1465" end="1473" title="Christian pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="1521" end="1539" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="1668" end="1687" title="Old Order Mennonite" label="Old Order Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186735" start="1765" end="1788" title="Conservative Mennonites" label="Conservative Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200646" start="1845" end="1856" title="plain dress" label="plain dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100801" start="2076" end="2086" title="Ordinance (Christianity)" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q182320" start="2532" end="2567" title="Mennonites in the Netherlands" label="Mennonite Church in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747620" start="2836" end="2853" title="ethnic Mennonites" label="ethnic Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251697" start="2959" end="2997" title="deforestation of the Amazon rainforest" label="deforestation of the Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="3106" end="3116" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="3451" end="3473" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3534" end="3555" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="3616" end="3623" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="3920" end="3933" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="3938" end="3954" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="3997" end="4012" title="Reformed churches" label="Reformed church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="4099" end="4112" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q426043" start="4208" end="4219" title="free church" label="free church"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="4317" end="4322" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q115638" start="4429" end="4442" title="Conrad Grebel" label="Conrad Grebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q124188" start="4444" end="4454" title="Felix Manz" label="Felix Manz"/>
<link wikidata="Q124175" start="4460" end="4475" title="George Blaurock" label="George Blaurock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="4693" end="4704" title="eschatology" label="eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207894" start="4764" end="4772" title="chastity" label="chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786655" start="4828" end="4847" title="Radical Reformation" label="Radical Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q691882" start="5033" end="5050" title="Münster Rebellion" label="Münster Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="5335" end="5340" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="5777" end="5787" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q106916972" start="5933" end="5945" title="Batenburgers" label="Batenburgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335171" start="6228" end="6240" title="Menno Simons" label="Menno Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="6267" end="6280" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q214500" start="6377" end="6395" title="transubstantiation" label="transubstantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q554482" start="6995" end="7005" title="Persecution of Christians" label="persecuted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537412" start="7092" end="7106" title="Martyrs Mirror" label="Martyrs Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="7239" end="7262" title="death by burning" label="burnings of individuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q193777" start="7277" end="7284" title="stoning" label="stoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="7287" end="7299" title="imprisonment" label="imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q861534" start="7306" end="7318" title="premature burial" label="live burials"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060" start="7570" end="7582" title="Jakob Ammann" label="Jakob Ammann"/>
<link wikidata="Q204244" start="7672" end="7680" title="shunning" label="shunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="7885" end="7890" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="7990" end="8005" title="Amish" label="Old Order Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858148" start="8007" end="8022" title="New Order Amish" label="New Order Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325261" start="8024" end="8048" title="Kauffman Amish Mennonite" label="Kauffman Amish Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148775" start="8050" end="8070" title="Swartzentruber Amish" label="Swartzentruber Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163052" start="8072" end="8105" title="Rosedale Network of Churches" label="Conservative Mennonite Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841495" start="8110" end="8137" title="Biblical Mennonite Alliance" label="Biblical Mennonite Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="8249" end="8262" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="9246" end="9262" title="Colonial America" label="Colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="10421" end="10431" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q744587" start="10689" end="10715" title="Mennonite World Conference" label="Mennonite World Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="10755" end="10760" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="10821" end="10831" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q61708049" start="11034" end="11056" title="Believers&amp;#x27; Church" label="Believers&amp;#x27; Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q265613" start="11129" end="11151" title="Schleitheim Confession" label="Schleitheim Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="11221" end="11236" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="11259" end="11268" title="Eucharist" label="Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q443666" start="11308" end="11319" title="Abomination (Bible)" label="abomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="11427" end="11433" title="Pastor" label="Pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="11478" end="11496" title="Christian pacifism" label="Christian pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q957109" start="11559" end="11588" title="Dordrecht Confession of Faith" label="Dordrecht Confession of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="11795" end="11804" title="salvation in Christianity" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="11886" end="11904" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670127" start="11927" end="11936" title="lovefeast" label="lovefeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351369" start="11953" end="11964" title="footwashing" label="footwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456750" start="11970" end="11979" title="holy kiss" label="holy kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="11984" end="11993" title="Holy Communion" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885639" start="11996" end="12008" title="Christian headcovering" label="headcovering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049575" start="12010" end="12023" title="nonresistance" label="nonresistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25035950" start="12056" end="12082" title="nonconformity to the world" label="nonconformity to the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="12123" end="12142" title="Old Order Mennonite" label="Old Order Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186735" start="12147" end="12169" title="Conservative Mennonite" label="Conservative Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100801" start="12192" end="12202" title="Ordinance (Christianity)" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q540959" start="12513" end="12525" title="Anne Zernike" label="Anne Zernike"/>
<link wikidata="Q907453" start="12956" end="12974" title="Mennonite Brethren" label="Mennonite Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789966" start="14201" end="14210" title="Matthew 5" label="Matthew 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186735" start="14928" end="14950" title="Conservative Mennonite" label="Conservative Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307520" start="15140" end="15158" title="Reformed Mennonite" label="Reformed Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663143" start="15352" end="15365" title="Stephen Scott (writer)" label="Stephen Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="15549" end="15562" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="15619" end="15624" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q737720" start="15997" end="16014" title="Milton S. Hershey" label="Milton S. Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116891" start="16190" end="16224" title="Church of God in Christ, Mennonite" label="Church of God in Christ, Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="16815" end="16835" title="Old Order Mennonites" label="Old Order Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610106" start="17882" end="17902" title="Groffdale Conference Mennonite Church" label="Groffdale Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="18334" end="18354" title="Old Order Mennonites" label="Old Order Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770983" start="18564" end="18601" title="Markham-Waterloo Mennonite Conference" label="Markham-Waterloo Mennonite Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904411" start="19116" end="19151" title="Black-bumper Mennonite" label="&amp;quot;Black Bumper&amp;quot; Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604722" start="19214" end="19232" title="Stauffer Mennonite" label="Stauffer Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="19440" end="19453" title="spousal abuse" label="spousal abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186735" start="19871" end="19894" title="Conservative Mennonites" label="Conservative Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="20602" end="20614" title="Christian fundamentalism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192033" start="21877" end="21889" title="Beachy Amish" label="Beachy Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248639" start="22107" end="22118" title="Progressive Christianity" label="Progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="22144" end="22150" title="LGBTQ+" label="LGBTQ+"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="22553" end="22561" title="Christian pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="22566" end="22578" title="non-violence" label="non-violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920636" start="22674" end="22694" title="Mennonite Church USA" label="Mennonite Church USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q597638" start="23044" end="23067" title="Mennonite Church Canada" label="Mennonite Church Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="23105" end="23122" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q182320" start="23129" end="23164" title="Mennonites in the Netherlands" label="Mennonite Church in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920636" start="23173" end="23193" title="Mennonite Church USA" label="Mennonite Church USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="23269" end="23286" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="23422" end="23433" title="Anabaptists" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q161947" start="23520" end="23532" title="West Prussia" label="West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="23640" end="23654" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634214" start="23685" end="23697" title="Volga region" label="Volga region"/>
<link wikidata="Q392133" start="23702" end="23722" title="Orenburg Governorate" label="Orenburg Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751432" start="23748" end="23760" title="Plautdietsch" label="Plautdietsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36443" start="23788" end="23803" title="East Low German" label="East Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="23821" end="23826" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="23885" end="23900" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="23954" end="23973" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="23981" end="23995" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="24039" end="24048" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="24065" end="24072" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123070" start="24088" end="24105" title="Russo-Turkish War (1768–74)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="24130" end="24137" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="24150" end="24165" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="24229" end="24247" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242966" start="24293" end="24304" title="Crimean-Nogai raids into East Slavic lands" label="Tatar raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634214" start="24566" end="24578" title="Volga region" label="Volga region"/>
<link wikidata="Q392133" start="24593" end="24613" title="Orenburg Governorate" label="Orenburg Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979186" start="24615" end="24632" title="Neu Samara Colony" label="Neu Samara Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="24996" end="25031" title="Soviet Union" label="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="25351" end="25377" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="25386" end="25403" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q220790" start="25462" end="25467" title="Kulak" label="Kulak"/>
<link wikidata="Q275038" start="25555" end="25568" title="Confiscation" label="expropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="25674" end="25684" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="25708" end="25726" title="Anarcho-Communism" label="Anarcho-Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q47900" start="25730" end="25743" title="Nestor Makhno" label="Nestor Makhno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419855" start="25951" end="25971" title="Ukrainian–Soviet War" label="Ukrainian–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="26014" end="26024" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q313323" start="26713" end="26726" title="Volksdeutsche" label="Volksdeutsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="26923" end="26930" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="26965" end="26970" title="gulag" label="gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q85125" start="26987" end="27031" title="Population transfer in the Soviet Union" label="Soviet program of mass internal deportations"/>
<link wikidata="Q628505" start="27261" end="27271" title="labor camp" label="labor camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166742" start="27948" end="27985" title="Barton Creek (Belize)" label="Lower and Upper Barton Creek Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22711" start="28118" end="28145" title="Pennsylvania Dutch language" label="Pennsylvania Dutch language"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="28372" end="28378" title="Quakers" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805" start="28511" end="28518" title="Krefeld" label="Krefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630" start="28520" end="28535" title="Altona, Hamburg" label="Altona, Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924" start="28537" end="28543" title="Gronau, North Rhine-Westphalia" label="Gronau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4174" start="28548" end="28553" title="Emden" label="Emden"/>
<link wikidata="Q209152" start="28648" end="28660" title="William Penn" label="William Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805" start="28879" end="28886" title="Krefeld" label="Krefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q279890" start="28920" end="28944" title="Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Germantown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q142339" start="28977" end="28996" title="William Rittenhouse" label="William Rittenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210441" start="29057" end="29073" title="Jacob Gottschalk" label="Jacob Gottschalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q216163" start="29197" end="29221" title="Francis Daniel Pastorius" label="Francis Daniel Pastorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q214730" start="29223" end="29244" title="Abraham op den Graeff" label="Abraham op den Graeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q123690154" start="29246" end="29266" title="Derick op den Graeff" label="Derick op den Graeff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29302" end="29319" title="Garret Hendericks" label="Garret Hendericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551872" start="29331" end="29388" title="1688 Germantown Quaker Petition Against Slavery" label="first formal protest against slavery in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="29555" end="29565" title="Palatinate region" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="29689" end="29696" title="German language" label="Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="30073" end="30082" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650145" start="30151" end="30166" title="Hans Herr House" label="Hans Herr House"/>
<link wikidata="Q385102" start="30170" end="30192" title="West Lampeter Township, Pennsylvania" label="West Lampeter Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112228" start="30225" end="30241" title="Christopher Dock" label="Christopher Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416520" start="30350" end="30371" title="Kishacoquillas Valley" label="Kishacoquillas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q494077" start="30412" end="30422" title="Huntingdon County, Pennsylvania" label="Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q494161" start="30427" end="30434" title="Mifflin County, PA" label="Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="30469" end="30485" title="Colonial America" label="Colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="30541" end="30548" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="30588" end="30614" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="30827" end="30857" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="30876" end="30883" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="30966" end="30970" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="30972" end="30979" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="30981" end="30989" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="30994" end="31002" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="31072" end="31083" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="31088" end="31103" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="31138" end="31152" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087403" start="31180" end="31206" title="Apostolic Christian Church" label="Apostolic Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="31341" end="31357" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q381896" start="31390" end="31404" title="Niagara region" label="Niagara region"/>
<link wikidata="Q268103" start="31406" end="31412" title="Bertie Township" label="Bertie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022201" start="31414" end="31424" title="Willoughby Township, Ontario" label="Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q424704" start="31430" end="31441" title="Humberstone, Ontario" label="Humberstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495261" start="31480" end="31499" title="St. Jacobs, Ontario" label="St. Jacobs, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q200166" start="31509" end="31527" title="Kitchener, Ontario" label="Kitchener, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q639408" start="31528" end="31545" title="Waterloo, Ontario" label="Waterloo, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028279" start="31557" end="31575" title="Cambridge, Ontario" label="Cambridge, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q44016" start="31587" end="31603" title="Markham, Ontario" label="Markham, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q483334" start="31621" end="31641" title="Whitchurch–Stouffville" label="Stouffville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="32312" end="32322" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q586528" start="32346" end="32357" title="Paso Robles" label="Paso Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="33203" end="33220" title="Midwestern United States" label="midwestern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="33251" end="33257" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008706" start="33414" end="33421" title="Elkhart, Indiana" label="Elkhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q597638" start="33877" end="33900" title="Mennonite Church Canada" label="Mennonite Church Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483225" start="34362" end="34392" title="Lancaster Mennonite Conference" label="Lancaster Mennonite Conference"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34628" end="34668" title="Mennonite Church USA#(General Assembly) Mennonite Church (MC)" label="General Assembly of the Mennonite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531795" start="34702" end="34737" title="General Conference Mennonite Church" label="General Conference Mennonite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="34747" end="34770" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q597638" start="35095" end="35118" title="Mennonite Church Canada" label="Mennonite Church Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="35179" end="35198" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="35335" end="35355" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732456" start="35642" end="35689" title="Alliance of Mennonite Evangelical Congregations" label="Alliance of Mennonite Evangelical Congregations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="35909" end="35917" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="35919" end="35927" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531795" start="36161" end="36196" title="General Conference Mennonite Church" label="General Conference Mennonite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920636" start="36273" end="36293" title="Mennonite Church USA" label="Mennonite Church USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q744587" start="36615" end="36641" title="Mennonite World Conference" label="Mennonite World Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186735" start="36676" end="36699" title="Conservative Mennonites" label="Conservative Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746805" start="37043" end="37058" title="Amish Mennonite" label="Amish Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37075" end="37110" title="Amish Mennonite#Division 1850–1878" label="Amish Mennonite: Division 1850–1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="37369" end="37391" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q571942" start="37747" end="37764" title="Russian Mennonite" label="Russian Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="38266" end="38271" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="38714" end="38726" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="38738" end="38761" title="conscientious objectors" label="conscientious objectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="39281" end="39290" title="Doukhobor" label="Doukhobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124726" start="39322" end="39345" title="Civilian Public Service" label="Civilian Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q910556" start="39464" end="39482" title="Brethren in Christ" label="Brethren in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q45135" start="40915" end="40927" title="Jakob Hutter" label="Jakob Hutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="40943" end="40952" title="Hutterite" label="Hutterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q571942" start="41119" end="41137" title="Russian Mennonites" label="Russian Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="41349" end="41354" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509267" start="41896" end="41903" title="Funkite" label="Funkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="42388" end="42402" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="42429" end="42435" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="42440" end="42448" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q204244" start="42829" end="42837" title="shunning" label="shunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747620" start="44319" end="44336" title="ethnic Mennonites" label="ethnic Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="44778" end="44799" title="ethno-religious group" label="ethno-religious group"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747620" start="44899" end="44915" title="ethnic Mennonite" label="ethnic Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22711" start="44964" end="44982" title="Pennsylvania Dutch language" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751432" start="44984" end="44996" title="Plautdietsch" label="Plautdietsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077088" start="45014" end="45028" title="Bernese German" label="Bernese German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648362" start="45619" end="45625" title="Penner (disambiguation)" label="Penner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232986" start="45632" end="45637" title="Wiens (disambiguation)" label="Wiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q21494564" start="45640" end="45646" title="Janzen" label="Janzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868197" start="45653" end="45657" title="Enns (surname)" label="Enns"/>
<link wikidata="Q37566212" start="45663" end="45667" title="Janz" label="Janz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469505" start="45670" end="45676" title="Froese" label="Froese"/>
<link wikidata="Q37106612" start="45679" end="45685" title="Regehr" label="Regehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870504" start="45688" end="45694" title="Harder (surname)" label="Harder"/>
<link wikidata="Q344754" start="45700" end="45705" title="Ewert" label="Ewert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16856145" start="45708" end="45713" title="Pauls (surname)" label="Pauls"/>
<link wikidata="Q342933" start="45716" end="45720" title="Fast (disambiguation)" label="Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696104" start="45723" end="45728" title="Franz (surname)" label="Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383833" start="45731" end="45734" title="Epp (surname)" label="Epp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158323" start="45747" end="45755" title="Albrecht" label="Albrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q21446971" start="45819" end="45827" title="Abrahams" label="Abrahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q47003595" start="45829" end="45834" title="Arens" label="Arens"/>
<link wikidata="Q21493490" start="45836" end="45844" title="Behrends" label="Behrends"/>
<link wikidata="Q17518364" start="45846" end="45855" title="Cornelius (name)" label="Cornelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869404" start="45857" end="45864" title="Daniels (surname)" label="Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q21449410" start="45866" end="45873" title="Dirksen" label="Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45875" end="45884" title="Doercksen" label="Doercksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27892793" start="45886" end="45894" title="Frantzen" label="Frantzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37446547" start="45896" end="45904" title="Goertzen" label="Goertzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204882" start="45906" end="45912" title="Gossen (disambiguation)" label="Gossen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488337" start="45914" end="45919" title="Harms" label="Harms"/>
<link wikidata="Q21507803" start="45921" end="45930" title="Heinrichs" label="Heinrichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683012" start="45932" end="45939" title="Jantzen (disambiguation)" label="Jantzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16856145" start="45941" end="45946" title="Pauls (surname)" label="Pauls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079518" start="45948" end="45954" title="Peters (surname)" label="Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16883318" start="45956" end="45963" title="Siemens (surname)" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45969" end="45975" title="Woelms" label="Woelms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46247" end="46265" title="Frisian Mennonites" label="Frisian Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46315" end="46333" title="Frisian Mennonites" label="Frisian Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459935" start="46590" end="46596" title="Environmental issues in Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381272" start="46598" end="46605" title="Deforestation in Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251679" start="46607" end="46615" title="Deforestation in Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46617" end="46623" title="Geography of Mexico#Environmental conditions" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381305" start="46625" end="46633" title="Deforestation in Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q107580496" start="46639" end="46643" title="Deforestation in Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034885" start="46651" end="46681" title="indigenous peoples in Suriname" label="indigenous peoples in Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46876" end="46883" title="Peasant#Latin American farmers" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172458" start="46887" end="46896" title="Corporate farming" label="corporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="46955" end="46960" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="47009" end="47019" title="wilderness" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q208347" start="47127" end="47137" title="Gran Chaco" label="Gran Chaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q17266500" start="47143" end="47153" title="Chiquitano dry forests" label="Chiquitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="47163" end="47180" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="47240" end="47265" title="Ecosystem" label="precious natural habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="47298" end="47316" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47397" end="47404" title="Soybean#Environmental issues" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47420" end="47435" title="Ranch#Ranching in South America" label="cattle ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="47500" end="47513" title="Conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740843" start="47883" end="47914" title="Amazon Conservation Association" label="Amazon Conservation Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251697" start="47973" end="47986" title="Deforestation of the Amazon rainforest" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48251" end="48268" title="Yucatán Peninsula#Ecology" label="Yucatán Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="48383" end="48402" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48474" end="48481" title="Logging#Environmental impact" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321919" start="48530" end="48535" title="ejido" label="ejido"/>
<link wikidata="Q80245" start="48565" end="48577" title="Quintana Roo" label="Quintana Roo"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="48616" end="48622" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838271" start="49318" end="49350" title="Evangelical Fellowship of Canada" label="Evangelical Fellowship of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16888523" start="49567" end="49593" title="Manitoba Colony, Bolivia" label="Manitoba Colony of Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117336716" start="49599" end="49628" title="Bolivian Mennonite gas-facilitated rapes" label="raped at night in their homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q464236" start="50441" end="50453" title="Miriam Toews" label="Miriam Toews"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="50601" end="50610" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q475678" start="50666" end="50682" title="Mexican drug war" label="Mexican drug war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817197" start="50743" end="50769" title="Mennonite Disaster Service" label="Mennonite Disaster Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920633" start="50962" end="50989" title="Mennonite Central Committee" label="Mennonite Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="51030" end="51047" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q487483" start="51456" end="51482" title="Christian Peacemaker Teams" label="Christian Peacemaker Teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q744587" start="51572" end="51598" title="Mennonite World Conference" label="Mennonite World Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="52439" end="52448" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="52460" end="52469" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193250" start="52699" end="52707" title="Bulawayo" label="Bulawayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q907453" start="54512" end="54530" title="Mennonite Brethren" label="Mennonite Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="54569" end="54584" title="Amish" label="Old Order Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628430" start="54623" end="54646" title="Meserete Kristos Church" label="Meserete Kristos Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018318" start="54712" end="54739" title="Old Colony Mennonites" label="Old Colony Mennonite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="54882" end="54901" title="Old Order Mennonite" label="Old Order Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920636" start="54963" end="54983" title="Mennonite Church USA" label="Mennonite Church USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186735" start="55111" end="55134" title="Conservative Mennonites" label="Conservative Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q597638" start="55180" end="55203" title="Mennonite Church Canada" label="Mennonite Church Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116891" start="55231" end="55265" title="Church of God in Christ, Mennonite" label="Church of God in Christ, Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="55678" end="55715" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863141" start="55807" end="55853" title="U.S. Conference of Mennonite Brethren Churches" label="U.S. Conference of Mennonite Brethren Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="55936" end="55955" title="Old Order Mennonite" label="Old Order Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016779" start="57002" end="57013" title="Nuevo Ideal" label="Nuevo Ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79918" start="57015" end="57022" title="Durango" label="Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q147955" start="57024" end="57045" title="Cuauhtémoc, Chihuahua" label="Cuauhtémoc, Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q80269" start="57060" end="57069" title="Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="58693" end="58718" title="World Council of Churches" label="World Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q870519" start="58975" end="59001" title="Swiss Mennonite Conference" label="Swiss Mennonite Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q743516" start="59031" end="59051" title="Mennonites in France" label="Mennonites in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851417" start="60064" end="60074" title="Mennonite literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656055" start="60158" end="60180" title="A Complicated Kindness" label="A Complicated Kindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q464236" start="60190" end="60202" title="Miriam Toews" label="Miriam Toews"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062694" start="60210" end="60234" title="Peace Shall Destroy Many" label="Peace Shall Destroy Many"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174591" start="60244" end="60254" title="Rudy Wiebe" label="Rudy Wiebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q86756649" start="60262" end="60292" title="The Salvation of Yasch Siemens" label="The Salvation of Yasch Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793539" start="60302" end="60313" title="Armin Wiebe" label="Armin Wiebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091045" start="60345" end="60360" title="Sandra Birdsell" label="Sandra Birdsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639916" start="60368" end="60384" title="A Year of Lesser" label="A Year of Lesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q648210" start="60394" end="60406" title="David Bergen" label="David Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063235" start="60442" end="60453" title="Casey Plett" label="Casey Plett"/>
<link wikidata="Q117389799" start="60465" end="60477" title="Once Removed (novel)" label="Once Removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q83802142" start="60487" end="60499" title="Andrew Unger" label="Andrew Unger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148167" start="60501" end="60513" title="Rhoda Janzen" label="Rhoda Janzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491441" start="60601" end="60614" title="Victor Davies" label="Victor Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q216924" start="60674" end="60685" title="Glenn Gould" label="Glenn Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558296" start="60806" end="60822" title="Solitude Trilogy" label="Solitude Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218112" start="60851" end="60863" title="Larry Towell" label="Larry Towell"/>
<link wikidata="Q928675" start="60959" end="60972" title="Phaidon Press" label="Phaidon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q388328" start="61000" end="61015" title="Carlos Reygadas" label="Carlos Reygadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q494306" start="61031" end="61043" title="Silent Light" label="Silent Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751432" start="61115" end="61127" title="Plautdietsch" label="Plautdietsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q101245108" start="61176" end="61229" title="I Propose We Never See Each Other Again After Tonight" label="I Propose We Never See Each Other Again After Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q105729539" start="61254" end="61273" title="All My Puny Sorrows (film)" label="All My Puny Sorrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="61288" end="61293" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030443" start="61308" end="61321" title="Women Talking (film)" label="Women Talking"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233267" start="61439" end="61443" title="Pure (Canadian TV series)" label="Pure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111973" start="61476" end="61495" title="Schitt&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="Schitt&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q19824762" start="61509" end="61520" title="Letterkenny (TV series)" label="Letterkenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="61537" end="61549" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="61578" end="61591" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127436" start="61680" end="61696" title="The Daily Bonnet" label="The Unger Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903101" start="61815" end="61841" title="Bible Mennonite Fellowship" label="Bible Mennonite Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q992197" start="61844" end="61865" title="Bruderhof Communities" label="Bruderhof Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116891" start="61868" end="61902" title="Church of God in Christ, Mennonite" label="Church of God in Christ, Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330288" start="61905" end="61931" title="Eastern Mennonite Missions" label="Eastern Mennonite Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931839" start="61934" end="61949" title="Vincent Harding" label="Vincent Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012255" start="61952" end="61967" title="Guy Hershberger" label="Guy Hershberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589937" start="61970" end="61988" title="List of Mennonites" label="List of Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817192" start="61991" end="62020" title="Mennonite Church USA Archives" label="Mennonite Church USA Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067956" start="62023" end="62040" title="Mennonite cuisine" label="Mennonite cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62043" end="62066" title=":Category:Mennonite denominations" label="Mennonite denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916420" start="62069" end="62092" title="Mennonites in Argentina" label="Mennonites in Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556536" start="62095" end="62115" title="Mennonites in Belize" label="Mennonites in Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185917" start="62118" end="62139" title="Mennonites in Bolivia" label="Mennonites in Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172593" start="62142" end="62162" title="Mennonites in Mexico" label="Mennonites in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151548" start="62165" end="62187" title="Mennonites in Paraguay" label="Mennonites in Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q571942" start="62190" end="62210" title="Russian Mennonites" label="Mennonites in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421536" start="62213" end="62234" title="Mennonites in Uruguay" label="Mennonites in Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851417" start="62237" end="62257" title="Mennonite literature" label="Mennonite literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q776489" start="62260" end="62290" title="Mennonite settlements of Altai" label="Mennonite settlements of Altai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910863" start="62299" end="62322" title="More-with-Less Cookbook" label="More-with-Less Cookbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q63345877" start="62337" end="62376" title="Portrait of a Man in a Wide-Brimmed Hat" label="Portrait of a Man in a Wide-Brimmed Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q470383" start="62385" end="62406" title="Rot-Front" label="Rot-Front, Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56092" start="62409" end="62422" title="Simple living" label="Simple living"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934405" start="62425" end="62452" title="Virginia Mennonite Missions" label="Virginia Mennonite Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q73803623" start="63909" end="63927" title="Pamela Klassen" label="Klassen, Pamela E."/>
<link wikidata="Q19663143" start="64596" end="64610" title="Stephen Scott (writer)" label="Scott, Stephen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20799" wikidata="Q1322057" url="?curid=20799" title="MMIX">
<text>MMIX (pronounced &quot;em-mix&quot;) is a 64-bit reduced instruction set computing (RISC) architecture designed by Donald Knuth, with significant contributions by John L. Hennessy (who contributed to the design of the MIPS architecture) and Richard L. Sites (who was an architect of the Alpha architecture). Knuth has said that,

MMIX is a computer intended to illustrate machine-level aspects of programming. In my books &quot;The Art of Computer Programming&quot;, it replaces MIX, the 1960s-style machine that formerly played such a role… I strove to design MMIX so that its machine language would be simple, elegant, and easy to learn. At the same time I was careful to include all of the complexities needed to achieve high performance in practice, so that MMIX could in principle be built and even perhaps be competitive with some of the fastest general-purpose computers in the marketplace.&quot;

Knuth started the design of MMIX in 1999, and released the stable version of the design in 2011. The processor is numbered as &quot;2009&quot; with Knuth explaining that this is the arithmetic mean from the numbers of other computer architectures; as well as being &quot;MMIX&quot; in Roman numerals.

==Architecture==
MMIX is a big-endian 64-bit reduced instruction set computer (RISC), with 256 64-bit general-purpose registers, 32 64-bit special-purpose registers, fixed-length 32-bit instructions and a 64-bit virtual address space. The MMIX instruction set comprises 256 opcodes, one of which is reserved for future expansion. MMIX uses IEEE 754 floating-point numbers.

===Instructions===
All instructions have an associated mnemonic. For example, instruction #20 (32 decimal) is associated with ADD. Most instructions have the symbolic form , where specifies the sort of instruction, X specifies the register used to store the result of the instruction and the rest specify the operands of the instruction. Each of these fields is eight bits wide. For example, means &quot;Set $0 to the sum of $1 and 3.&quot;

Most instructions can take either immediate values or register contents; thus a single instruction mnemonic may correspond to one of two opcodes.

MMIX programs are typically constructed using the MMIXAL assembly language. The below is a simple MMIXAL program, which prints the string &quot;Hello, world!&quot;:

 LOC #100 % Set the address of the program
 % initially to 0x100.

Main GETA $255,string % Put the address of the string
 % into register 255.

 TRAP 0,Fputs,StdOut % Write the string pointed to by
 % register 255 to the standard
 % output file.

 TRAP 0,Halt,0 % End process.

string BYTE &quot;Hello, world!&quot;,#a,0 % String to be printed. #a is
 % newline, 0 terminates the
 % string.
===Registers===
There are 256 directly addressable general-purpose architectural registers in an MMIX chip, designated by $0 through $255, and 32 special-purpose architectural registers. The special-purpose registers can be accessed with the GET and PUT instructions.
Two of the special registers, rL and rG, determine which of the general registers are local and which are global. All registers from $0... are local registers, and represent a window into an internal stack of registers. Registers from [rL]... are &quot;marginal registers&quot;, they always return 0 if they are used as a source in an operation. Using a marginal register as the destination of an operation will cause the machine to automatically increase rL to include that register. All registers [rG]... $255 are called global registers, and are not part of the register stack.

====Local register stack====
The local register stack provides each subroutine with its own rL local registers, designated by $0 through . Whenever a subroutine is called, a number of local registers are pushed down the stack (by shifting the start of the window). The arguments of the called subroutine are left in the remaining local registers. When a subroutine finishes it pops the previously pushed registers. Because the internal stack can contain only a finite number of registers, it may be necessary to store a part of the stack in memory. This is implemented with the special registers rO and rS which record which part of the local register stack is in memory and which part is still in local physical registers. The register stack provides for fast subroutine linkage.

====Special registers====
The 32 special physical architectural registers are as follows:
#: When tripping, rB ← $255 and $255 ← rJ. Thus saving rJ in a general register.
# rD, the dividend register
#: Unsigned integer divide uses this as the left half of the 128-bit input that is to be divided by the other operand.
# rE, the epsilon register
#: Used for floating comparisons with respect to epsilon.
# rH, the himult register
#: Used to store the left half of the 128-bit result of unsigned integer multiplication.
# rJ, the return-jump register
#: Used to save the address of the next instruction by PUSHes and by POP to return from a PUSH.
# rM, the multiplex mask register
#: Used by the multiplex instruction.
# rR, the remainder register
#:Is set to the remainder of integer division.
# rBB, the bootstrap register (trap)
#: When trapping, rBB ← $255 and $255 ← rJ. Thus saving rJ in a general register
# rC, the cycle counter
#: Incremented every cycle.
# rN, the serial number
#: A constant identifying this particular MMIX processor.
# rO, the register stack offset
#: Used to implement the register stack.
# rS, the register stack pointer
#: Used to implement the register stack.
# rI, the interval counter
#: Decremented every cycle. Causes an interrupt when zero.
# rT, the trap address register
#: Used to store the address of the trip vector.
# rTT, the dynamic trap address register
#: Used to store the address of the trap vector.
# rK, the interrupt mask register
#: Used to enable and disable specific interrupts.
# rQ, the interrupt request register
#: Used to record interrupts as they occur.
# rU, the usage counter
#: Used to keep a count of executed instructions.
# rV, the virtual translation register
#: Used to translate virtual addresses to physical addresses. Contains the size and number of segments, the root location of the page table and the address space number.
# rG, the global threshold register
#: All general registers references with a number greater or equal to rG refer to global registers.
# rL, the local threshold register
#: All general registers references with a number smaller than rL refer to local registers.
# rA, the arithmetic status register
#: Used to record, enable and disable arithmetic exception like overflow and divide by zero.
# rF, the failure location register
#: Used to store the address of the instruction that caused a failure.
# rP, the prediction register
#: Used by conditional swap (CSWAP).
# rW, the where-interrupted register (trip)
#: Used, when tripping, to store the address of the instruction after the one that was interrupted.
# rX, the execution register (trip)
#: Used, when tripping, to store the instruction that was interrupted.
# rY, the Y operand (trip)
#: Used, when tripping, to store the Y operand of the interrupted instruction.
# rZ, the Z operand (trip)
#: Used, when tripping, to store the Z operand of the interrupted instruction.
# rWW, the where-interrupted register (trap)
#: Used, when trapping, to store the address of the instruction after the one that was interrupted.
# rXX, the execution register (trap)
#: Used, when trapping, to store the instruction that was interrupted.
# rYY, the Y operand (trap)
#: Used, when trapping, to store the Y operand of the interrupted instruction.
# rZZ, the Z operand (trap)
#: Used, when trapping, to store the Z operand of the interrupted instruction.

Like programs running on almost all other CPUs,
MMIX programs can be interrupted in several ways.
External hardware, such as timers, are a common source of preemption interrupts.
Many instructions cause an interrupt in certain exceptional cases; such as the memory protection page fault exceptions used to implement virtual memory, and floating point exception handling.
MMIX has 2 kinds of interrupts: &quot;trips&quot; and &quot;traps&quot;.
The main difference between &quot;trips&quot; and &quot;traps&quot; is that
traps send control to a &quot;trap handler&quot; program in the operating system (trapping), but
trips send control to a &quot;trip handler&quot; program in the user application (tripping).
Users can also force any interrupt handler to run with explicit software interrupt instructions TRIP and TRAP, similar to some kinds of trap in other computer systems.
In particular, a system call from a user program to the operating system uses a TRAP instruction.

==Hardware implementations==
, no known hardware implementations of the MMIX instruction set architecture exist. However, the fpgammix project implements MMIX in Verilog, making it possible to implement using a field-programmable gate array.

==Software tools==
The MMIX instruction set architecture is supported by a number of software tools for computer architecture research and software development.

===Simulators and assembler===
* MMIXware – Donald Knuth&#x27;s MMIX-SIM simple (behavioral) simulator, MMIXAL assembler, test suite, sample programs, full documentation, and MMIX architectural (pipeline) simulator (codice_1 codice_2 file).
* MMIXX – An X11-based graphics package contributed by Andrew Pochinsky of MIT’s Center for Theoretical Physics which, when combined with the MMIXware sources above, augments the MMIX virtual machine with a 640×480 pixel, true-color ‘virtual display’ (for UNIX/Linux).

===Compiler===
The GNU Compiler Collection includes an MMIX back-end for its C/C++ compilers, contributed by Hans-Peter Nilsson and part of the main GCC distribution since late 2001. , the MMIX back-end to GCC continues to be actively developed and maintained by volunteers.
* Installation instructions for GCC + MMIX tools by Hans-Peter Nilsson.
* §3.17.26. MMIX Options for GNU GCC version 7.2.0 (GNU GCC Web site).
* §9.28. MMIX-dependent Features for GNU as from GNU Binutils version 2.29, the assembler back-end for GNU GCC (GNU Binutils Web site).
The above tools could theoretically be used to compile, build, and bootstrap an entire FreeBSD, Linux, or other similar operating system kernel onto MMIX hardware, were such hardware to exist.

== See also ==
* Educational programming language
* DLX
* LC-3
* Little man computer
* MikroSim
* MIX
* NAR 2, another processor designed by a professor to help students learn

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Donald E. Knuth (2005). &quot;The Art of Computer Programming Volume 1 Fascicle 1: MMIX A RISC Computer for the New Millennium&quot;. Addison-Wesley. (errata)
* Martin Ruckert (2015). &quot;MMIX Supplement, The: Supplement to The Art of Computer Programming Volumes 1, 2, 3 by Donald E. Knuth&quot;. Addison-Wesley. 

==External links==

*MMIX Home Page
*Donald Knuth&#x27;s MMIX page — A brief introduction to MMIX, and Knuth&#x27;s reasons for using a hypothetical assembly language in TAoCP.
*Donald Knuth&#x27;s MMIX news page — An open source simulator written in CWEB, a programmer&#x27;s manual, and example programs.
*MMIXmasters web site — A web site for the volunteers (MMIXmasters) who are converting all of the programs in TAOCP, Volumes 1–3, from the old MIX to the new MMIX.
*VMMMIX — VMMMIX is the MMIX virtual machine. It has console, HDD and Ethernet I/Os. Currently, this virtual machine runs on Windows only. And Linux runs on this MMIX virtual machine.
*The VMB Homepage — The Virtual Motherboard Project offers a plug and play collection of devices that can be used with an appropriate version of the MMIX CPU.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1322057" start="0" end="4" title="MMIX" label="MMIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="42" end="48" title="64-bit" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="49" end="82" title="reduced instruction set computing" label="reduced instruction set computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="90" end="102" title="Computer architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="115" end="127" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q92854" start="163" end="179" title="John L. Hennessy" label="John L. Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="218" end="235" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q858065" start="287" end="292" title="DEC Alpha" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q82438" start="428" end="459" title="The Art of Computer Programming" label="The Art of Computer Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q371805" start="479" end="482" title="MIX (abstract machine)" label="MIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="1087" end="1102" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="1190" end="1204" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="1234" end="1244" title="Endianness" label="big-endian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="1252" end="1284" title="reduced instruction set computer" label="reduced instruction set computer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1373" end="1385" title="instruction set#Instruction length" label="fixed-length"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="1393" end="1404" title="instruction (computer science)" label="instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451721" start="1419" end="1440" title="virtual address space" label="virtual address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q828287" start="1547" end="1555" title="IEEE 754" label="IEEE 754"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="2314" end="2327" title="Hello, world!" label="Hello, world!"/>
<link wikidata="Q401517" start="3171" end="3177" title="Register window" label="window"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="7824" end="7833" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193100" start="7911" end="7932" title="preemption (computing)" label="preemption interrupts"/>
<link wikidata="Q163585" start="8013" end="8030" title="memory protection" label="memory protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928607" start="8031" end="8041" title="page fault" label="page fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q471748" start="8106" end="8124" title="exception handling" label="exception handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="8529" end="8547" title="software interrupt" label="software interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="8601" end="8605" title="trap (computing)" label="trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q722192" start="8650" end="8661" title="system call" label="system call"/>
<link wikidata="Q827773" start="8894" end="8901" title="Verilog" label="Verilog"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="8943" end="8972" title="field-programmable gate array" label="field-programmable gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="9391" end="9394" title="X Window System" label="X11"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="9453" end="9456" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716290" start="9459" end="9489" title="MIT Center for Theoretical Physics" label="Center for Theoretical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12538706" start="9585" end="9598" title="Display resolution" label="640×480 pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q690110" start="9600" end="9610" title="24-bit color" label="true-color"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="9667" end="9690" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="GNU Compiler Collection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9708" end="9716" title="compilers#Back end" label="back-end"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="9725" end="9726" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="9727" end="9730" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="10024" end="10027" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="10028" end="10031" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="GCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="10103" end="10106" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486175" start="10107" end="10109" title="GNU Assembler" label="as"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144975" start="10115" end="10127" title="GNU Binutils" label="GNU Binutils"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="10289" end="10296" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="10298" end="10303" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193107" start="10413" end="10445" title="Educational programming language" label="Educational programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q362451" start="10448" end="10451" title="DLX" label="DLX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457333" start="10454" end="10458" title="Little Computer 3" label="LC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652737" start="10461" end="10480" title="Little man computer" label="Little man computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933827" start="10483" end="10491" title="MikroSim" label="MikroSim"/>
<link wikidata="Q371805" start="10494" end="10497" title="MIX (abstract machine)" label="MIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952365" start="10500" end="10505" title="NAR 2" label="NAR 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="11081" end="11098" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="11150" end="11161" title="open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141484" start="11183" end="11187" title="CWEB" label="CWEB"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20803" wikidata="Q11146" url="?curid=20803" title="Maastricht Treaty">
<text>The Treaty on European Union, commonly known as the Maastricht Treaty, is the foundation treaty of the European Union (EU). Concluded in 1992 between the then-twelve member states of the European Communities, it announced &quot;a new stage in the process of European integration&quot; chiefly in provisions for a shared European citizenship, for the eventual introduction of a single currency, and (with less precision) for common foreign and security policies, and a number of changes to the European institutions and their decision taking procedures, not least a strengthening of the powers of the European Parliament and more majority voting on the Council of Ministers. Although these were seen by many to presage a &quot;federal Europe&quot;, key areas remained inter-governmental with national governments collectively taking key decisions. This constitutional debate continued through the negotiation of subsequent treaties (see below), culminating in the 2007 Treaty of Lisbon. 

In the wake of the Eurozone debt crisis unfolding from 2009, the most enduring reference to the Maastricht Treaty has been to the rules of compliance – the &quot;Maastricht criteria&quot; – for the currency union.

Against the background of the end of the Cold War and the re-unification of Germany, and in anticipation of accelerated globalisation, the treaty negotiated tensions between member states seeking deeper integration and those wishing to retain greater national control. The resulting compromise faced what was to be the first in a series of EU treaty ratification crises.

==Overview==
Having &quot;resolved to continue the process of creating an ever closer union among the people of Europe&quot;, the Treaty proposes &quot;further steps to be taken in order to advance European integration&quot; under seven titles.

Title I, Common Provisions, establishes the European Union (EU) on the foundation of the three, already partially merged, European Communities: the European Economic Community (EEC), the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). It confirms among its objectives are &quot;the introduction of a citizenship of the Union&quot; common to the nationals of the Member States; &quot;economic and monetary union, ultimately including a single currency&quot;; and &quot;a common foreign and security policy including the eventual framing of a common defence&quot;.

Title II, Provisions Amending the Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community, reformulates the EEC as the central &quot;pillar&quot; of the Union. It amends the EEC&#x27;s Treaty of Rome constitution, renaming it the European Community to reflect the Union&#x27;s broader ambition. Amendments incorporate (as detailed in attached protocols) a staged progression toward monetary union including the price-stability-first criteria for adoption of the single currency and for the operations of the prospective European Central Bank (ECB).

Other amendments create the office of European Ombudsman, expand the Structural Fund assistance to the poorer EU regions; and broaden Community competencies in education, culture, public health, consumer protection, trans-European networks, industry and the environment.

In these and other areas which do not fall within Community&#x27;s &quot;exclusive competence&quot;, in accordance with &quot;the principle of subsidiarity&quot; action is to be taken only if, &quot;by reason of the scale or effects&quot;, the objectives cannot be more &quot;efficiently&quot; achieved by the Member States themselves.

In several of these areas, the Treaty seeks to enhance the &quot;democratic functioning&quot; of the institutions by conceding the directly elected European Parliament rights not only of consultation but also of co-decision on some categories of European legislation. It also grants the Parliament the power to confirm (and therefore to veto) the Council&#x27;s nominations for the European Commission, the Community&#x27;s executive.

Titles III and IV amend the treaties establishing the ECSC and Euratom to complete their absorption into the structure of European Community.

Title V and VI extend existing intergovernmental consultations on foreign-policy, security and defence matters, and on &quot;cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs&quot;. In both cases, Member States are to &quot;inform and consult one another within the Council [of Ministers]&quot;, but otherwise cooperate independently of Community institutions.

Title VII, Final Provisions, covers a number of anomalous issues. Provided that all Member States ratify, it rules that the Treaty should come into force on 1 January 1993.

Articles within the Treaty were referred to by using the letters A to S.

Annexed to the Treaty is a Protocol, and an Agreement, on Social Policy. With a view to ensuring that the dynamic of the European single market respect certain minimum social and employment protections, these allow the Council of Ministers to approve relevant proposals from the European Commission on the basis of a qualified majority rather than unanimous consent.

The United Kingdom was not a party of the Agreement on Social Policy and secured an &quot;opt out&quot; from the protocol. It was to do the same with respect to the &quot;obligation&quot; to enter the final, single-currency, stage of monetary union (the UK would not have to give up the Pound sterling).

==Procedural history==
===Signatories===

The signatory nations were represented by:

* Mark Eyskens and Philippe Maystadt (Belgium)
* Uffe Ellemann-Jensen and Anders Fogh Rasmussen (Denmark)
* Roland Dumas and Pierre Bérégovoy (France)
* Antonis Samaras and Efthymios Christodoulou (Greece)
* Gerry Collins and Bertie Ahern (Ireland)
* Gianni De Michelis and Guido Carli (Italy)
* Jacques Poos and Jean-Claude Juncker (Luxembourg)
* Hans van den Broek and Wim Kok (Netherlands)
* João de Deus Pinheiro and Jorge Braga de Macedo (Portugal)
* Francisco Fernández Ordóñez and Carlos Solchaga (Spain)
* Douglas Hurd and Francis Maude (United Kingdom)
* Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Theo Waigel (Germany)

In consequence of the Dutch Presidency of the Council of the European Communities during the previous six months of negotiation, the Treaty was signed in the Netherlands, in the city of Maastricht. The twelve members of the European Communities signing the Treaty on 7 February 1992 were Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.

===Ratification===
The Treaty noted that it should be &quot;ratified by the High Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective constitutional requirement&quot;. In the cases of Denmark, France and Ireland this required referendums.

In the first Danish referendum, on 2 June 1992, the treaty was rejected by a margin of 50.7% to 49.3%. Concessions secured by the end of year in Edinburgh including, critically, the same exemption secured by Britain from the single currency (Denmark would not have to give up the krone), allowed for a second referendum. On 18 May 1993, the Maastricht Treaty was endorsed by a vote of 56.7%.

In Ireland, the Eleventh Amendment of the Constitution, allowing the state to ratify the Treaty, was approved in a referendum held on 18 June 1992 with the support of 69.1% of votes cast.

In September 1992, a referendum in France narrowly supported the ratification of the treaty, with 50.8% in favour. This narrow vote for ratification in France, known at the time as the &quot;, led Jacques Delors to comment that &quot;Europe began as an elitist project in which it was believed that all that was required was to convince the decision-makers. That phase of benign despotism is over.&quot;

In the United Kingdom parliament ratification did not command a clear majority. In protest against the social-policy opt out, Labour opposed, while &quot;anti-federalists&quot; split the governing Conservatives. Prime Minister John Major was able to face down his &quot;Maastricht Rebels&quot; only by tying ratification to the survival of the government in a vote of confidence. (Researchers and observers suggest that, in the United Kingdom, the Maastricht Treaty represented &quot;a critical turning point&quot; in terms of divisions within the Conservative Party over European integration and the ruling party&#x27; ultimate fragmentation in 2016 into Leave and Remain factions).

In Germany, the Maastricht Treaty passed the Bundestag on December 2, 1992, with a majority of 543 out of 562, and the Bundesrat with unanimity. The Bundestag was required to amend the Grundgesetz (German Basic Law) to “legalize Germany’s membership in the European Union (Article 23) as well as to install a European Monetary Union (Article 88).” The ratification was delayed by challenges at the German Federal Constitutional Court, the complainants claiming the amendments transferring sovereign competencies to the European Union violated democratic principles (Article 20 and 38(1)) of the Grundgesetz that were unamendable (Article 79(3)); hence the Maastricht Treaty should be inadmissible. The court delivered its judgment on October 12, 1993 ruling the Maastricht Treaty compatible with the Grundgesetz, but provided that the European Union could not endow itself with more powers without the Bundestag’s approval. The court also confirmed its Solange II decision accepting the supremacy of European Court of Justice decisions while retaining the power to review secondary community law as to guarantee basic rights protection in close cooperation with the European Court of Justice. Germany was the last member state to ratify the treaty and it entered into force on November 1, 1993.

==Citizenship of the European Union==
From the establishment of the European Economic Community in 1957, integrationists argued the free movement of workers was the logical corollary of the free movement of capital, goods and services and integral to the establishment of a common (and later single) European market. In time, the tension between the transferred worker as &quot;a mobile unit of production&quot; contributing to the success of the single market, and the reality of the Community migrants as individuals, seeking to exercise &quot;a personal right&quot; to live and work in another state for their own, and their families&#x27;, welfare, asserted itself. The Treaty built on the growing suggestion that there was a Community-wide basis for citizenship rights.

The Treaty rules that &quot;every person holding the nationality of a Member State shall be a citizen of the Union&quot;. This common and parallel citizenship accords the Member State migrants not only the civil right to take up residence and employment, but also, and for the first time, political rights. In a new EU country of residence Member-State nationals have the right to vote, and to stand, in both local and European elections. Unresolved in the Treaty is the question of their access to social rights. Political debate continued as to who should have access to public services and welfare systems funded by taxation.

==Economic and monetary union==

===Franco-German agreement===
French President François Mitterrand was forced to abandon the centrepiece of his Socialist programme in 1983, a job creating reflation, due to speculation against the franc. Since then, Mitterrand had been committed to drawing Germany into a currency partnership. After the fall of the Berlin Wall in late 1989, Germany sought re-unification. France, the UK, and the rest of Europe expressed their concerns over re-unification. When German Chancellor Helmut Kohl asked for re-unification in 1990, Mitterrand would only accept in the event Germany would abandon the Deutsche Mark and adopt a common currency. Without consulting Karl Otto Pöhl, President of the Bundesbank, Kohl accepted the deal. Despite this win for France, it was widely perceived that the cost of German cooperation was German dictation of the rules for a single currency. The Bundesbank had signalled that Germany&#x27;s economic success would come before being &quot;a good european&quot;.

===The ERM crises===
In the UK, the Maastricht rebellion drew on the experience of Black Wednesday. On 16 September 1992 the British government had been forced to withdraw the pound sterling from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM). This was the centrepiece of the European Monetary System (EMS), agreed in 1978 as a means of reducing the &quot;barrier&quot; that exchange-rate volatility presented for intra-Community commerce (and for the management of payments under the Common Agricultural Policy). 

Britain had signed up to the ERM in 1990 as a token of the government&#x27;s commitment to control inflation (then running at three times the rate of Germany). From the beginning of 1990, high German interest rates, set by the Bundesbank to counteract inflationary impact of the expenditure on German reunification, caused significant stress across the whole of the ERM. By the time of their own ratifications debates, France and Denmark also found themselves under pressure in foreign exchange markets, their currencies trading close to the bottom of their ERM bands. In Britain, the government of John Major failed in a costly attempt to keep the pound above its mandated exchange rate limit. While a political humiliation, sterling&#x27;s exit from the ERM was followed in the UK by economic recovery and a significant fall in employment. 

===The Maastricht criteria===
Having &quot;resolved to achieve the strengthening and the convergence and to establish an economic and monetary union including... a single and stable currency&quot;, the Treaty ruled that &quot;Member States shall regard their economic policies as a matter of common concern&quot;, and that the obligations assumed should be a matter for &quot;mutual surveillance.&quot; Commonly known as the Maastricht criteria, these obligations represented the performance thresholds for member states to progress toward the third stage of European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), the adoption the common currency (designated at the 1995 Madrid European as the Euro).

The four &quot;convergence criteria&quot;, as detailed in attached protocols, impose control over inflation, public debt and the public deficit, exchange rate stability and domestic interest rates. With limited leeway granted in exceptional circumstances, the obligations are to maintain:

1. Inflation at a rate no more than 1.5 percentage points higher than the average of the three best performing (lowest inflation) Member States;

2. a &quot;budgetary position&quot; that avoids &quot;excessive&quot; government deficits defined in ratios to gross domestic product (GDP) of greater than 3% for annual deficits and 60% for gross government debt;

3. the exchange rate of the national currency within &quot;the normal fluctuation margins by the exchange-rate mechanism of the European Monetary System without
severe tensions for at least the last two years&quot;; and

4. nominal long-term interest rates no more than 2 percentage points higher than in the three Member States with the lowest inflation.

===The European Central Bank mandate===
These criteria in turn dictated the mandate of the European System of Central Banks comprising the national central banks, but to include the prospective currency-issuing European Central Bank. As envisaged by the Treaty, the ECB replaced its shadow European Monetary Institute on 1 June 1998, and began exercising its full powers with the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999.

The Treaty dedicates the EU central banking system to price stability, and gives it &quot;a degree of independence from elected officials&quot; greater even &quot;than that of its putative model, the German Bundesbank&quot;. Whereas the Bundesbank, under article 12 of its constitution, is &quot;bound to support the general economic policy of the [German] Federal Government&quot;, the obligation of the ECB to &quot;support the general economic policies in the Community&quot; is to be &quot;without prejudice&quot; to price stability, the Bank&#x27;s &quot;primary objective&quot;. It is further conditioned by the express understanding that &quot;neither the ECB, nor a national central bank, nor any member of their decision-making bodies, shall seek or take instructions from Community institutions or bodies from any Government of a Member State or from any other body.&quot;

Seeming to further preclude any possibility of the single-currency banking system being used to regulate European financial markets in support of potentially inflationary policies, the Treaty expressly prohibits the ECB or any Member State central extending &quot;overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility&quot; to &quot;Community institutions or bodies, central governments, regional, local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of Member States&quot;, or the purchase from them debt instruments.

===The Maastricht economic-policy model===
Critics felt that, in limiting the role of the future ECB and euro in national, or Union-coordinated, reflationary policies, Maastricht affirmed what by the late 1980s was the general economic-policy orthodoxy within the Community. This has been described as a &quot;reversed Keynesianism&quot;: macro-economic policy not to secure a full-employment level of demand, but, through the restrictive control of monetary growth and public expenditure, to maintain price and financial market stability; micro economic policy, not to engineer income and price controls in support of fiscal expansion, but to encourage job creation by reducing barriers to lower labour costs. The commitment to monetary union and the convergence criteria denied member states the resort to currency deflation to ease balance-of-payments constraints on domestic spending, and left labour market &quot;flexibility&quot; as the main mean of coping with asymmetric economic shocks.

These constraints were to become the focus of political scrutiny and public protest in the new-century European debt crisis. Beginning in 2009 with Greece, the governments of several Euro-zone countries (Portugal, Ireland, Spain and Cyprus) declared themselves unable to repay or refinance their government debt or to bail out over-indebted banks without assistance from third parties. The &quot;austerity&quot; they had subsequently to impose as a condition of assistance from Germany and other of their trade-surplus EU partners, raised calls for new arrangements to better manage payment imbalances between member states, and ease the burden of adjustment upon wage-, and benefit-, dependent households. Greek finance minister Yanis Varoufakis credited the Maastricht criteria with framing of a union of deflation and unemployment.

Taking issue in defence of the Maastricht criteria, German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble argued that &quot;the old way to stimulate growth will not work.&quot; There is a real &quot;moral hazard&quot; in allowing Member States to accumulate higher debts within the Eurozone – higher debts which, ultimately, have no relationship to higher growth. The Maastricht criteria, he insisted, were correct in placing the onus for growth on &quot;competitiveness, structural reforms, investment, and sustainable financing&quot;.

==Foreign and security policy, justice and home affairs==
Set alongside the European Community, the cooperation proposed in the Maastricht Treaty on foreign and security policy, and on justice and home affairs, were characterised in official commentary as the second and third &quot;pillars&quot; of the Union. The Treaty, however, proposed no significant departures in these areas. Coordination in foreign and security policy had taken place since the beginning of the 1970s under the name of European Political Cooperation (EPC), which had been first written into the treaties by the 1987 Single European Act. Cooperation on law enforcement, criminal justice, asylum, and immigration and other judicial matters was being pursued under the 1990 Schengen Agreement and Convention.

The new provisions called on governments to &quot;inform and consult one another within the Council of Ministers&quot;, but otherwise continued cooperation on the basis of intergovernmental liaison outside of the EC and its institutions. The West European Union, an until recently moribund club within NATO, is described as &quot;an integral part of the development of the Union&quot;, and asked it to help &quot;elaborate and implement decisions and actions of the Union which have defence implications. Yet it is clear that nothing is to be construed as systematically constraining the foreign or defence policies of the individual Member States. &quot;Failing a Council decision&quot;, which would require unanimity, a Member State is free to take such action as it considers &quot;necessary&quot;. This, in part, was a concession to United Kingdom which continued to insist on the sufficiency of the North Atlantic alliance (supported by the non-aligned Member States, Ireland and Austria, at the 1997 Amsterdam summit, the UK prevented a merger of the WEU and the EU),

==Subsidiarity and co-decision==
As an implicit presumption subsidiarity may have been considered a check upon the supranational development of the EEC. But in making it an explicit constitutional principle the Maastricht Treaty opened up &quot;debates about whether this strengthened the states, regions or local government vis-à-vis the EU or vice versa&quot;. Subsidiarity can be read as a federalising principle. For every endeavour it poses the question of whether national or Community policy is the most effective means, and elevates simple utility above any deference to national or local feeling, albeit with a presumption that action will be taken at European level only where national efforts cannot achieve the objective in question.

Sceptics note that the Treaty offers no legally actionable definition of subsidiarity. Rather there are &quot;a series of tentative indications for Community action in a document full of imprecise concepts: &#x27;sufficiently&#x27;, &#x27;better achieved&#x27;, &#x27;what is necessary&#x27;, &#x27;to achieve the objectives&#x27;, subjective notions which leave the way wide open for interpretation or practical developments.&quot; Jacques Santer, Prime Minister of Luxembourg, conceded that consensus around the principle of subsidiarity had been possible only because &quot;it conceals different interpretations&quot;.

The 1992 Treaty may have introduced a more consequential constitutional principle in its promotion &quot;co-decision&quot;. It introduced procedures that made the European Parliament &quot;co-legislator with the Council of Ministers&quot; and have since been developed and extended to nearly all areas where the Council decides on legislation by qualified majority voting. The &quot;foundations of co-decision in the Maastricht Treaty&quot; have led to ways to reconcile differences between the Parliament and the Council, formally through a &quot;conciliation procedure&quot; and informally through &quot;trialogues&quot; involving negotiations between the European Parliament, Council and Commission, which have become standard in most legislative procedures.

==Amending Treaties==
In establishing the European Union the Maastricht Treaty amended the treaties that had established the European Communities in the 1950s. Following the EU accessions of Austria, Finland, and Sweden, it was in turn amended by the treaties of Amsterdam (1997), and Nice (2001). Following the accession of a further twelve states, ten from the former Eastern Bloc – Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia – plus Cyprus and Malta, and an aborted Treaty on a European Constitution, the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty Establishing the European Community (TEC) were more comprehensively revisited. The 2007 Treaty of Lisbon amends both again and renames the TEC as the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).

==Timeline==
==See also==
*Treaties of the European Union
**Treaty on European Union
**Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* Corbett, Richard. &#x27;The Treaty of Maastricht: from conception to ratification&#x27; Longman - Cartermill Publishing (1993) ISBN 0-582-20906-4
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* at EUR-Lex
* – Original version
*Maastricht Treaty (7 February 1992) CVCE
*Proposed 1962 treaty establishing a &quot;European Union&quot; CVCE
*The Treaty on European Union – Current consolidated versions of the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (in PDF)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="4" end="28" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="52" end="69" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="103" end="117" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="166" end="179" title="Member state of the European Union" label="member states"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="187" end="207" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="258" end="278" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q363404" start="313" end="340" title="European Union citizenship" label="shared European citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="375" end="392" title="Euro" label="a single currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q672788" start="424" end="460" title="Common Foreign and Security Policy" label="common foreign and security policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="600" end="619" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q15105" start="652" end="672" title="Council of Ministers" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q602875" start="726" end="740" title="Federalisation of the European Union" label="federal Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="968" end="984" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="1007" end="1027" title="European debt crisis" label="Eurozone debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q744775" start="1140" end="1175" title="Euro convergence criteria" label="the &amp;quot;Maastricht criteria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="1186" end="1200" title="currency union" label="currency union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323301" start="1233" end="1252" title="Cold War (1985–1991)" label="end of the Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="1261" end="1286" title="German reunification" label="re-unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="1323" end="1336" title="Globalization" label="globalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="1969" end="1996" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="2008" end="2041" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="2057" end="2089" title="Euratom" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="2611" end="2625" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="2656" end="2674" title="European Economic Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q220893" start="3014" end="3032" title="European Ombudsman" label="European Ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q846996" start="3045" end="3060" title="European Structural and Investment Funds" label="Structural Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403633" start="3391" end="3403" title="Subsidiarity (European Union)" label="subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="3733" end="3752" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="3967" end="3986" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="4434" end="4455" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council [of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="4899" end="4921" title="European single market" label="European single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="5433" end="5447" title="Pound sterling" label="Pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q349477" start="5539" end="5551" title="Mark Eyskens" label="Mark Eyskens"/>
<link wikidata="Q725611" start="5556" end="5573" title="Philippe Maystadt" label="Philippe Maystadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q698080" start="5586" end="5606" title="Uffe Ellemann-Jensen" label="Uffe Ellemann-Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46052" start="5611" end="5632" title="Anders Fogh Rasmussen" label="Anders Fogh Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q547525" start="5645" end="5657" title="Roland Dumas" label="Roland Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q298355" start="5662" end="5678" title="Pierre Bérégovoy" label="Pierre Bérégovoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57806" start="5690" end="5705" title="Antonis Samaras" label="Antonis Samaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q15127317" start="5710" end="5733" title="Efthymios Christodoulou" label="Efthymios Christodoulou"/>
<link wikidata="Q446685" start="5745" end="5758" title="Gerry Collins (politician)" label="Gerry Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q154550" start="5763" end="5775" title="Bertie Ahern" label="Bertie Ahern"/>
<link wikidata="Q902439" start="5788" end="5806" title="Gianni De Michelis" label="Gianni De Michelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q563217" start="5811" end="5822" title="Guido Carli" label="Guido Carli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384216" start="5833" end="5845" title="Jacques Poos" label="Jacques Poos"/>
<link wikidata="Q57661" start="5850" end="5869" title="Jean-Claude Juncker" label="Jean-Claude Juncker"/>
<link wikidata="Q712105" start="5885" end="5903" title="Hans van den Broek" label="Hans van den Broek"/>
<link wikidata="Q221411" start="5908" end="5915" title="Wim Kok" label="Wim Kok"/>
<link wikidata="Q722614" start="5932" end="5953" title="João de Deus Pinheiro" label="João de Deus Pinheiro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5958" end="5979" title="Jorge Braga de Macedo" label="Jorge Braga de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441961" start="5993" end="6020" title="Francisco Fernández Ordóñez" label="Francisco Fernández Ordóñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749496" start="6025" end="6040" title="Carlos Solchaga" label="Carlos Solchaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q337375" start="6051" end="6063" title="Douglas Hurd" label="Douglas Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q333986" start="6068" end="6081" title="Francis Maude" label="Francis Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q106235" start="6101" end="6123" title="Hans-Dietrich Genscher" label="Hans-Dietrich Genscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q62077" start="6128" end="6139" title="Theo Waigel" label="Theo Waigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q308905" start="6179" end="6232" title="Presidency of the Council of the European Union" label="Presidency of the Council of the European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6309" end="6320" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309" start="6337" end="6347" title="Maastricht" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072357" start="6818" end="6841" title="1992 Danish Maastricht Treaty referendum" label="first Danish referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340483" start="6956" end="6965" title="Edinburgh Agreement (1992)" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="7091" end="7096" title="Danish krone" label="krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993694" start="7113" end="7130" title="1993 Danish Maastricht Treaty referendum" label="second referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004617" start="7220" end="7258" title="Eleventh Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Eleventh Amendment of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319164" start="7414" end="7434" title="1992 French Maastricht Treaty referendum" label="referendum in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q153425" start="7590" end="7604" title="Jacques Delors" label="Jacques Delors"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="7924" end="7930" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="7995" end="8008" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="8025" end="8035" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721256" start="8068" end="8085" title="Maastricht Rebels" label="Maastricht Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q23057883" start="8454" end="8459" title="Leave Campaign" label="Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q21091849" start="8464" end="8470" title="Britain Stronger in Europe" label="Remain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="8528" end="8537" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q146138" start="8602" end="8611" title="German Bundesrat" label="Bundesrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="8668" end="8679" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Grundgesetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="8888" end="8916" title="Federal Constitutional Court" label="Federal Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="9483" end="9508" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="11265" end="11284" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="11330" end="11339" title="Socialist Party (France)" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141415" start="11374" end="11383" title="reflation" label="reflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="11416" end="11421" title="French franc" label="franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="11523" end="11546" title="fall of the Berlin Wall" label="fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11631" end="11655" title="German Reunification#Foreign support and opposition" label="expressed their concerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="11682" end="11699" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="German Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="11700" end="11711" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="11814" end="11827" title="Deutsche Mark" label="Deutsche Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q97051" start="11876" end="11890" title="Karl Otto Pöhl" label="Karl Otto Pöhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q162222" start="11909" end="11919" title="Bundesbank" label="Bundesbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q400500" start="12294" end="12309" title="Black Wednesday" label="Black Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="12336" end="12354" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="12387" end="12401" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q733221" start="12411" end="12443" title="European Exchange Rate Mechanism" label="European Exchange Rate Mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q385239" start="12483" end="12507" title="European Monetary System" label="European Monetary System"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="12692" end="12718" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="Common Agricultural Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162222" start="12950" end="12960" title="Bundesbank" label="Bundesbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="13017" end="13037" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="13322" end="13332" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="13397" end="13410" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="13449" end="13457" title="Pound sterling" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q212141" start="14135" end="14162" title="Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union" label="Economic and Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="14227" end="14233" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="14250" end="14254" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="14764" end="14783" title="Government budget balance" label="government deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="14857" end="14872" title="Government budget deficit" label="annual deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="14891" end="14906" title="government debt" label="government debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="14916" end="14929" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q733221" start="15006" end="15029" title="European Exchange Rate Mechanism" label="exchange-rate mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q385239" start="15037" end="15061" title="European Monetary System" label="European Monetary System"/>
<link wikidata="Q221598" start="15357" end="15389" title="European System of Central Banks" label="European System of Central Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="15477" end="15498" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q993176" start="15556" end="15583" title="European Monetary Institute" label="European Monetary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q162222" start="15898" end="15908" title="Bundesbank" label="Bundesbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="17460" end="17472" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="18241" end="18261" title="European debt crisis" label="European debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="18286" end="18292" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="18321" end="18330" title="Eurozone" label="Euro-zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="18371" end="18377" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="18434" end="18449" title="government debt" label="government debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="18534" end="18543" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40688" start="18868" end="18884" title="Yanis Varoufakis" label="Yanis Varoufakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377486" start="19994" end="20024" title="European Political Cooperation" label="European Political Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622649" start="20091" end="20110" title="Single European Act" label="Single European Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q117488" start="20144" end="20160" title="criminal justice" label="criminal justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="20246" end="20264" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="20524" end="20543" title="West European Union" label="West European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="20584" end="20588" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="21186" end="21209" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="21267" end="21274" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403633" start="21417" end="21429" title="Subsidiarity (European Union)" label="subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="22890" end="22909" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="22939" end="22965" title="European Council of Ministers" label="Council of Ministers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="23753" end="23762" title="Treaty of Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q208688" start="23775" end="23779" title="Treaty of Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="23860" end="23872" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="24021" end="24054" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="Treaty on a European Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="24188" end="24204" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="24250" end="24297" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122" start="24334" end="24364" title="Treaties of the European Union" label="Treaties of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="24367" end="24391" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="24394" end="24441" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276282" start="24660" end="24667" title="EUR-Lex" label="EUR-Lex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946113" start="24726" end="24730" title="Centre virtuel de la connaissance sur l&amp;#x27;Europe" label="CVCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946113" start="24795" end="24799" title="Centre virtuel de la connaissance sur l&amp;#x27;Europe" label="CVCE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20804" wikidata="Q1733" url="?curid=20804" title="Magdeburg">
<text>Magdeburg (; ) is the capital of the German state Saxony-Anhalt. The city is on the Elbe river.

Otto I, the first Holy Roman Emperor and founder of the Archbishopric of Magdeburg, was buried in the city&#x27;s cathedral after his death. Magdeburg&#x27;s version of German town law, known as Magdeburg rights, spread throughout Central and Eastern Europe. In the Late Middle Ages, Magdeburg was one of the largest and most prosperous German cities and a notable member of the Hanseatic League. One of the most notable people from the city was Otto von Guericke, famous for his experiments with the Magdeburg hemispheres.

Magdeburg has experienced three major devastations in its history. In 1207 the first catastrophe struck the city, with a fire burning down large parts of the city, including the Ottonian cathedral. The Catholic League sacked Magdeburg in 1631, resulting in the death of 25,000 non-combatants, the largest loss of the Thirty Years&#x27; War. During World War II the Allies bombed the city in 1945 and destroyed much of the city centre. Today, around 46% of the city consists of buildings from before 1950.

After World War II, the city belonged to the German Democratic Republic from 1949 to 1990. Since then, many new construction projects have been implemented and old buildings have been restored. Magdeburg celebrated its 1,200th anniversary in 2005.

Magdeburg is on Autobahn 2 and Autobahn 14, connecting Eastern and Western Europe as well as northern and southern Germany. Significant industries include machines, healthcare, mechanical engineering, environmental technology, circular economy, logistics, culture, wood and information and communications technology.

There are numerous cultural institutions in the city, including the Theater Magdeburg and the Museum of Cultural History. The city is also the location of two universities, the Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg and the Magdeburg-Stendal University of Applied Sciences.

==History==
===Early years===

Founded by Charlemagne in 805 as Magadoburg (probably from Old High German &quot;magado&quot; for &quot;big&quot;, &quot;mighty&quot; and &quot;burg&quot; for &quot;fortress&quot;), the town was fortified in 919 by King Henry the Fowler against the Magyars and Slavs. In 929 King Otto I granted the city to his English-born wife Edith as dower. Queen Edith loved the town and often resided there; at her death she was buried in the crypt of the Benedictine abbey of Saint Maurice, later rebuilt as the cathedral. In 937, Magdeburg was the seat of a royal assembly. Otto I repeatedly visited Magdeburg, establishing a convent here about 937 and was later buried in the cathedral. He granted the abbey the right to income from tithes and to corvée labour from the surrounding countryside.

The Archbishopric of Magdeburg was founded in 968 at the synod of Ravenna; Adalbert of Magdeburg was consecrated as its first archbishop. The archbishopric under Adalbert included the bishoprics of Havelberg, Brandenburg, Merseburg, Meissen and Naumburg-Zeitz. The archbishops played a prominent role in the German colonisation of the Slavic lands east of the Elbe river.

In 1035 Magdeburg received a patent giving the city the right to hold trade exhibitions and conventions. This formed the basis of German town law to become known as the Magdeburg rights. These laws were adopted and modified throughout Central and Eastern Europe. Visitors from many countries began to trade with Magdeburg. The town was burnt down in 1188.

In the 13th century, Magdeburg became a member of the Hanseatic League. With more than 20,000 inhabitants Magdeburg was one of the largest cities in the Holy Roman Empire. The town had active maritime commerce on the west (towards Flanders), with the countries of the North Sea, and maintained traffic and communication with the interior (for example Braunschweig).

===Reformation===
The citizens constantly struggled against the archbishop, becoming nearly independent from him by the end of the 15th century. Around Easter 1497, the then twelve-year-old Martin Luther attended school in Magdeburg, where he was exposed to the teachings of the Brethren of the Common Life. In 1524, he was called to Magdeburg, where he preached and caused the city&#x27;s defection from Roman Catholicism. The Protestant Reformation had quickly found adherents in the city, where Luther had been a schoolboy. Emperor Charles V repeatedly outlawed the unruly town, which had joined the League of Torgau and the Schmalkaldic League.

As it had not accepted the Augsburg Interim decree (1548), the city, by the emperor&#x27;s commands, was besieged (1550–1551) by Maurice, Elector of Saxony, but it retained its independence. The rule of the archbishop was replaced by that of administrators belonging to Protestant dynasties. In the following years, Magdeburg gained a reputation as a stronghold of Protestantism and became the first major city to publish the writings of Martin Luther. In Magdeburg, Matthias Flacius and his companions wrote their anti-Catholic pamphlets and the &quot;Magdeburg Centuries&quot;, in which they argued that the Roman Catholic Church had become the kingdom of the Antichrist.

In 1629 the city withstood its first siege during the Thirty Years&#x27; War, by Albrecht von Wallenstein, a Protestant convert to Catholicism. However, in 1631, imperial troops under Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly, stormed the city and massacred the inhabitants, killing about 20,000 and burning the city.

After the war, a population of only 4,000 remained. Under the Peace of Westphalia (1648), Magdeburg was to be assigned to Brandenburg-Prussia after the death of the administrator August of Saxe-Weissenfels, as the semi-autonomous Duchy of Magdeburg. This occurred in 1680.

The city made an astonishingly quick recovery, due especially to the energy and dedication of its mayor Otto von Guericke, who was also a noted scientist. Just six years after the end of the terribly destructive war, Magdeburg was the scene of the famous scientific experiment known as The &quot;Magdeburg hemispheres&quot; by which the existence of vacuum – hitherto hotly debated – was empirically proven, with enormous implications for the later developments of physics.

===19th century===
In the course of the Napoleonic Wars, the fortress surrendered to French troops in 1806. The city was annexed to the French-controlled Kingdom of Westphalia in the 1807 Treaty of Tilsit. King Jérôme appointed Count Heinrich von Blumenthal as mayor. In 1815, after the Napoleonic Wars, Magdeburg was made the capital of the new Prussian Province of Saxony.

===20th century===
In 1912, the old fortress was dismantled, and in 1908, the municipality Rothensee became part of Magdeburg.

During World War I, Polish leader Józef Piłsudski and his close associate Kazimierz Sosnkowski were imprisoned in the city by Germany in 1917–1918.

During the Weimar Republic the was published as a local newspaper in Magdeburg.

During World War II, Magdeburg was the location of 30 forced labour detachments of the Stalag XI-A prisoner-of-war camp for some 4,500 Allied POWs, a camp for Sinti and Romani people (see also &quot;Romani Holocaust&quot;), and three subcamps of the Buchenwald concentration camp, in which mostly Jewish men and boys and Soviet, Polish and Jewish women were imprisoned. In April 1945, dozens of prisoners were massacred by the &quot;Volkssturm&quot; and Hitler Youth, and surviving prisoners were sent on death marches towards the Ravensbrück and Sachsenhausen concentration camps.

Magdeburg was heavily bombed by British and American air forces during the Second World War. The RAF bombing raid on the night of 16 January 1945 destroyed much of the city centre. The death toll is estimated at 2,000–2,500. Near the end of World War II, the city of about 340,000 became capital of the Province of Magdeburg. Brabag&#x27;s Magdeburg/Rothensee plant that produced synthetic oil from lignite coal was a target of the Oil Campaign of World War II. The suburbs north of the city, called the Nordfront, were destroyed as well as some of the city&#x27;s main streets with its Baroque buildings.

It was occupied by 9th US Army troops on 18 April 1945 and was left to the Red Army on 1 July 1945. Post-war the area was part of the Soviet Zone of Occupation and many of the remaining pre-World War II city buildings were destroyed, with only a few buildings near the cathedral and in the southern part of the old city being restored to their pre-war state. Before the reunification of Germany, many surviving &quot;Gründerzeit&quot; buildings were left uninhabited and, after years of degradation, waiting for demolition. 
From 1949 until German reunification on 3 October 1990, Magdeburg belonged to the German Democratic Republic.

===Since German reunification===
In 1990 Magdeburg became the capital of the new state of Saxony-Anhalt within reunified Germany. Huge parts of the city and its centre were also rebuilt in a modern style. Its economy is one of the fastest-growing in the former East German states.

In 2005 Magdeburg celebrated its 1200th anniversary.

The city was hit by 2013 European floods. Authorities declared a state of emergency and said they expected the Elbe river to rise higher than in 2002. In Magdeburg, with water levels of above normal, about 23,000 residents had to leave their homes on 9 June.

On 20 December 2024, at least five people were killed and more than 200 injured at the Magdeburg Christmas market when a car was driven into the crowd. The suspect, who was arrested at the scene, was identified in German media as Taleb al-Abdulmohsen, a Saudi psychiatrist living in Germany since 2006.

Intel will build its largest plant in Europe in the south of the city by 2027.

==Gallery==
==Geography==
Magdeburg is one of the major towns along the Elbe Cycle Route (Elberadweg). Its area is .
===Districts===
The city of Magdeburg is divided into 40 &quot;Stadtteile&quot; (districts). Three of these, the former municipalities Beyendorf-Sohlen, Pechau and Randau-Calenberge, have a special status as &quot;Ortschaften&quot;. The &quot;Stadtteile&quot; of Magdeburg are:


===Climate===
Magdeburg has an oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;; Trewartha: &quot;Dobk&quot;) according to Köppen climate classification. The weather is damp and chilly in winters, with 71.7 days per year in which the minimum temperature is below the freezing point, and 15.6 days with maximum temperature below the mark. Magdeburg is warm and relatively wet in summer and can sometimes become hot. Annually, 48.9 days have maximum temperature above , of which 12 days have daily maximum above .

On average, there are 20.9 days with thunder and 0.8 days with hail, annually. Thunder is more common in spring and summer than other times of the year, while hail exclusively occurs in spring and summer months.

The Magdeburg weather station has recorded the following extreme values:
* Its highest temperature was on 20 July 2022.
* Its lowest temperature was on 27 January 1942.
* Its greatest annual precipitation was in 1926.
* Its least annual precipitation was in 1911.
* The longest annual sunshine was 2,168.1 hours in 2018.
* The shortest annual sunshine was 1,393.0 hours in 1984.

==Population==

As of 2021, Magdeburg has a population of about 237,000. Its population grew rapidly after the end of 19th century due to industrialization. In 1885, the population was 100,000, and doubled after only five years. Magdeburg reached its greatest population in 1940, at approximately 346,000. At that time the city was poised to become a giant metropolis, but the events of WWII changed its future. After the war, in the East Germany era, Magdeburg recovered its industrial base to a degree, particularly the Machine industry, and became one of the important cities of East Germany. In 1991, when Magdeburg became the capital of the state of Saxony-Anhalt, its population was about 275,000. After the German Reunification, the population of Magdeburg declined due to some loss of industries, when many residents moved to former West Germany. Since 2011, the population has stabilized at around 240,000.

==Politics==
===Mayor and city council===
The mayor of Magdeburg is independent politician Simone Borris since 2022. The most recent mayoral election was held on 24 April 2022, with a runoff held on 8 May, and the results were as follows:
! rowspan=2 colspan=2| Candidate
! rowspan=2| Party
! colspan=2| First round
! colspan=2| Second round
! Votes
! Votes
|-
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Simone Borris
| align=left| Independent (FDP, future!, MUT)
| 33,065
| 44.3
| 39,201
| 64.8
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Jens Rösler
| align=left| SPD/Greens
| 20,080
| 26.3
| 21,298
| 35.2
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Tobias Krull
| align=left| Christian Democratic Union
| 9,327
| 12.2
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Nicole Anger
| align=left| The Left
| 5,230
| 6.8
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Frank Pasemann
| align=left| Alternative for Germany
| 3,802
| 5.0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Till Isenhuth
| align=left| Independent
| 1,676
| 2.2
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Sarah Biedermann
| align=left| Free Voters
| 1,289
| 1.7
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Bettina Fassl
| align=left| Animal Protection Alliance
| 1,103
| 1.4
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| André Jordan
| align=left| Die PARTEI
| 860
| 1.1
! colspan=3| Valid votes
! 76,432
! 99.6
! 60,508
! 99.4
! colspan=3| Invalid votes
! 302
! 0.4
! 340
! 0.6
! colspan=3| Total
! 76,734
! 100.0
! 60,848
! 100.0
! colspan=3| Electorate/voter turnout
! 189,916
! 40.4
! 189,471
! 32.1
| colspan=7| Source: City of Magdeburg

The most recent city council election was held on 9 June 2024, and the results were as follows:
! colspan=2| Party
! Votes
! +/-
! Seats
|-
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Christian Democratic Union (CDU)
| 75,972
| 23.8
| 5.2
| 13
| 3
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Alternative for Germany (AfD)
| 72,626
| 22.8
| 8.4
| 13
| 5
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Social Democratic Party (SPD)
| 47,852
| 15.0
| 1.9
| 8
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| The Left (Die Linke)
| 32,549
| 10.2
| 5.1
| 6
| 3
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Alliance 90/The Greens (Grüne)
| 30,119
| 9.4
| 5.9
| 5
| 4
| 
| align=left| Magdeburg Garden Party (Gartenpartei)
| 14,711
| 4.6
| 0.4
| 3
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Animal Protection Party (Tierschutzpartei)
| 14,328
| 4.5
| 1.2
| 3
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Free Democratic Party (FDP)
| 13,141
| 4.1
| 1.3
| 2
| 1
| 
| align=left| future!
| 6,984
| 2.2
| 0.7
| 1
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Animal Protection Alliance (Tierschutzallianz)
| 5,495
| 1.7
| 0.4
| 1
| 0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Volt Germany (Volt)
| 3,343
| 1.0
| New
| 1
| New
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Pößel (Independent)
| 809
| 0.3
| New
| 0
| New
! colspan=2| Valid votes
! 319,022
! 100.0
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Invalid balots
! 1,620
! 1.5
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Total ballots
! 109,729
! 100.0
! 56
! ±0
! colspan=2| Electorate/voter turnout
! 187,588
! 58.5
! 5.1
! 
| colspan=7| Source: City of Magdeburg

==Education==

The Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg (German: Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg) was founded in 1993 and is one of the newest universities in Germany. The university in Magdeburg has about 13,000 students in nine faculties. There are 11,700 papers published in international journals from this institute.

The Magdeburg-Stendal University of Applied Sciences was founded in 1991. There are 30 direct study programs in five departments in Magdeburg and two departments in Stendal. The university has more than 130 professors and approximately 4,500 students at Magdeburg and 1,900 at Stendal.

==Culture and architecture==
===Entertainment===
Magdeburg has a municipal theatre, Theater Magdeburg.

Magdeburg is well known for the Magdeburg Christmas market, which is an attraction for 1.5 million visitors every year. Other events are the &quot;Stadtfest&quot;, &quot;Christopher Street Day&quot;, &quot;Elbe in Flames&quot;, and the &quot;Europafest Magdeburg&quot;. The autumn fair (formerly men&#x27;s fair) of Magdeburg goes back to Germany&#x27;s oldest folk festival. The tradition dates back to September 1010, when the holy feast of the Theban Legion was celebrated in Magdeburg (then called Magathaburg).

====Event venues====

* Altes Theater am Jerichower Platz – Former theater, used for parties and large conferences
* AMO – Culture and congress building
* Buttergasse – Night club near the city centre at &quot;Alter Markt&quot; – house-, electro, pop and black music
* Concert hall Georg Philipp Telemann at &quot;Kloster unser lieben Frauen&quot;
* Factory – Former factory building, German and international pop, rock, metal, and indie music artists are featured
* Festung Mark – Part of the former city fortification, now reconstructed for parties and conventions
* Feuerwache – Former fire station, repurposed for events
* GETEC Arena – Biggest multi-purpose hall in Saxony-Anhalt, home of handball team SC Magdeburg
* halber85 – Conventions, partys, conferences
* Kunstkantine – Factory cafeteria, monthly electro-music parties
* MDCC-Arena – Home of 1. FC Magdeburg
* Messe Magdeburg – Official trade fair site
* Prinzzclub – Night club at Halberstädter Straße – house-, electro, and black music
* Seebühne at Elbauenpark
* Stadthalle – Concert hall
* Studentenclub Baracke – Night club especially for students – house-, electro, rock, pop, indie and black music
* Tessenow Loft – Conventions, partys, conferences

===Museums===
* Magdeburg Museum of Cultural History
* Otto-von-Guericke-Museum Lukasklause
* Jahrtausendturm
* Magdeburg Museum of Nature
* Magdeburg Museum of Technology
* Art Museum in the Monastery of Our Lady
* Magdeburg Circus Museum
* Magdeburg Hairdressing Museum
* Steamboat Württemberg – a museum ship

===Architecture===


====Cathedral====
One of Magdeburg&#x27;s most impressive buildings is the Lutheran Cathedral of Saints Catherine and Maurice with a height of , making it the tallest church building of eastern Germany. It is notable for its beautiful and unique sculptures, especially the &quot;Twelve Virgins&quot; at the Northern Gate, the depictions of Otto I the Great and his wife Editha as well as the statues of St Maurice and St Catherine. 
The predecessor of the cathedral was a church built in 937 within an abbey, called St. Maurice. Emperor Otto I the Great was buried here beside his wife in 973. St. Maurice burnt to ashes in 1207. The exact location of that church remained unknown for a long time. The foundations were rediscovered in May 2003, revealing a building long and wide.

The construction of the new church lasted 300 years. The cathedral of Saints Catherine and Maurice was the first Gothic church building in Germany. The building of the steeples was completed as late as 1520.

While the cathedral was virtually the only building to survive the massacres of the Thirty Years&#x27; War, it suffered damage in World War II. It was soon rebuilt and completed in 1955.

The square in front of the cathedral (also called the &quot;Neuer Markt&quot;, or &quot;new marketplace&quot;) was occupied by an imperial palace (&quot;Kaiserpfalz&quot;), which was destroyed in the fire of 1207. The stones from the ruin were used for the building of the cathedral. The presumed remains of the palace were excavated in the 1960s.

====Other sights====
* &quot;Unser Lieben Frauen &quot;Monastery (Our Lady), 11th century, containing the church of St. Mary. Today a museum for Modern Art. Home of the National Collection of Small Art Statues of the GDR (Nationale Sammlung Kleinkunstplastiken der DDR).
* The &quot;Magdeburger Reiter&quot; (&quot;Magdeburg Rider&quot;, 1240), the first free-standing equestrian sculpture north of the Alps. It probably depicts the Emperor Otto I.
* City hall (1698). This building had stood on the market place since the 13th century, but it was destroyed in the Thirty Years&#x27; War; the new city hall was built in a Renaissance style influenced by Dutch architecture. It was renovated and re-opened in Oct 2005.
* Landtag; the seat of the government of Saxony-Anhalt with its Baroque façade built-in 1724.
* Monuments depicting Otto von Guericke (1907), Eike von Repkow and Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben.
* Ruins of the greatest fortress of the former Kingdom of Prussia.
* Rotehorn-Park
* Elbauenpark containing the highest wooden structure in Germany.
* St. Sebastian&#x27;s Cathedral, the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Magdeburg.
* St. John Church (Johanniskirche)
* The Gruson-Gewächshäuser, a botanical garden within a greenhouse complex
* The Magdeburg Water Bridge, Europe&#x27;s longest water bridge
* &quot;Die Grüne Zitadelle&quot; or The Green Citadel of Magdeburg, a large, pink building of a modern architectural style designed by Friedensreich Hundertwasser and completed in 2005.
* Jerusalem Bridge
* Zoo Magdeburg
* St. Johannis Church
* St. Petri Church, with stained glass by Charles Crodel

== Sports ==
Magdeburg has a proud history of sports teams. 1. FC Magdeburg plays in the 2. Bundesliga, the second division of German football. They are the only East German football club to have won the UEFA Cup Winners&#x27; Cup. The now-defunct clubs SV Victoria 96 Magdeburg and Cricket Viktoria Magdeburg were among the first football clubs in Germany.

There is also the very successful handball team, SC Magdeburg. They won multiple times the Handball-Bundesliga (HBL), DHB-Pokal, DHB-Supercup, EHF European League, EHF Champions League, EHF Men&#x27;s Champions Trophy and the IHF Men&#x27;s Super Globe.

The discus was re-discovered in Magdeburg in the 1870s by Christian Georg Kohlrausch, a gymnastics teacher.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Magdeburg is twinned with:

* Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (1977)
* Braunschweig, Germany (1987)
* Nashville, United States (2003)
* Zaporizhzhia, Ukraine (2008)
* Radom, Poland (2008)
* Harbin, China (2008)
* Le Havre, France (2011)
* Kiryat Motzkin, Israel (2024)
== People ==
===A–K===
*Ernst Anders (1845–1911), portrait and genre painter
*Richard Assmann (1845–1918), meteorologist
*Theodor Avé-Lallemant (1806–1890), music critic and writer on music
*Alfons Bach, (1904–1999), industrial designer
*Kurt Behrens (1884–1928), springboard diver
*Arno Bieberstein (1884–1918), swimmer
*Jessica Böhrs (born 1980), actress and singer
*Henry Busse (1894–1955), trumpeter and bandleader, emigrated to the US at 18
*Adelbert Delbrück (1822–1890), banker and lawyer
* Margarethe Düren (1904–1988), German operatic soprano
*Friedrich Ernst Fesca (1789–1826), violinist and composer
*Hans Gericke (1912–2014), architect
*Frank Giering (1971–2010), actor
*Harry Giese (1903–1991), actor and spokesman in Nazi newsreels
*Georg Gradnauer (1866–1946), newspaper editor and politician
*Alfred Grünberg (1901–1942), worker, KPD member and resistance fighter against Nazism
*Otto von Guericke (1602–1686), mayor and inventor of the Magdeburg hemispheres. The Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg is named after him
*Carl Gustav Friedrich Hasselbach (1809–1882), mayor and member of the Prussian House of Lords; a square in the centre of Magdeburg is named after him
*Ulrike Helzel, soprano
*Gottlieb von Haeseler (1701–1752), entrepreneur in the Duchy of Magdeburg
*Ingolf Huhn (born 1955), theatre and opera manager
*Hartmann Wilhem Otto (1876–1960), immigrated to the US, where he changed his name to William Hartman and served as a Rough Rider in the Spanish–American War together with Theodore Roosevelt
*Christian Georg Kohlrausch (1851–1934), gymnastics teacher and re-discoverer of discus throwing
*Anna-Maria Henckel von Donnersmarck (born 1940), political activist
*Carl Hindenburg (1820–1899), cycling official and first president of the German Cyclist Federation (DRB)
*Heinrich Jost (1889–1948), typeface designer
*Eberhard Jüngel (1934–2021), German Lutheran theologian
*Georg Kaiser (1878–1945), writer
*Nadine Kleinert (born 1975), retired shot putter, Olympic and World Championship silver medallist
*Wilhelm Kobelt (1865–1927), member of the Reichstag and local politician in Magdeburg
*Rolf Kohnert (born 1938), engineer, 3 times Australian masters cycling champion
*Stefan Kretzschmar (born 1973), handball player and Olympic medallist
*Hans Kühne (1880–1969), chemist on the board of I.G. Farben and defendant during the Nuremberg trials

===L–Z===
*Ernst Lehmann (1908–1945), SPD politician, active in the resistance against Nazism
*Otto Lehmann (1900–1936), resistance fighter against Nazism
*Werner Marcks (1896–1967), lieutenant general in World War II
*Olaf Malolepski (born 1946), singer-songwriter
*Johann Carl Simon Morgenstern (1770–1852), philologist who coined the term Bildungsroman
*Felix von Niemeyer (1820–1871), physician, royal Württemberg personal physician
*Leo Nowak (born 1929), Roman Catholic bishop of Magdeburg (1990–2004)
*Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard (born 1942), biologist, the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research in 1991 and the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1995
*Oleh Kuznetsov (born 1963), Ukrainian football coach and former professional player
*Richard Ölze (1900–1980), painter
*Erich Ollenhauer (1901–1963), leader of the Social Democratic Party of Germany 1952–1963
*Menahem Pressler (1923–2023), pianist
*Ernst Reuter (1889–1953), Mayor of Magdeburg 1931–1933, then Mayor of West Berlin in 1948–1953
*Willy Rosen (1894–1944) composer and songwriter
*Arthur Ruppin (1876–1943), Zionist thinker and leader
*Gustav Schäfer (1988–), drummer and musician for Tokio Hotel
*Ekkehard Schall (1930–2005), actor and theatre director
*Marcel Schmelzer (born 1988), footballer
*Karl Schmidt (1902–1945), resistance fighter against Nazism
*Petra Schmidt-Schaller (born 1980), actress
*Manfred Schoof (born 1936), jazz trumpeter
*Wolfgang Schreyer (1927–2017), writer
*Margarete Schön (1895–1985), stage and film actress
*Ivan Shyshkin (born 1983), Ukrainian footballer
*Kurt Singer (1886–1962), philosopher
*Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben (1730–1794), American patriot
*Christoph Christian Sturm (1740–1786), preacher and author, wrote the majority of his devotional works here
*Bruno Taut (1880–1938), city architect 1921–1923, completed two housing projects in Magdeburg
*Georg Philipp Telemann (1681–1767), composer
*Klaus Thunemann (born 1937), bassoon professor
*Henning von Tresckow (1901–1944), major general in the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;, active in the military resistance
*Lothar von Trotha (1848–1920), military commander notorious for presiding over the near-extermination of the Herero in German South-West Africa
*Karl Wallenda (1905–1978), highwire acrobat
*Camillo Walzel (1829–1895), librettist and theatre director
*Wilhelm Weitling (1808–1871), utopian Communist
*Dieter Zahn (born 1940), double-bassist
*Dejan Zavec (born 1976), Slovenian welterweight boxer, IBF Welterweight Champion
*Heinrich Zschokke (1771–1848), author and reformer
*George William Ziemann (1809–1881), Christian missionary who served in Magdeburg in the infantry

==Gallery==
==See also==

* The Magdeburg hemispheres, an experimental apparatus used to demonstrate the force of atmospheric pressure in 1656 by scientist Otto von Guericke
* Timeline of Magdeburg

==References==
==External links==
* Official website 
* Website for tourists
* Virtual city tour Magdeburg
* The city of Otto</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="0" end="9" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="22" end="29" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="37" end="43" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="44" end="49" title="States of Germany" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="50" end="63" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="84" end="88" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="97" end="103" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="115" end="133" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q636389" start="153" end="179" title="Archbishopric of Magdeburg" label="Archbishopric of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q668341" start="211" end="220" title="Magdeburg Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981896" start="266" end="281" title="German town law" label="German town law"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="292" end="308" title="Magdeburg rights" label="Magdeburg rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="328" end="335" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="363" end="379" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="476" end="492" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q60095" start="543" end="560" title="Otto von Guericke" label="Otto von Guericke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23361" start="598" end="619" title="Magdeburg hemispheres" label="Magdeburg hemispheres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="800" end="818" title="Magdeburg Cathedral#Previous building" label="Ottonian cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q731814" start="824" end="839" title="Catholic League (German)" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q698045" start="840" end="856" title="Sack of Magdeburg" label="sacked Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="939" end="961" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="970" end="982" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="987" end="993" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1173" end="1199" title="East Germany" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9010" start="1393" end="1403" title="Bundesautobahn 2" label="Autobahn 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q9032" start="1408" end="1419" title="Bundesautobahn 14" label="Autobahn 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1432" end="1439" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="1444" end="1458" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957908" start="1532" end="1540" title="machine industry" label="machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15067276" start="1542" end="1552" title="healthcare industry" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="1554" end="1576" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q743030" start="1578" end="1602" title="environmental technology" label="environmental technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q497743" start="1604" end="1620" title="circular economy" label="circular economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="1622" end="1631" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791776" start="1633" end="1640" title="culture industry" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q995609" start="1642" end="1646" title="wood industry" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="1651" end="1692" title="information and communications technology" label="information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="1714" end="1735" title="Culture" label="cultural institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521622" start="1763" end="1780" title="Theater Magdeburg" label="Theater Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673285" start="1789" end="1815" title="Kulturhistorisches Museum Magdeburg" label="Museum of Cultural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q655866" start="1872" end="1910" title="Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg" label="Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622123" start="1919" end="1967" title="Magdeburg-Stendal University of Applied Sciences" label="Magdeburg-Stendal University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="2012" end="2023" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="2060" end="2075" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150620" start="2221" end="2237" title="Henry the Fowler" label="Henry the Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="2250" end="2257" title="Hungarian people" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="2262" end="2267" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="2281" end="2287" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q237510" start="2330" end="2335" title="Eadgyth" label="Edith"/>
<link wikidata="Q351406" start="2339" end="2344" title="dower" label="dower"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="2446" end="2457" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q316599" start="2467" end="2480" title="Saint Maurice" label="Saint Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="2726" end="2731" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="2740" end="2746" title="corvée" label="corvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q636389" start="2793" end="2819" title="Archbishopric of Magdeburg" label="Archbishopric of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="2846" end="2851" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="2855" end="2862" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q77394" start="2864" end="2885" title="Adalbert (Archbishop of Magdeburg)" label="Adalbert of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q535236" start="2987" end="2996" title="Bishopric of Havelberg" label="Havelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q182492" start="2998" end="3009" title="Prince-Bishopric of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q566770" start="3011" end="3020" title="Bishopric of Merseburg" label="Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q702389" start="3022" end="3029" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Dresden-Meissen" label="Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q315609" start="3034" end="3048" title="Bishopric of Naumburg-Zeitz" label="Naumburg-Zeitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170346" start="3097" end="3116" title="Ostsiedlung" label="German colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="3149" end="3153" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981896" start="3292" end="3307" title="German town law" label="German town law"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="3331" end="3347" title="Magdeburg rights" label="Magdeburg rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="3573" end="3589" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="3672" end="3689" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="3750" end="3758" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="3787" end="3796" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="3870" end="3882" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="4076" end="4089" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q736039" start="4165" end="4192" title="Brethren of the Common Life" label="Brethren of the Common Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4291" end="4308" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="4314" end="4336" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="4421" end="4430" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q474366" start="4489" end="4505" title="League of Torgau" label="League of Torgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q155024" start="4514" end="4533" title="Schmalkaldic League" label="Schmalkaldic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q706216" start="4563" end="4579" title="Augsburg Interim" label="Augsburg Interim"/>
<link wikidata="Q317710" start="4665" end="4691" title="Maurice, Elector of Saxony" label="Maurice, Elector of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="4974" end="4987" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q435311" start="5003" end="5019" title="Matthias Flacius" label="Matthias Flacius"/>
<link wikidata="Q565384" start="5089" end="5108" title="Magdeburg Centuries" label="Magdeburg Centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5146" end="5167" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="5198" end="5208" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="5265" end="5287" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153545" start="5292" end="5316" title="Albrecht von Wallenstein" label="Albrecht von Wallenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="5373" end="5381" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q155534" start="5395" end="5427" title="Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly" label="Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q698045" start="5429" end="5475" title="sack of Magdeburg" label="stormed the city and massacred the inhabitants"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="5583" end="5602" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157367" start="5643" end="5662" title="Brandenburg-Prussia" label="Brandenburg-Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680131" start="5700" end="5726" title="August, Duke of Saxe-Weissenfels" label="August of Saxe-Weissenfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q702012" start="5751" end="5769" title="Duchy of Magdeburg" label="Duchy of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60095" start="5899" end="5916" title="Otto von Guericke" label="Otto von Guericke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23361" start="6091" end="6112" title="Magdeburg hemispheres" label="Magdeburg hemispheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="6145" end="6151" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905265" start="6163" end="6176" title="Horror vacui (physics)" label="hotly debated"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="6310" end="6325" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="6355" end="6361" title="First French Empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q153943" start="6424" end="6445" title="Kingdom of Westphalia" label="Kingdom of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154596" start="6458" end="6474" title="Treaties of Tilsit" label="Treaty of Tilsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q151087" start="6481" end="6487" title="Jérôme Bonaparte" label="Jérôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q727594" start="6513" end="6527" title="von Blumenthal" label="von Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="6616" end="6624" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q340210" start="6625" end="6643" title="Province of Saxony" label="Province of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q696771" start="6737" end="6746" title="Ohrekreis" label="Rothensee"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6781" end="6792" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="6808" end="6823" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988903" start="6848" end="6868" title="Kazimierz Sosnkowski" label="Kazimierz Sosnkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="6934" end="6949" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7011" end="7023" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="7058" end="7071" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496421" start="7091" end="7102" title="Stalag XI-A" label="Stalag XI-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q321177" start="7103" end="7123" title="German prisoner-of-war camps in World War II" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="7139" end="7145" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q840648" start="7163" end="7168" title="Sinti" label="Sinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="7173" end="7186" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="7203" end="7219" title="Romani Holocaust" label="Romani Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q321360" start="7238" end="7246" title="List of subcamps of Buchenwald" label="subcamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="7254" end="7283" title="Buchenwald concentration camp" label="Buchenwald concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="7333" end="7339" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q157912" start="7437" end="7447" title="Volkssturm" label="Volkssturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="7458" end="7470" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023193" start="7509" end="7522" title="Death marches during the Holocaust" label="death marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q159483" start="7535" end="7546" title="Ravensbrück concentration camp" label="Ravensbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="7551" end="7564" title="Sachsenhausen concentration camp" label="Sachsenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7828" end="7840" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q896419" start="7890" end="7911" title="Province of Magdeburg" label="Province of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q796906" start="7913" end="7919" title="Brabag" label="Brabag"/>
<link wikidata="Q835618" start="7967" end="7980" title="Synthetic fuel" label="synthetic oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="7986" end="7993" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909622" start="8019" end="8047" title="Oil Campaign of World War II" label="Oil Campaign of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q275885" start="8213" end="8224" title="Ninth United States Army" label="9th US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="8269" end="8277" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201472" start="8294" end="8302" title="Post-war" label="Post-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="8328" end="8353" title="Allied Occupation Zones in Germany" label="Soviet Zone of Occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="8564" end="8588" title="German reunification" label="reunification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="8801" end="8827" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="8920" end="8933" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415210" start="9186" end="9206" title="2013 European floods" label="2013 European floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q15833336" start="9513" end="9539" title="Magdeburg Christmas market" label="Magdeburg Christmas market"/>
<link wikidata="Q131520015" start="9545" end="9576" title="2024 Magdeburg car attack" label="a car was driven into the crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="9730" end="9735" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q882270" start="9882" end="9898" title="Elbe Cycle Route" label="Elbe Cycle Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983893" start="9990" end="9999" title="Stadtteil" label="Stadtteil"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="10238" end="10253" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="10255" end="10261" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="10280" end="10289" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="10322" end="10351" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q83301" start="10749" end="10756" title="thunder" label="thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="10775" end="10779" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11031" end="11043" title="2022_European_heatwaves#July_heatwave_2" label="20 July 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="11739" end="11751" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957908" start="11827" end="11843" title="Machine industry" label="Machine industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="11960" end="11973" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="12019" end="12039" title="German Reunification" label="German Reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="12146" end="12158" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="12290" end="12312" title="independent politician" label="independent politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="12638" end="12649" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="12651" end="12654" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q492561" start="12665" end="12668" title="Human Environment Animal Protection" label="MUT"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="12755" end="12758" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="12759" end="12765" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="12852" end="12878" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="12948" end="12956" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="13027" end="13050" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="13120" end="13131" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q327389" start="13204" end="13215" title="Free Voters" label="Free Voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23951319" start="13285" end="13311" title="Alliance for Human Rights, Animal and Nature Protection" label="Animal Protection Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q22748" start="13380" end="13390" title="Die PARTEI" label="Die PARTEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="13843" end="13869" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="13934" end="13957" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="14022" end="14045" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="14109" end="14117" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="14187" end="14209" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q492561" start="14358" end="14381" title="Human Environment Animal Protection Party" label="Animal Protection Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="14457" end="14478" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23951319" start="14594" end="14620" title="Alliance for Human Rights, Animal and Nature Protection" label="Animal Protection Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q106205950" start="14696" end="14708" title="Volt Germany" label="Volt Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="14780" end="14791" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q655866" start="15096" end="15134" title="Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg" label="Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622123" start="15414" end="15462" title="Magdeburg-Stendal University of Applied Sciences" label="Magdeburg-Stendal University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521622" start="15781" end="15798" title="Theater Magdeburg" label="Theater Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15833336" start="15833" end="15859" title="Magdeburg Christmas market" label="Magdeburg Christmas market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630631" start="15971" end="15993" title="Christopher Street Day" label="Christopher Street Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q885030" start="16945" end="16956" title="GETEC Arena" label="GETEC Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q10865306" start="17026" end="17038" title="SC Magdeburg" label="SC Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q473032" start="17153" end="17163" title="MDCC-Arena" label="MDCC-Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q155730" start="17174" end="17189" title="1. FC Magdeburg" label="1. FC Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q895677" start="17633" end="17648" title="Jahrtausendturm" label="Jahrtausendturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="17948" end="17956" title="Protestant Church in Germany" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="17977" end="17986" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q316599" start="17991" end="17998" title="Saint Maurice" label="Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="18213" end="18229" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q237510" start="18243" end="18249" title="Eadgyth" label="Editha"/>
<link wikidata="Q316599" start="18276" end="18286" title="Saint Maurice" label="St Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="18291" end="18303" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="St Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="18768" end="18774" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="19842" end="19848" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="20023" end="20034" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q884829" start="20121" end="20128" title="Landtag of Saxony-Anhalt" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="20183" end="20190" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q60095" start="20235" end="20252" title="Otto von Guericke" label="Otto von Guericke"/>
<link wikidata="Q77737" start="20261" end="20276" title="Eike von Repgow" label="Eike von Repkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="20281" end="20310" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="20359" end="20377" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q684326" start="20511" end="20546" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Magdeburg" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q875233" start="20589" end="20609" title="Gruson-Gewächshäuser" label="Gruson-Gewächshäuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="20613" end="20629" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="20639" end="20649" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q640980" start="20664" end="20686" title="Magdeburg Water Bridge" label="Magdeburg Water Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q151836" start="20859" end="20886" title="Friedensreich Hundertwasser" label="Friedensreich Hundertwasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q220258" start="20931" end="20944" title="Magdeburg Zoo" label="Zoo Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q313995" start="21009" end="21023" title="Charles Crodel" label="Charles Crodel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155730" start="21085" end="21100" title="1. FC Magdeburg" label="1. FC Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152665" start="21114" end="21127" title="2. Bundesliga" label="2. Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="21229" end="21255" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q121454" start="21279" end="21303" title="SV Victoria 96 Magdeburg" label="SV Victoria 96 Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q320322" start="21308" end="21334" title="Cricket Viktoria Magdeburg" label="Cricket Viktoria Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="21418" end="21426" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q10865306" start="21433" end="21445" title="SC Magdeburg" label="SC Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q175762" start="21475" end="21500" title="Handball-Bundesliga" label="Handball-Bundesliga (HBL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q686699" start="21502" end="21511" title="DHB-Pokal" label="DHB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q469855" start="21513" end="21525" title="DHB-Supercup" label="DHB-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q834840" start="21527" end="21546" title="EHF European League" label="EHF European League"/>
<link wikidata="Q330395" start="21548" end="21568" title="EHF Champions League" label="EHF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q606672" start="21570" end="21601" title="EHF Men&amp;#x27;s Champions Trophy" label="EHF Men&amp;#x27;s Champions Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151278" start="21610" end="21636" title="IHF Men&amp;#x27;s Super Globe" label="IHF Men&amp;#x27;s Super Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182570" start="21643" end="21649" title="Discus throw" label="discus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079805" start="21697" end="21723" title="Christian Georg Kohlrausch" label="Christian Georg Kohlrausch"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="21793" end="21800" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="21810" end="21818" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="21852" end="21864" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="21883" end="21892" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q157835" start="21917" end="21929" title="Zaporizhzhia" label="Zaporizhzhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104740" start="21948" end="21953" title="Radom" label="Radom"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="21971" end="21977" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="21994" end="22002" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q152567" start="22020" end="22034" title="Kiryat Motzkin" label="Kiryat Motzkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14544340" start="22074" end="22086" title="Ernst Anders" label="Ernst Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q65308" start="22128" end="22143" title="Richard Assmann" label="Richard Assmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q92467" start="22172" end="22193" title="Theodor Avé-Lallemant" label="Theodor Avé-Lallemant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721949" start="22241" end="22252" title="Alfons Bach" label="Alfons Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q66659" start="22288" end="22300" title="Kurt Behrens" label="Kurt Behrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q544054" start="22333" end="22349" title="Arno Bieberstein" label="Arno Bieberstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q213824" start="22372" end="22385" title="Jessica Böhrs" label="Jessica Böhrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026959" start="22419" end="22430" title="Henry Busse" label="Henry Busse"/>
<link wikidata="Q110509" start="22497" end="22514" title="Adelbert Delbrück" label="Adelbert Delbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323535" start="22548" end="22564" title="Margarethe Düren" label="Margarethe Düren"/>
<link wikidata="Q325731" start="22603" end="22624" title="Friedrich Ernst Fesca" label="Friedrich Ernst Fesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579800" start="22662" end="22674" title="Hans Gericke" label="Hans Gericke"/>
<link wikidata="Q67287" start="22699" end="22712" title="Frank Giering" label="Frank Giering"/>
<link wikidata="Q72811" start="22733" end="22744" title="Harry Giese" label="Harry Giese"/>
<link wikidata="Q85788" start="22797" end="22812" title="Georg Gradnauer" label="Georg Gradnauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q100762" start="22859" end="22874" title="Alfred Grünberg" label="Alfred Grünberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60095" start="22946" end="22963" title="Otto von Guericke" label="Otto von Guericke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23361" start="23003" end="23024" title="Magdeburg hemispheres" label="Magdeburg hemispheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q655866" start="23030" end="23068" title="Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg" label="Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q106007" start="23089" end="23121" title="Carl Gustav Friedrich Hasselbach" label="Carl Gustav Friedrich Hasselbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q52557060" start="23240" end="23253" title="Ulrike Helzel" label="Ulrike Helzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q71251" start="23264" end="23285" title="Gottlieb von Haeseler" label="Gottlieb von Haeseler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454169" start="23339" end="23350" title="Ingolf Huhn" label="Ingolf Huhn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23391" end="23411" title="Hartmann Wilhem Otto" label="Hartmann Wilhem Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079805" start="23582" end="23608" title="Christian Georg Kohlrausch" label="Christian Georg Kohlrausch"/>
<link wikidata="Q182570" start="23662" end="23674" title="discus throw" label="discus throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q123752814" start="23679" end="23714" title="Anna-Maria Henckel von Donnersmarck" label="Anna-Maria Henckel von Donnersmarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q65720" start="23748" end="23763" title="Carl Hindenburg" label="Carl Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19935440" start="23854" end="23867" title="Heinrich Jost" label="Heinrich Jost"/>
<link wikidata="Q85083" start="23900" end="23915" title="Eberhard Jüngel" label="Eberhard Jüngel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60477" start="23957" end="23969" title="Georg Kaiser" label="Georg Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q61935" start="23991" end="24006" title="Nadine Kleinert" label="Nadine Kleinert"/>
<link wikidata="Q76224" start="24090" end="24104" title="Wilhelm Kobelt" label="Wilhelm Kobelt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24177" end="24189" title="Rolf Kohnert" label="Rolf Kohnert"/>
<link wikidata="Q563427" start="24258" end="24276" title="Stefan Kretzschmar" label="Stefan Kretzschmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q119039" start="24329" end="24339" title="Hans Kühne" label="Hans Kühne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082881" start="24588" end="24601" title="Werner Marcks" label="Werner Marcks"/>
<link wikidata="Q458435" start="24651" end="24666" title="Olaf Malolepski" label="Olaf Malolepski"/>
<link wikidata="Q67149" start="24699" end="24728" title="Johann Carl Simon Morgenstern" label="Johann Carl Simon Morgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="24774" end="24787" title="Bildungsroman" label="Bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q87146" start="24789" end="24807" title="Felix von Niemeyer" label="Felix von Niemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q96864" start="24870" end="24879" title="Leo Nowak (bishop)" label="Leo Nowak"/>
<link wikidata="Q77174" start="24941" end="24968" title="Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard" label="Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q508065" start="25107" end="25121" title="Oleh Kuznetsov" label="Oleh Kuznetsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q175412" start="25192" end="25204" title="Richard Ölze" label="Richard Ölze"/>
<link wikidata="Q62185" start="25227" end="25243" title="Erich Ollenhauer" label="Erich Ollenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="25271" end="25305" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q70142" start="25317" end="25333" title="Menahem Pressler" label="Menahem Pressler"/>
<link wikidata="Q213561" start="25356" end="25368" title="Ernst Reuter" label="Ernst Reuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q90971" start="25452" end="25463" title="Willy Rosen" label="Willy Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q215779" start="25501" end="25514" title="Arthur Ruppin" label="Arthur Ruppin"/>
<link wikidata="Q386216" start="25556" end="25570" title="Gustav Schäfer (drummer)" label="Gustav Schäfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q386216" start="25605" end="25616" title="Tokio Hotel" label="Tokio Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q90893" start="25618" end="25633" title="Ekkehard Schall" label="Ekkehard Schall"/>
<link wikidata="Q153416" start="25675" end="25691" title="Marcel Schmelzer" label="Marcel Schmelzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q96084" start="25778" end="25800" title="Petra Schmidt-Schaller" label="Petra Schmidt-Schaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q457357" start="25823" end="25837" title="Manfred Schoof" label="Manfred Schoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q102012" start="25867" end="25884" title="Wolfgang Schreyer" label="Wolfgang Schreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103851" start="25906" end="25921" title="Margarete Schön" label="Margarete Schön"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097488" start="25959" end="25972" title="Ivan Shyshkin" label="Ivan Shyshkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q88081" start="26008" end="26019" title="Kurt Singer" label="Kurt Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="26046" end="26075" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084696" start="26107" end="26132" title="Christoph Christian Sturm" label="Christoph Christian Sturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q76729" start="26216" end="26226" title="Bruno Taut" label="Bruno Taut"/>
<link wikidata="Q75854" start="26311" end="26333" title="Georg Philipp Telemann" label="Georg Philipp Telemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q62660" start="26357" end="26372" title="Klaus Thunemann" label="Klaus Thunemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57574" start="26405" end="26425" title="Henning von Tresckow" label="Henning von Tresckow"/>
<link wikidata="Q65898" start="26518" end="26535" title="Lothar von Trotha" label="Lothar von Trotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q312492" start="26601" end="26633" title="Herero and Namaqua genocide" label="near-extermination of the Herero"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="26637" end="26661" title="German South-West Africa" label="German South-West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632482" start="26663" end="26676" title="Karl Wallenda" label="Karl Wallenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q326540" start="26708" end="26722" title="Camillo Walzel" label="Camillo Walzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="26736" end="26746" title="libretto" label="librettist"/>
<link wikidata="Q215808" start="26769" end="26785" title="Wilhelm Weitling" label="Wilhelm Weitling"/>
<link wikidata="Q192447" start="26799" end="26816" title="utopian Socialist" label="utopian Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223051" start="26818" end="26829" title="Dieter Zahn" label="Dieter Zahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="26843" end="26857" title="double-bassist" label="double-bassist"/>
<link wikidata="Q963256" start="26859" end="26870" title="Dejan Zavec" label="Dejan Zavec"/>
<link wikidata="Q66207" start="26941" end="26958" title="Heinrich Zschokke" label="Heinrich Zschokke"/>
<link wikidata="Q79383784" start="26993" end="27015" title="George William Ziemann" label="George William Ziemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q23361" start="27123" end="27144" title="Magdeburg hemispheres" label="Magdeburg hemispheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="27205" end="27225" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q60095" start="27247" end="27264" title="Otto von Guericke" label="Otto von Guericke"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196086" start="27267" end="27288" title="Timeline of Magdeburg" label="Timeline of Magdeburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20805" wikidata="Q188285" url="?curid=20805" title="Motet">
<text>In Western classical music, a motet is mainly a vocal musical composition, of highly diverse form and style, from high medieval music to the present. The motet was one of the pre-eminent polyphonic forms of Renaissance music. According to the English musicologist Margaret Bent, &quot;a piece of music in several parts with words&quot; is as precise a definition of the motet as will serve from the 13th to the late 16th century and beyond. The late 13th-century theorist Johannes de Grocheo believed that the motet was &quot;not to be celebrated in the presence of common people, because they do not notice its subtlety, nor are they delighted in hearing it, but in the presence of the educated and of those who are seeking out subtleties in the arts&quot;.

==Etymology==
In the early 20th century, it was generally believed &quot;motet&quot; came from the Latin &quot;movere&quot; (to move), though a derivation from the French (&quot;word&quot;, or &quot;phrase&quot;) had also been suggested. The Medieval Latin for &quot;motet&quot; is &quot;motectum&quot;, and the Italian was also used. If the word is from Latin, the name describes the movement of the different voices against one another. Today, however, the French etymology is favoured by reference books, as the word &quot;motet&quot; in 13th-century French had the sense of &quot;little word&quot;. The troped &quot;clausulas&quot; that were the forerunner of the motet were originally called &quot;motelli&quot; (from the French &quot;mot&quot;, &quot;word&quot;), soon replaced by the term .

==Medieval examples==
The earliest motets arose in the 13th century from the &quot;organum&quot; tradition exemplified in the Notre-Dame school of Léonin and Pérotin. The motet probably arose from clausula sections in a longer sequence of . Clausulae represent brief sections of longer polyphonic settings of chant with a note-against-note texture. In some cases, these sections were composed independently and &quot;substituted&quot; for existing setting. These clausulae could then be &quot;troped,&quot; or given new text in the upper part(s), creating motets. From these first motets arose a medieval tradition of secular motets. These were two- to four-part compositions in which different texts, sometimes in different vernacular languages, were sung simultaneously over a (usually Latin-texted) &quot;cantus firmus&quot; usually adapted from a melismatic passage of Gregorian chant on a single word or phrase. It is also increasingly argued that the term &quot;motet&quot; could in fact include certain brief single-voice songs. 

The texts of upper voices include subjects as diverse as courtly love odes, pastoral encounters with shepherdesses, political attacks, and many Christian devotions, especially to the Virgin Mary. In many cases, the texts of the upper voices are related to the themes of the chant passage they elaborate on, even in cases where the upper voices are secular in content. Most medieval motets are anonymous compositions and significantly re-use music and text. They are transmitted in a number of contexts, and were most popular in northern France. The largest surviving collection is in the Montpellier Codex.

Increasingly in the 14th and 15th centuries, motets made use of repetitive patterns often termed panisorhythmic; that is, they employed repeated rhythmic patterns in all voices—not only the &quot;cantus firmus&quot;—which did not necessarily coincide with repeating melodic patterns. Philippe de Vitry was one of the earliest composers to use this technique, and his work evidently had an influence on that of Guillaume de Machaut, one of the most famous named composers of late medieval motets.

===Medieval composers===
Other medieval motet composers include:

* Adam de la Halle (1237?–1288? or after 1306)
* Johannes Ciconia (c. 1370–1412)
* Guillaume Du Fay (1397-1474)
* John Dunstaple (c. 1390–1453)
* Franco of Cologne (fl. mid-13th century)
* Jacopo da Bologna (fl. 1340–1385)
* Marchetto da Padova (fl. 1305–1319)
* Petrus de Cruce (fl. second half of the 13th century)
* W. de Wycombe (fl. 1270s)

==Renaissance examples==
The compositional character of the motet changed entirely during the transition from medieval to Renaissance music, as most composers abandoned the use of a repeated figure as a &quot;cantus firmus&quot;. Guillaume Dufay was a transitional figure in this regard, writing one of the last important motets in the medieval, isorhythmic style, &quot;Nuper rosarum flores&quot;, in 1436. During the second half of the fifteenth century Motets stretched the &quot;cantus firmus&quot; to greater lengths compared to the surrounding multi-voice counterpoint, adopting a technique of contemporary &#x27;tenor masses&#x27;. This obscured the &quot;cantus firmus&quot; rhythm more than in medieval isorhythmic motets. Cascading, passing chords created by the interplay of voices and the absence of an obvious beat distinguish medieval and renaissance motet styles.

Motet frequently used the texts of antiphons and the Renaissance period marked the flowering of the form. The Renaissance motet is polyphonic, sometimes with an imitative counterpoint, for a chorus singing a Latin and usually sacred text. It is not connected to a specific liturgy, making it suitable for any service.

Motets were sacred madrigals and the language of the text was decisive: Latin for a motet and the vernacular for a madrigal. The relationship between the forms is clearest in composers of sacred music, such as Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, whose &quot;motets&quot; setting texts from the &quot;Canticum Canticorum&quot; are among the most lush and madrigal-like, while his madrigals using Petrarch&#x27;s poems could be performed in a church. Religious compositions in vernacular languages were often called &quot;madrigali spirituali&quot;, &quot;spiritual madrigals&quot;. These Renaissance motets developed in episodic format with separate phrases of the text given independent melodic treatment and contrapuntal development.

Secular motets, known as &quot;ceremonial motets&quot;, typically set a Latin text to praise a monarch, music or commemorate a triumph. The theme of courtly love, often found in the medieval secular motet, was banished from the Renaissance motet. Ceremonial motets are characterised by clear articulation of formal structure and by clear diction, because the texts would be novel for the audience. Adrian Willaert, Ludwig Senfl, and Cipriano de Rore are prominent composers of ceremonial motets from the first half of the 16th century.

===Renaissance composers===
The motet was one of the preeminent forms of Renaissance music. Important composers of Renaissance motets include:
* Alexander Agricola
* Gilles Binchois
* Antoine Boësset
* Antoine Brumel
* Antoine Busnois
* William Byrd
* Johannes Vodnianus Campanus
* Pierre Certon
* Jacobus Clemens non Papa
* Loyset Compère
* Thomas Crecquillon
* Josquin des Prez
* John Dunstaple
* François-Eustache Du Caurroy
* Antoine de Févin
* Carlo Gesualdo
* Nicolas Gombert
* Francisco Guerrero
* Heinrich Isaac
* Claude Le Jeune
* Pierre de La Rue
* Orlande de Lassus
* Jean Maillard
* Cristóbal de Morales
* Étienne Moulinié
* Jean Mouton
* Jacob Obrecht
* Johannes Ockeghem
* Andreas Pevernage
* Lucrezia Orsina Vizzana
* Martin Peerson
* Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina
* Thomas Tallis
* John Taverner
* Robert Carver
* Tomás Luis de Victoria
* Manuel Cardoso
In the latter part of the 16th century, Giovanni Gabrieli and other composers developed a new style, the polychoral motet, in which two or more choirs of singers (or instruments) alternated. This style of motet was sometimes called the &quot;Venetian motet&quot; to distinguish it from the &quot;Netherlands&quot; or &quot;Flemish&quot; motet written elsewhere. &quot;If Ye Love Me&quot; by Thomas Tallis serves the demand of the Church of England for English texts, and a focus on understanding the words, beginning in homophony.

==Baroque examples==
In Baroque music, especially in France where the motet was very important, there were two distinct, and very different types of motet: &quot;petits motets&quot;, sacred choral or chamber compositions whose only accompaniment was a basso continuo; and &quot;grands motets&quot;, which included massed choirs and instruments up to and including a full orchestra. Jean-Baptiste Lully, Michel Richard de Lalande, Marc-Antoine Charpentier were important composers of this sort of motet. Their motets often included parts for soloists as well as choirs; they were longer, including multiple movements in which different soloist, choral, or instrumental forces were employed. Lully&#x27;s motets also continued the Renaissance tradition of semi-secular Latin motets in works such as &quot;Plaude Laetare Gallia&quot;, written to celebrate the baptism of King Louis XIV&#x27;s son; its text by Pierre Perrin begins:

&lt;poem&gt;&quot;Plaude laetare Gallia&quot;
&quot;Rore caelesti rigantur lilia,&quot;
&quot;Sacro Delphinus fonte lavatur&quot;
&quot;Et christianus Christo dicatur.&quot;&lt;/poem&gt;

(&quot;Rejoice and sing, France: the lily is bathed with heavenly dew. The Dauphin is bathed in the sacred font, and the Christian is dedicated to Christ.&quot;)

In France, Pierre Robert (24 grands motets), Henry Dumont (grands &amp; petits motets), Marc-Antoine Charpentier (206 different types of motets), Michel-Richard de La Lande (70 grands motets), Henry Desmarest (20 grands motets), François Couperin (motets lost), Nicolas Bernier, André Campra, Charles-Hubert Gervais (42 grands motets), Louis-Nicolas Clérambault, François Giroust (70 grands motets) were also important composers. In Germany, too, pieces called motets were written in the new musical languages of the Baroque. Heinrich Schütz wrote many motets in series of publications, for example three books of Symphoniae sacrae, some in Latin and some in German. Hans Leo Hassler composed motets such as &quot;Dixit Maria&quot;, on which he also based a mass composition.

=== J. S. Bach&#x27;s compositions ===

Six motets attributed to Johann Sebastian Bach and catalogued BWV 225–230 are relatively long pieces combining German hymns with biblical texts, several of them composed for funerals. Mostly written in &quot;a cappella&quot; style, &quot;basso continuo&quot;, with instruments playing colla parte, several of them composed for funerals. The first five, for double chorus, are almost certainly composed by Bach and are written in &quot;a cappella&quot; style, though strings and oboes appear to have accompanied colla parte. &quot;Lobet dem Herrn&quot; is for SATB with &quot;basso continuo&quot;.

* BWV 225 &quot;Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied&quot; (1726)
* BWV 226 &quot;Der Geist hilft unser Schwachheit auf&quot; (1729)
* BWV 227 &quot;Jesu, meine Freude&quot; 
* BWV 228 &quot;Fürchte dich nicht&quot; 
* BWV 229 &quot;Komm, Jesu, komm&quot; (1730?)
* BWV 230 &quot;Lobet den Herrn, alle Heiden&quot; (?)

The funeral cantata &quot;O Jesu Christ, meins Lebens Licht&quot;, BWV 118 (1736–37?) is regarded as a motet, though it has independent instrumental parts. The motet &quot;Sei Lob und Preis mit Ehren&quot;, BWV 231 is an arrangement of a movement from Bach&#x27;s Cantata 28, and the authenticity of the arrangement is not certain. For a few more motets, such as &quot;Ich lasse dich nicht&quot;, BWV Anh 159, Bach&#x27;s authorship is debated.

== Later 18th century - present==
Later 18th-century composers wrote few motets. Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach composed an extended chorale motet &quot;Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme&quot;, combining Baroque techniques with the galant style. Mozart&#x27;s Ave verum corpus (K. 618) is this genre. Rameau, Mondonville and Giroust also wrote grands motets.

In the 19th century, some German composers continued to write motets. Felix Mendelssohn composed &quot;Jauchzet dem Herrn, alle Welt&quot;, &quot;Denn er hat seinen Engeln befohlen&quot; and &quot;Mitten wir im Leben sind&quot;. Johannes Brahms composed three motets on biblical verses, &quot;Fest- und Gedenksprüche&quot;. Josef Rheinberger composed &quot;Abendlied&quot;. Anton Bruckner composed about 40 motets, mainly in Latin, including &quot;Locus iste&quot;. French composers of motets include Camille Saint-Saëns and César Franck. In English similar compositions are called anthems. Some later English composers, such as Charles Villiers Stanford, wrote motets in Latin. Most of these compositions are a cappella and some, such as Edward Elgar&#x27;s three motets Op. 2, are accompanied by organ.

In the 20th century, composers of motets have often consciously imitated earlier styles. In 1920, Ralph Vaughan Williams composed &quot;O clap your hands&quot;, a setting of verses from Psalm 47 for a four-part choir, organ, brass, and percussion, called a motet. Carl Nielsen set in &quot;Tre Motetter&quot; three verses from different psalms as motets, first performed in 1930. Francis Poulenc set several Latin texts as motets, first &quot;Quatre motets pour un temps de pénitence&quot; (1938). Maurice Duruflé composed &quot;Quatre Motets sur des thèmes grégoriens&quot; in 1960, and &quot;Notre Père&quot; in 1977. Other examples include works by Richard Strauss, Charles Villiers Stanford, Edmund Rubbra, Lennox Berkeley, Morten Lauridsen, Edward Elgar, Hugo Distler, F. Melius Christiansen, Ernst Krenek, Michael Finnissy, Karl Jenkins and Igor Stravinsky.

Arvo Pärt has composed motets, including &quot;Da pacem Domine&quot; in 2006, as have Dave Soldier (Motet: Harmonies of the World, with rules from Johannes Kepler), Sven-David Sandström, Enjott Schneider, Ludger Stühlmeyer and Pierre Pincemaille.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Anderson, Michael Alan. &quot;St. Anne in Renaissance Music: Devotion and Politics.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
* Cumming, Julie E. &quot;The Motet in the Age of Dufay.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
* Favier, Thierry, &quot;Le Motet à grand chœur (1660–1792): Gloria in Gallia Deo.&quot; Paris: Fayard, 2009.
* Fitch, Fabrice, &quot;Renaissance Polyphony.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020.
* Lincoln, Harry B. &quot;The Latin Motet: Indexes to Printed Collections, 1500–1600&quot; Institute of Medieval Music, 1993.
* Melamed, Daniel R., &quot;J. S. Bach and the German Motet.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
* Nosow, Robert, &quot;Ritual Meanings in the Fifteenth-Century Motet.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
* Pesce, Dolores, ed., &quot;Hearing the Motet: Essays on the Motet of the Middle Ages and Renaissance&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
* Rice, John A., &quot;Saint Cecilia in the Renaissance: The Emergence of a Musical Icon&quot; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2022.
* Rodríguez-Garcia, Esperanza, and Daniele V. Filippi, eds, &quot;Mapping the Motet in the Post-Tridentine Era.&quot; Abingdon: Routledge, 2019
* Schmidt, Thomas, &quot;The Motet around 1500: On the Relationship between Imitation and Text Treatment.&quot; Turnhout: Brepols, 2012.
* Zazulia, Emily, &quot;Where Sight Meets Sound: The Poetics of Late-Medieval Music Writing.&quot; New York: Oxford University Press, 2021
* Zayaruznaya, Anna, &quot;The Monstrous New Art: Divided Forms in the Late Medieval Motet.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.

==External links==
* Motet online database at the University of Florida</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="3" end="26" title="Western classical music" label="Western classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188285" start="30" end="35" title="Motet" label="motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q163775" start="119" end="133" title="medieval music" label="medieval music"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="187" end="197" title="polyphonic" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="207" end="224" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="251" end="263" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759182" start="264" end="277" title="Margaret Bent" label="Margaret Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338046" start="472" end="491" title="Johannes de Grocheo" label="Johannes de Grocheo"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="859" end="864" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="1002" end="1016" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="1226" end="1235" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554097" start="1367" end="1373" title="trope (music)" label="troped"/>
<link wikidata="Q867914" start="1380" end="1389" title="Clausula (music)" label="clausulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q599877" start="1642" end="1649" title="organum" label="organum"/>
<link wikidata="Q830881" start="1685" end="1702" title="Notre-Dame school" label="Notre-Dame school"/>
<link wikidata="Q297501" start="1706" end="1712" title="Léonin" label="Léonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206275" start="1717" end="1724" title="Pérotin" label="Pérotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q867914" start="1756" end="1764" title="Clausula (music)" label="clausula"/>
<link wikidata="Q163775" start="2155" end="2163" title="medieval music" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="2177" end="2184" title="secular" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="2284" end="2294" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q938118" start="2367" end="2380" title="cantus firmus" label="cantus firmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q248255" start="2410" end="2420" title="Melisma" label="melismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="2432" end="2447" title="Gregorian chant" label="Gregorian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106061" start="3185" end="3202" title="Montpellier Codex" label="Montpellier Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q250765" start="3302" end="3316" title="isorhythm" label="panisorhythmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q311766" start="3489" end="3506" title="Philippe de Vitry" label="Philippe de Vitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q200580" start="3615" end="3635" title="Guillaume de Machaut" label="Guillaume de Machaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4214" start="3770" end="3786" title="Adam de la Halle" label="Adam de la Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q378148" start="3817" end="3833" title="Johannes Ciconia" label="Johannes Ciconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207717" start="3851" end="3867" title="Guillaume Du Fay" label="Guillaume Du Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q215134" start="3882" end="3896" title="John Dunstaple" label="John Dunstaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383390" start="3914" end="3931" title="Franco of Cologne" label="Franco of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q510939" start="3957" end="3974" title="Jacopo da Bologna" label="Jacopo da Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893498" start="3993" end="4012" title="Marchetto da Padova" label="Marchetto da Padova"/>
<link wikidata="Q180026" start="4031" end="4046" title="Petrus de Cruce" label="Petrus de Cruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016791" start="4087" end="4100" title="W. de Wycombe" label="W. de Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="4236" end="4253" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q207717" start="4344" end="4359" title="Guillaume Dufay" label="Guillaume Dufay"/>
<link wikidata="Q589115" start="4485" end="4505" title="Nuper rosarum flores" label="Nuper rosarum flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142665" start="4857" end="4870" title="passing chord" label="passing chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q582093" start="5029" end="5037" title="antiphon" label="antiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="5125" end="5135" title="polyphony" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="5267" end="5274" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193217" start="5332" end="5340" title="madrigal (music)" label="madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5385" end="5390" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="5523" end="5555" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="5611" end="5630" title="Song of Solomon" label="Canticum Canticorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="5706" end="5714" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842899" start="5831" end="5851" title="madrigale spirituale" label="madrigali spirituali"/>
<link wikidata="Q851650" start="6196" end="6208" title="courtly love" label="courtly love"/>
<link wikidata="Q312615" start="6445" end="6460" title="Adrian Willaert" label="Adrian Willaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q58008" start="6462" end="6474" title="Ludwig Senfl" label="Ludwig Senfl"/>
<link wikidata="Q316074" start="6480" end="6496" title="Cipriano de Rore" label="Cipriano de Rore"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="6657" end="6674" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q360813" start="6729" end="6747" title="Alexander Agricola" label="Alexander Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q214964" start="6750" end="6765" title="Gilles Binchois" label="Gilles Binchois"/>
<link wikidata="Q279121" start="6768" end="6783" title="Antoine Boësset" label="Antoine Boësset"/>
<link wikidata="Q455101" start="6786" end="6800" title="Antoine Brumel" label="Antoine Brumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q317937" start="6803" end="6818" title="Antoine Busnois" label="Antoine Busnois"/>
<link wikidata="Q208375" start="6821" end="6833" title="William Byrd" label="William Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q328374" start="6836" end="6863" title="Johannes Vodnianus Campanus" label="Johannes Vodnianus Campanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q484817" start="6866" end="6879" title="Pierre Certon" label="Pierre Certon"/>
<link wikidata="Q438090" start="6882" end="6906" title="Jacobus Clemens non Papa" label="Jacobus Clemens non Papa"/>
<link wikidata="Q975576" start="6909" end="6923" title="Loyset Compère" label="Loyset Compère"/>
<link wikidata="Q611169" start="6926" end="6944" title="Thomas Crecquillon" label="Thomas Crecquillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q143100" start="6947" end="6963" title="Josquin des Prez" label="Josquin des Prez"/>
<link wikidata="Q215134" start="6966" end="6980" title="John Dunstaple" label="John Dunstaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378713" start="6992" end="7011" title="Eustache Du Caurroy" label="Eustache Du Caurroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856873" start="7014" end="7030" title="Antoine de Févin" label="Antoine de Févin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192958" start="7033" end="7047" title="Carlo Gesualdo" label="Carlo Gesualdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q549689" start="7050" end="7065" title="Nicolas Gombert" label="Nicolas Gombert"/>
<link wikidata="Q470568" start="7068" end="7086" title="Francisco Guerrero (composer)" label="Francisco Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q316668" start="7089" end="7103" title="Heinrich Isaac" label="Heinrich Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q493688" start="7106" end="7121" title="Claude Le Jeune" label="Claude Le Jeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q370540" start="7124" end="7140" title="Pierre de La Rue" label="Pierre de La Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q154792" start="7143" end="7160" title="Orlande de Lassus" label="Orlande de Lassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807690" start="7163" end="7176" title="Jean Maillard" label="Jean Maillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q360184" start="7179" end="7199" title="Cristóbal de Morales" label="Cristóbal de Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q205898" start="7202" end="7218" title="Étienne Moulinié" label="Étienne Moulinié"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660965" start="7221" end="7232" title="Jean Mouton" label="Jean Mouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q311629" start="7235" end="7248" title="Jacob Obrecht" label="Jacob Obrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q143059" start="7251" end="7268" title="Johannes Ockeghem" label="Johannes Ockeghem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159084" start="7271" end="7288" title="Andreas Pevernage" label="Andreas Pevernage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698125" start="7291" end="7314" title="Lucrezia Orsina Vizzana" label="Lucrezia Orsina Vizzana"/>
<link wikidata="Q559956" start="7317" end="7331" title="Martin Peerson" label="Martin Peerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="7334" end="7366" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q207789" start="7369" end="7382" title="Thomas Tallis" label="Thomas Tallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q315353" start="7385" end="7398" title="John Taverner" label="John Taverner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342809" start="7401" end="7414" title="Robert Carver (composer)" label="Robert Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q215128" start="7417" end="7439" title="Tomás Luis de Victoria" label="Tomás Luis de Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q707614" start="7442" end="7456" title="Manuel Cardoso (composer)" label="Manuel Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q34624" start="7497" end="7514" title="Giovanni Gabrieli" label="Giovanni Gabrieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q582093" start="7562" end="7572" title="polychoral" label="polychoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="7601" end="7606" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q25449088" start="7825" end="7838" title="If Ye Love Me" label="If Ye Love Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q207349" start="7977" end="7986" title="homophony" label="homophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="8013" end="8026" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="8241" end="8255" title="basso continuo" label="basso continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523768" start="8267" end="8280" title="grands motets" label="grands motets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192" start="8371" end="8390" title="Jean-Baptiste Lully" label="Jean-Baptiste Lully"/>
<link wikidata="Q312979" start="8392" end="8417" title="Michel Richard Delalande" label="Michel Richard de Lalande"/>
<link wikidata="Q55524" start="8419" end="8443" title="Marc-Antoine Charpentier" label="Marc-Antoine Charpentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16220813" start="8792" end="8813" title="Plaude Laetare Gallia" label="Plaude Laetare Gallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="8862" end="8871" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294482" start="8896" end="8909" title="Pierre Perrin" label="Pierre Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="9182" end="9189" title="Dauphin of France" label="Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q955813" start="9281" end="9294" title="Pierre Robert (composer)" label="Pierre Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364326" start="9315" end="9327" title="Henri Dumont" label="Henry Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q312979" start="9416" end="9442" title="Michel Richard Delalande" label="Michel-Richard de La Lande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345283" start="9463" end="9478" title="Henri Desmarets" label="Henry Desmarest"/>
<link wikidata="Q50186" start="9499" end="9516" title="François Couperin" label="François Couperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q428547" start="9532" end="9547" title="Nicolas Bernier" label="Nicolas Bernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q313860" start="9549" end="9561" title="André Campra" label="André Campra"/>
<link wikidata="Q327875" start="9563" end="9585" title="Charles-Hubert Gervais" label="Charles-Hubert Gervais"/>
<link wikidata="Q470149" start="9606" end="9631" title="Louis-Nicolas Clérambault" label="Louis-Nicolas Clérambault"/>
<link wikidata="Q360065" start="9633" end="9649" title="François Giroust" label="François Giroust"/>
<link wikidata="Q153643" start="9796" end="9811" title="Heinrich Schütz" label="Heinrich Schütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q48726809" start="9884" end="9901" title="Symphoniae sacrae I" label="Symphoniae sacrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q164882" start="9937" end="9953" title="Hans Leo Hassler" label="Hans Leo Hassler"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757202" start="9984" end="9995" title="Dixit Maria" label="Dixit Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="10112" end="10133" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="10295" end="10305" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="10325" end="10339" title="basso continuo" label="basso continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="10372" end="10383" title="colla parte" label="colla parte"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="10522" end="10532" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="10598" end="10609" title="colla parte" label="colla parte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948826" start="10646" end="10650" title="SATB" label="SATB"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="10662" end="10676" title="basso continuo" label="basso continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049534" start="10701" end="10732" title="Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied, BWV 225" label="Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193795" start="10762" end="10799" title="Der Geist hilft unser Schwachheit auf, BWV 226" label="Der Geist hilft unser Schwachheit auf"/>
<link wikidata="Q892166" start="10829" end="10847" title="Jesu, meine Freude, BWV 227" label="Jesu, meine Freude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603263" start="10871" end="10889" title="Fürchte dich nicht, BWV 228" label="Fürchte dich nicht"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042298" start="10913" end="10929" title="Komm, Jesu, komm, BWV 229" label="Komm, Jesu, komm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848964" start="10960" end="10988" title="Lobet den Herrn, alle Heiden, BWV 230" label="Lobet den Herrn, alle Heiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q692310" start="11012" end="11019" title="List of Bach cantatas" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013868" start="11020" end="11074" title="O Jesu Christ, meins Lebens Licht, BWV 118" label="&amp;quot;O Jesu Christ, meins Lebens Licht&amp;quot;, BWV 118"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800236" start="11166" end="11214" title="Sei Lob und Preis mit Ehren, BWV 231" label="&amp;quot;Sei Lob und Preis mit Ehren&amp;quot;, BWV 231"/>
<link wikidata="Q21998553" start="11363" end="11408" title="Ich lasse dich nicht, BWV Anh 159" label="&amp;quot;Ich lasse dich nicht&amp;quot;, BWV Anh 159"/>
<link wikidata="Q57225" start="11527" end="11558" title="Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach" label="Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104953" start="11580" end="11593" title="chorale motet" label="chorale motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228305" start="11600" end="11631" title="Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme (J. C. F. Bach)" label="Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme"/>
<link wikidata="Q18978825" start="11677" end="11689" title="galant style" label="galant style"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="11691" end="11704" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q955663" start="11705" end="11721" title="Ave verum corpus (Mozart)" label="Ave verum corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145" start="11746" end="11752" title="Jean-Philippe Rameau" label="Rameau"/>
<link wikidata="Q371862" start="11754" end="11765" title="Jean-Joseph de Mondonville" label="Mondonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q360065" start="11770" end="11777" title="François Giroust" label="Giroust"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="11875" end="11892" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q62024018" start="11908" end="11937" title="Jauchzet dem Herrn, alle Welt (Mendelssohn)" label="Jauchzet dem Herrn, alle Welt"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075390" start="11951" end="11985" title="Denn er hat seinen Engeln befohlen" label="Denn er hat seinen Engeln befohlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q117528395" start="12002" end="12026" title="Mitten wir im Leben sind (Mendelssohn)" label="Mitten wir im Leben sind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="12034" end="12049" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643101" start="12098" end="12121" title="Fest- und Gedenksprüche" label="Fest- und Gedenksprüche"/>
<link wikidata="Q15629545" start="12162" end="12171" title="Abendlied (Rheinberger)" label="Abendlied"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="12179" end="12193" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391244" start="12212" end="12218" title="Motets (Bruckner)" label="motets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124334" start="12253" end="12263" title="Locus iste (Bruckner)" label="Locus iste"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="12306" end="12325" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q50187" start="12330" end="12342" title="César Franck" label="César Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q541947" start="12387" end="12393" title="anthem" label="anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q368264" start="12434" end="12459" title="Charles Villiers Stanford" label="Charles Villiers Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21998366" start="12467" end="12482" title="Three Latin Motets" label="motets in Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="12515" end="12525" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="12544" end="12556" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56280707" start="12747" end="12764" title="O clap your hands (Vaughan Williams)" label="O clap your hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067299" start="12797" end="12805" title="Psalm 47" label="Psalm 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q205139" start="12875" end="12887" title="Carl Nielsen" label="Carl Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24041078" start="12901" end="12913" title="Tre Motetter" label="Tre Motetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401330" start="13054" end="13094" title="Quatre motets pour un temps de pénitence" label="Quatre motets pour un temps de pénitence"/>
<link wikidata="Q183256" start="13109" end="13124" title="Maurice Duruflé" label="Maurice Duruflé"/>
<link wikidata="Q41095843" start="13140" end="13179" title="Quatre Motets sur des thèmes grégoriens" label="Quatre Motets sur des thèmes grégoriens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11495836" start="13205" end="13215" title="Notre Père" label="Notre Père"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="13263" end="13278" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q368264" start="13280" end="13305" title="Charles Villiers Stanford" label="Charles Villiers Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q958880" start="13307" end="13320" title="Edmund Rubbra" label="Edmund Rubbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q514975" start="13322" end="13337" title="Lennox Berkeley" label="Lennox Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355103" start="13339" end="13355" title="Morten Lauridsen" label="Morten Lauridsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="13357" end="13369" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q702366" start="13371" end="13383" title="Hugo Distler" label="Hugo Distler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567030" start="13385" end="13407" title="F. Melius Christiansen" label="F. Melius Christiansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q158436" start="13409" end="13421" title="Ernst Krenek" label="Ernst Krenek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813877" start="13423" end="13439" title="Michael Finnissy" label="Michael Finnissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333168" start="13441" end="13453" title="Karl Jenkins" label="Karl Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="13458" end="13473" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q189534" start="13476" end="13485" title="Arvo Pärt" label="Arvo Pärt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18551141" start="13523" end="13538" title="Da pacem Domine" label="Da pacem Domine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229885" start="13562" end="13574" title="Dave Soldier" label="Dave Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q920770" start="13641" end="13661" title="Sven-David Sandström" label="Sven-David Sandström"/>
<link wikidata="Q241316" start="13663" end="13679" title="Enjott Schneider" label="Enjott Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873853" start="13681" end="13698" title="Ludger Stühlmeyer" label="Ludger Stühlmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093784" start="13703" end="13721" title="Pierre Pincemaille" label="Pierre Pincemaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="15474" end="15495" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20806" wikidata="Q1181250" url="?curid=20806" title="Madrigal (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Madrigal]] is a European musical form of the 16th and 17th centuries.

Madrigal may also refer to:

== Literature ==
===Works===
* Madrigal (poetry), a type of poem
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a poem by Federico García Lorca
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a spy novel by John Gardner

===Characters===
* Madrigal, a main character in the &quot;Daughter of Smoke and Bone&quot; trilogy by Laini Taylor
* Anna Madrigal, fictional character from Armistead Maupin&#x27;s novel series &quot;Tales of the City&quot;
* Miss Madrigal, a character in the play &quot;The Chalk Garden&quot; by Enid Bagnold
* Madrigal Raith, aka Darby Crane, a character in the novel &quot;Proven Guilty&quot; by Jim Butcher
* Madeline Madrigal, aka Ma-Ma, a character in the 2012 movie &quot;Dredd&quot;
* Madrigal, a mysterious family branch in the novel series: &quot;The 39 Clues&quot;
* The Madrigal family, a group of characters from the 2021 Disney animated film &quot;Encanto&quot;
** Mirabel Madrigal, a fictional character and protagonist of &quot;Encanto&quot;
** Bruno Madrigal, a fictional character in &quot;Encanto&quot;, uncle of the protagonist
** Isabela Madrigal, a fictional character in &quot;Encanto&quot;, sister of the protagonist
* The Madrigal, a local kingpin in the novel &quot;Legends &amp; Lattes&quot; by Travis Baldree

==Music==
===Forms===
* Madrigal comedy, entertainment music of late 16th century Italy, featuring &quot;a cappella&quot; madrigals
* Madrigal dinner, a form of dinner theater incorporating comedy, madrigals, and a feast
* Madrigal (Trecento), an Italian musical form of the fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries

===Artists===
* Madrigal (ensemble) an early music group formed in 1965 by the Russian composer and harpsichord player Andrey Volkonsky
* Madrigal (band), a Canadian rock band of the early 1970s

===Classical compositions===
*&quot;Madrigal&quot; (Fauré), an 1883 song by Gabriel Fauré
*&quot;Madrigal&quot;, a composition for organ by Edwin Lemare (1865-1934) 
*&quot;Madrigal&quot;, a piano composition by Lao Silesu (1883-1953)
*&quot;Madrigal&quot;, a composition for trombones by Georges Delerue (1925-1992)
*&quot;Madrigal&quot;, a composition for violin and piano by Ma Sicong
*&quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song by Cécile Chaminade (1857-1944)

===Albums===
* &quot;Madrigals&quot; (aka &quot;Love Songs for Madrigals and Madriguys&quot;), a 1974 recording by Swingle II
* , a 2001 album by Japanese singer Chara

===Songs===
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song sung by Andy Williams from &quot;The Academy Award-Winning &quot;Call Me Irresponsible&quot; and Other Hit Songs from the Movies&quot; 1964
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song by American singer Neil Diamond, from the album &quot;Tap Root Manuscript&quot; 1970
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song by the Canadian rock band Rush, from the album &quot;A Farewell to Kings&quot; 1977
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song by British progressive rock band Yes, from the album &quot;Tormato&quot; 1978
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song by Swedish progressive metal band Opeth, from the album &quot;My Arms, Your Hearse&quot; 1998
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song by Puerto Rican singer and songwriter Danny Rivera
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song by Japanese band Malice Mizer, from the album &quot;Voyage Sans Retour&quot; 1996
* &quot;Madrigal&quot;, a song by Australian band Taxiride, from the album &quot;Garage Mahal&quot; 2002

==Television==
* &quot;Madrigal&quot; (&quot;Breaking Bad&quot;), episode 5.02 of &quot;Breaking Bad&quot;
* Madrigal Electromotive, a fictitious multinational conglomerate in &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; and &quot;Better Call Saul&quot;

==People==

Madrigal is also used as a Spanish surname that refers to:
* Al Madrigal (born 1971), American stand-up comedian and actor of Mexican descent
* Alexander Madrigal (born 1972), Costa Rican-Mexican footballer
* Alexis Madrigal, an American journalist
* Diego Madrigal (born 1989), Costa Rican football striker
* Jamby Madrigal (born 1958), Filipina politician and senator
* Junior Félix Madrigal (born 1982), Mexican football goalkeeper
* Liliana Madrigal (born 1957), Costa Rican conservationist 
* Michelle Madrigal (born 1986), Filipina actress
* Nick Madrigal (born 1997), American baseball player 
* Roger Madrigal (born 1972), Costa Rican slalom canoer
* Warner Madrigal (born 1984), Major League Baseball relief pitcher
* Warren Madrigal (born 2004), Costa Rican footballer

==Places==
* Madrigal de las Altas Torres, a municipality in Ávila, Castile and León, Spain
* Madrigal del Monte, a municipality in Burgos, Castile and León, Spain
* Estadio El Madrigal, a stadium in Villarreal, Spain

==Other uses==
*Madrigal Audio Laboratories, an American company (closed in 2002)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1181250" start="0" end="12" title="Madrigal (disambiguation)" label="[[Madrigal]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181250" start="73" end="81" title="Madrigal (disambiguation)" label="Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728645" start="133" end="150" title="Madrigal (poetry)" label="Madrigal (poetry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="201" end="222" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383799" start="262" end="274" title="John Gardner (British writer)" label="John Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227918" start="335" end="361" title="Daughter of Smoke and Bone (trilogy)" label="Daughter of Smoke and Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700501" start="477" end="494" title="Tales of the City" label="Tales of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722005" start="548" end="564" title="The Chalk Garden" label="The Chalk Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252324" start="653" end="666" title="Proven Guilty (novel)" label="Proven Guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q276772" start="756" end="761" title="Dredd" label="Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q130438" start="834" end="846" title="The 39 Clues" label="The 39 Clues"/>
<link wikidata="Q103372692" start="859" end="874" title="Madrigal family" label="Madrigal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q107453681" start="956" end="972" title="Mirabel Madrigal" label="Mirabel Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110876326" start="1038" end="1052" title="Bruno Madrigal" label="Bruno Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110864156" start="1128" end="1144" title="Isabela Madrigal" label="Isabela Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q114291824" start="1269" end="1289" title="Legends &amp;amp; Lattes" label="Legends &amp;amp; Lattes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267742" start="1339" end="1354" title="Madrigal comedy" label="Madrigal comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728649" start="1449" end="1464" title="Madrigal dinner" label="Madrigal dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361883" start="1538" end="1557" title="Madrigal (Trecento)" label="Madrigal (Trecento)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274347" start="1648" end="1667" title="Madrigal (ensemble)" label="Madrigal (ensemble)"/>
<link wikidata="Q118108080" start="1770" end="1785" title="Madrigal (band)" label="Madrigal (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621700" start="1858" end="1886" title="Madrigal (Fauré)" label="&amp;quot;Madrigal&amp;quot; (Fauré)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294780" start="1968" end="1980" title="Edwin Lemare" label="Edwin Lemare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342527" start="2040" end="2050" title="Lao Silesu" label="Lao Silesu"/>
<link wikidata="Q435034" start="2117" end="2132" title="Georges Delerue" label="Georges Delerue"/>
<link wikidata="Q330201" start="2206" end="2215" title="Ma Sicong" label="Ma Sicong"/>
<link wikidata="Q236438" start="2249" end="2265" title="Cécile Chaminade" label="Cécile Chaminade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691318" start="2327" end="2365" title="Love Songs for Madrigals and Madriguys" label="Love Songs for Madrigals and Madriguys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712178" start="2524" end="2619" title="The Academy Award-Winning &amp;quot;Call Me Irresponsible&amp;quot; and Other Hit Songs from the Movies" label="The Academy Award-Winning &amp;quot;Call Me Irresponsible&amp;quot; and Other Hit Songs from the Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684373" start="2716" end="2735" title="Tap Root Manuscript" label="Tap Root Manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q300403" start="2831" end="2850" title="A Farewell to Kings" label="A Farewell to Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q604634" start="2952" end="2959" title="Tormato" label="Tormato"/>
<link wikidata="Q18613" start="3064" end="3084" title="My Arms, Your Hearse" label="My Arms, Your Hearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220773" start="3165" end="3177" title="Danny Rivera" label="Danny Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q969454" start="3261" end="3279" title="Voyage Sans Retour" label="Voyage Sans Retour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521868" start="3372" end="3384" title="Garage Mahal" label="Garage Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728642" start="3414" end="3461" title="Madrigal (Breaking Bad)" label="&amp;quot;Madrigal&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Breaking Bad&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="3579" end="3591" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925221" start="3608" end="3624" title="Better Call Saul" label="Better Call Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704337" start="3705" end="3716" title="Al Madrigal" label="Al Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719526" start="3788" end="3806" title="Alexander Madrigal" label="Alexander Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17523878" start="3853" end="3868" title="Alexis Madrigal" label="Alexis Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009484" start="3895" end="3909" title="Diego Madrigal" label="Diego Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547191" start="3954" end="3968" title="Jamby Madrigal" label="Jamby Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313264" start="4016" end="4037" title="Junior Félix Madrigal" label="Junior Félix Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28534225" start="4081" end="4097" title="Liliana Madrigal" label="Liliana Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12968083" start="4142" end="4159" title="Michelle Madrigal" label="Michelle Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30163049" start="4192" end="4205" title="Nick Madrigal" label="Nick Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358573" start="4247" end="4261" title="Roger Madrigal" label="Roger Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566347" start="4303" end="4318" title="Warner Madrigal" label="Warner Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q99314924" start="4371" end="4386" title="Warren Madrigal" label="Warren Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406727" start="4437" end="4465" title="Madrigal de las Altas Torres" label="Madrigal de las Altas Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643684" start="4518" end="4536" title="Madrigal del Monte" label="Madrigal del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q741157" start="4590" end="4609" title="Estadio El Madrigal" label="Estadio El Madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728647" start="4659" end="4686" title="Madrigal Audio Laboratories" label="Madrigal Audio Laboratories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20807" wikidata="Q188044" url="?curid=20807" title="Merlin">
<text>Merlin (, , ) is a mythical figure prominently featured in the legend of King Arthur and best known as a magician, with several other main roles. The familiar depiction of Merlin, based on an amalgamation of historical and legendary figures, was introduced by the 12th-century Catholic cleric Geoffrey of Monmouth and then built on by the French poet Robert de Boron and prose successors in the 13th century.

Geoffrey seems to have combined earlier Welsh tales of Myrddin and Ambrosius, two legendary Briton prophets with no connection to Arthur, to form the composite figure that he called Merlinus Ambrosius. His rendering of the character became immediately popular, especially in Wales. Later chronicle and romance writers in France and elsewhere expanded the account to produce a more full, multifaceted character, creating one of the most important figures in the imagination and literature of the Middle Ages.

Merlin&#x27;s traditional biography casts him as an often-mad cambion, born of a mortal woman and an incubus, from whom he inherits his supernatural powers and abilities. His most notable abilities commonly include prophecy and shapeshifting. Merlin matures to an ascendant sagehood and engineers the birth of Arthur through magic and intrigue. Later stories have Merlin as an advisor and mentor to the young king until he disappears from the tale, leaving behind a series of prophecies foretelling events to come. A popular version from the French prose cycles tells of Merlin being bewitched and forever sealed up or killed by his student, the Lady of the Lake, after having fallen in love with her. Other texts variously describe his retirement, at times supernatural, or death.

== Name ==
The name Merlin is derived from the Brythonic name of the legendary bard that Geoffrey of Monmouth Latinised to in his works. Medievalist Gaston Paris suggests that Geoffrey chose the form rather than the expected &quot;*Merdinus&quot; to avoid a resemblance to the Anglo-Norman word (from Latin ) for feces. &#x27;Merlin&#x27; may also be an adjective, in which case he should be called &quot;The Merlin&quot;, from the French meaning blackbird. According to Martin Aurell, the Latin form &quot;Merlinus&quot; is a euphony of the Celtic form &quot;Myrddin&quot; to bring him closer to the blackbird (Latin &quot;merula&quot;) into which he could metamorphose through his shamanic powers, as was notably the case for Merlin&#x27;s Irish counterpart.

&quot;Myrddin&quot; may be a combination of *&quot;mer&quot; (mad) and the Welsh (man), to mean &#x27;madman&#x27;. It may also mean &#x27;[of] many names&#x27; if it was derived from the Welsh , myriad. In his (1862), La Villemarqué derived &quot;Marz[h]in&quot;, which he considered the original form of Merlin&#x27;s name, from the Breton word (wonder) to mean &#x27;wonder man&#x27;. or &quot;Merlin&#x27;s Enclosure&quot; is an early name for Great Britain as stated in the third series of Welsh Triads.

Celticist Alfred Owen Hughes Jarman suggested that the Welsh name () was derived from the toponym , the Welsh name for the town known in English as Carmarthen. This contrasts with the popular folk etymology that the town was named after the bard. The name Carmarthen is derived from the town&#x27;s previous Roman name Moridunum, in turn, derived from the Celtic Brittonic &quot;moridunon&quot;, &#x27;sea fort[ress]&#x27;. Eric P. Hamp proposed a similar etymology: &quot;Morij:n&quot;, &#x27;the maritime&#x27; or &#x27;born of the sea&#x27;. There is no obvious connection between Merlin and the sea in the texts about him, but Claude Sterckx has suggested that Merlin&#x27;s father in the Welsh texts, Morfryn, might have been a sea spirit. Philippe Walter connected it with the figure of the insular Celtic sea god Manannán.

Folklorist Jean Markale proposed that the name of Merlin is of French origin and means &#x27;little blackbird&#x27;, an allusion to the mocking and provocative personality usually attributed to him in medieval stories. The Welsh &quot;Myrddin&quot; could be also phonetically connected to the name Martin and some of the powers and other attributes of the 4th-century French Saint Martin of Tours (and his disciple Saint Hilaire) in hagiography and folklore are similar to these of Merlin. If a relationship between the two figures does exist, however, it may rather be a reverse one in which the Merlin tradition inspired the later accounts of the saint&#x27;s miracles and life.

==Legend==
=== Geoffrey and his sources ===


Geoffrey&#x27;s composite Merlin is based mostly on the North Brythonic poet and seer Myrddin Wyllt, that is Myrddin the Wild (known as &quot;Merlinus Caledonensis&quot; or &quot;Merlin Sylvestris&quot; in later texts influenced by Geoffrey). Myrddin&#x27;s legend has parallels with a northern Welsh and southern Scottish story of the mad prophet Lailoken (&quot;Laleocen&quot;), probably the same as Myrddin son of Morfryn (&quot;Myrddin map Morfryn&quot;) mentioned in the Welsh Triads, and with &quot;Buile Shuibhne&quot;, an Irish tale of the wandering insane king Suibihne mac Colmáin (often Anglicised to &quot;Sweeney&quot;).

In Welsh poetry, Myrddin was a bard who was driven mad after witnessing the horrors of war and subsequently fled civilization to become a wild man of the wood in the 6th century. He roamed the Caledonian Forest until he was cured of his madness by Kentigern, also known as Saint Mungo. Geoffrey had Myrddin in mind when he wrote his earliest surviving work, the &quot;Prophetiae Merlini&quot; (&quot;Prophecies of Merlin&quot;, c. 1130), which he claimed were the actual words of the legendary poet (including some distinctively apocalyptic prophecies for Geoffrey&#x27;s contemporary 12th century); however, the work reveals little about Merlin&#x27;s background.

Geoffrey was further inspired by Emrys (Old Welsh: &quot;Embreis&quot;), a character based in part on the 5th-century historical figure of the Romano-British war leader Ambrosius Aurelianus (Welsh name &quot;Emrys Wledig&quot;, also known as &quot;Myrddin Emrys&quot;). When Geoffrey included Merlin in his next work, &quot;Historia Regum Britanniae&quot; (c. 1136), he supplemented his characterisation of Merlin by attributing stories of Ambrosius to Merlin. These stories were taken from one of Geoffrey&#x27;s primary sources, the early 9th-century &quot;Historia Brittonum&quot; attributed to Nennius. In this source, Ambrosius was discovered when the King of the Britons, Vortigern, attempted to erect a tower at Dinas Emrys (City of Emrys). More than once, the tower collapsed before completion. Vortigen&#x27;s wise men advised him that the only solution was to sprinkle the foundation with the blood of a child born without a father. Ambrosius was rumoured to be such a child. When he was brought before the king, Ambrosius revealed that below the foundation of the tower was a lake containing two dragons battling into each other, representing the struggle between the invading Saxons (the white dragon) and the native Celtic Britons (the red dragon). Geoffrey retold the story in his &quot;Historia Regum Britanniæ&quot;, adding new episodes that tie Merlin with King Arthur and his predecessors. Geoffrey stated that this Ambrosius was also called &quot;Merlin&quot;, hence Ambrosius Merlinus.

Geoffrey&#x27;s account of Merlin&#x27;s early life is based on the story from the &quot;Historia Brittonum&quot;. At the same time, however, Geoffrey also turned Ambrosius Aurelianus into the separate character of Uther Pendragon&#x27;s brother Aurelius Ambrosius. Geoffrey added his own embellishments to the tale, which he set in Carmarthen, Wales (Welsh: Caerfyrddin). While Nennius&#x27; &quot;fatherless&quot; Ambrosius eventually reveals himself to be the son of a Roman consul, Geoffrey&#x27;s Merlin is fathered by an incubus demon through a nun, daughter of the King of Dyfed (Demetae, today&#x27;s South West Wales). Usually, the name of Merlin&#x27;s mother is not stated, but it is given as Adhan in the oldest version of the Prose &quot;Brut&quot;, the text also naming his grandfather as King Conaan.

Merlin is born all hairy and already able to speak like an adult, as well as possessing supernatural knowledge that he uses to save his mother. The story of Vortigern&#x27;s tower is the same; the underground dragons, one white and one red, represent the Saxons and the Britons, and their final battle is a portent of things to come. At this point Geoffrey inserted a long section of Merlin&#x27;s prophecies, taken from his earlier &quot;Prophetiae Merlini&quot;. Geoffrey also told two further tales of the character. In the first, Merlin creates Stonehenge as a burial place for Aurelius Ambrosius, bringing the stones from Ireland. In the second, Merlin&#x27;s magic enables the new British king, Uther Pendragon, to enter into Tintagel Castle in disguise and to father Arthur with his enemy&#x27;s wife, Igerna (Igraine). These episodes appear in many later adaptations of Geoffrey&#x27;s account. As Lewis Thorpe notes, Merlin subsequently disappears from the narrative. He does not tutor or advise Arthur as in later versions.

Geoffrey dealt with Merlin again in his third work, &quot;Vita Merlini&quot; (1150). He based it on stories of the original 6th-century Myrddin, set long after his time frame for the life of Merlin Ambrosius. Nevertheless, Geoffrey asserts that the characters and events of &quot;Vita Merlini&quot; are the same as told in the &quot;Historia Regum Britanniae&quot;. Here, Merlin survives the reign of Arthur, whose fall he is told about by Taliesin. Merlin spends a part of his life as a madman in the woods and marries a woman named Guendoloena (a character inspired by the historic king Gwenddoleu ap Ceidio). He eventually retires to observing stars from his house with seventy windows in the remote woods of Rhydderch. There, he is often visited by Taliesin and by his own sister Ganieda (a Latinized name of Myrddin&#x27;s sister Gwenddydd), who has become queen of the Cumbrians and is also endowed with prophetic powers. Compared to Geoffrey&#x27;s &quot;Historia&quot;, his &quot;Vita&quot; seems to have little influence on the later portrayals of Merlin.

Mark Chorvinsky hypothesized that Merlin is based on a historical person, probably a 5th and/or 6th-century druid living in southern Scotland. Nikolai Tolstoy makes a similar argument based on the fact that early references to Merlin describe him as possessing characteristics which modern scholarship would recognize as druidical (but that sources of the time would not have recognized), the inference being that those characteristics were not invented by the early chroniclers but belonged to a real person. If so, the hypothetical proto-Merlin would have lived about a century after the hypothetical historical Arthur.

A late version of the &quot;Annales Cambriae&quot; (dubbed the &quot;B-text&quot;, written at the end of the 13th century) and influenced by Geoffrey, records that in the year 573 after &quot;the battle of Arfderydd, between the sons of Eliffer and Gwenddolau son of Ceidio; in which battle Gwenddolau fell; Myrddin went mad.&quot; The earliest version of the same entry in &quot;Annales Cambriae&quot; (in the &quot;A-text&quot;, written c. 1100), as well as a later copy (the &quot;C-text&quot;, written towards the end of the 13th century) do not mention Myrddin. Myrddin furthermore shares similarities with the shamanic bard figure of Taliesin, alongside whom he appears in the Welsh Triads and in &quot;Vita Merlini&quot;, as well as in the poem &quot;Ymddiddan Myrddin a Thaliesin&quot; (&quot;The Conversation between Myrddin and Taliesin&quot;) from &quot;The Black Book of Carmarthen&quot;, which was dated by Rachel Bromwich as &quot;certainly&quot; before 1100, that is predating &quot;Vita Merlini&quot; by at least half century while telling a different version of the same story. According to Villemarqué, the origin of the legend of Merlin lies with the Roman story of Marsus, a son of Circe, which eventually influenced the Breton and Welsh tales of a supernaturally-born bard or enchanter named Marzin or Marddin. 

=== Romance reimagination ===
Around the turn of the 13th century, Robert de Boron retold and expanded on this material in &quot;Merlin&quot;, an Old French epic poem inspired by Wace&#x27;s &quot;Roman de Brut&quot;, an Anglo-Norman creative adaptation of Geoffrey&#x27;s &quot;Historia&quot;. The work presents itself as the story of Merlin&#x27;s life as told by Merlin himself to be written down by the &quot;real&quot; author while the actual author claimed merely to translate the story into French. Only a few lines of what is believed to be the original text have survived, but a more popular prose version had a great influence on the emerging genre of Arthurian-themed chivalric romance.

As in Geoffrey&#x27;s &quot;Historia&quot;, Merlin is created as a demon spawn, but in Robert&#x27;s account he is explicitly to become the Antichrist intended to reverse the effect of the Harrowing of Hell. The infernal plot is thwarted when a priest named (the story&#x27;s narrator and perhaps Merlin&#x27;s divine twin in a hypothetical now-lost oral tradition) is contacted by the child&#x27;s mother; Blaise immediately baptizes the boy at birth, thus freeing him from the power of Satan and his intended destiny. The demonic legacy invests Merlin (already able to speak fluently even as a newborn) with a preternatural knowledge of the past and present, which is supplemented by God, who gives the boy prophetic knowledge of the future. The text lays great emphasis on Merlin&#x27;s power to shapeshift, his joking personality, and his connection to the Holy Grail, the quest for which he later foretells.

&quot;Merlin&quot; was originally part of a cycle of Robert&#x27;s poems telling the story of the Grail over the centuries. The narrative of &quot;Merlin&quot; is largely based on Geoffrey&#x27;s familiar tale of Vortigern&#x27;s Tower, Uther&#x27;s war against the Saxons, and Arthur&#x27;s conception. New in this retelling is the episode of young Arthur (who had been secreted away by Merlin) drawing the sword from the stone, an event orchestrated by Merlin in the role of kingmaker. Earlier, Merlin also instructs Uther to establish the original order of the Round Table for fifty members, following his own act of creating the table itself. The text ends with the coronation of Arthur. The prose version of Robert&#x27;s poem was then continued in the 13th-century &quot;Merlin Continuation&quot;, telling of King Arthur&#x27;s early wars and Merlin&#x27;s role in them. In this text, also known as the &quot;Suite du Merlin&quot;, the mage both predicts and, wielding elemental magic, influences the course of battles, in addition to helping the young Arthur in other ways. Eventually, he arranges the reconciliation between Arthur and his rivals, and the surrender of the defeated Saxons and their departure from Britain.

The extended prose rendering of &quot;Merlin&quot; was incorporated as a foundation of the &quot;Lancelot-Grail&quot;, a vast cyclical series of Old French prose works also known as the Vulgate Cycle, in the form of the &quot;Estoire de Merlin&quot; (&quot;Story of Merlin&quot;), also known as the Vulgate &quot;Merlin&quot; or the Prose &quot;Merlin&quot;. There, while not identifying his mother, it is stated that Merlin was named after his grandfather on her side. The Vulgate&#x27;s Prose &quot;Lancelot&quot; further relates that after growing up in the borderlands between &#x27;Scotland&#x27; (i.e. Pictish lands) and &#x27;Ireland&#x27; (i.e. Argyll), Merlin &quot;possessed all the wisdom that can come from demons, which is why he was so feared by the Bretons and so revered that everyone called him a holy prophet and the ordinary people all called him their god.&quot; In the Vulgate Cycle&#x27;s version of &quot;Merlin&quot;, his acts include arranging the consummation of Arthur&#x27;s desire for &quot;the most beautiful maiden ever born,&quot; Lady Lisanor of Cardigan, resulting in the birth of Arthur&#x27;s illegitimate son Lohot from before the marriage to Guinevere.

A further reworking and an alternative continuation of the Prose &quot;Merlin&quot; were included within the subsequent Post-Vulgate Cycle as the Post-Vulgate &quot;Suite du Merlin&quot; or the Huth &quot;Merlin&quot;, the so-called &quot;romantic&quot; rewrite (as opposed to the so-called &quot;historical&quot; original of the Vulgate). It added some content such as Merlin providing Arthur with the sword Excalibur through a Lady of the Lake, while either removing or altering many other episodes. Merlin&#x27;s magical interventions in the Post-Vulgate versions of his story are relatively limited and markedly less spectacular, even compared to the magical feats of his own students, and his character becomes less moral. In addition, Merlin&#x27;s prophecies also include sets of alternative possibilities (meaning future can be changed) instead of only certain outcomes. The Post-Vulgate Cycle has Merlin warn Arthur of how the birth of his other son will bring great misfortune and ruin to his kingdom, which then becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. Eventually, long after Merlin is gone, his advice to dispose of the baby Mordred through an event evoking the Biblical Massacre of the Innocents leads to the deaths of many, among them Arthur.

Both &quot;Merlin&quot; and its continuations have been adapted in verse and prose, translated into several languages, and further modified to various degrees by other authors. Notably, the Post-Vulgate &quot;Suite&quot; (along with an earlier version of the Prose &quot;Merlin&quot;) was the main source for the opening section of Thomas Malory&#x27;s English-language compilation work &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot; which formed a now-iconic version of the legend. Compared to some of his French sources (such as the Vulgate &quot;Lancelot&quot; which described Merlin as &quot;treacherous and disloyal by nature, like his [demon] father before him&quot;), Malory limited the extent of the negative association of Merlin and his powers. He is relatively rarely condemned as demonic by other characters such as King Lot, instead he is presented as an ambiguous trickster. Conversely, Merlin seems to be inherently evil in the so-called non-cyclic &quot;Lancelot&quot;, where he was born as the &quot;fatherless child&quot; from not a supernatural rape of a virgin but a consensual union between a lustful demon and an unmarried beautiful young lady and was never baptized.

=== Later developments ===
As the Arthurian myths were retold, Merlin&#x27;s prophetic &quot;seer&quot; aspects were sometimes de-emphasized (or even seemingly vanish entirely, as in the fragmentary and more fantastical &quot;Livre d&#x27;Artus&quot;) in favor of portraying him as a wizard and an advisor to the young Arthur, sometimes in the struggle between good and evil sides of his character, and living in deep forests connected with nature. Through his ability to change his shape, he may appear as a &quot;wild man&quot; figure, evoking his prototype Myrddin Wyllt, as a civilized man of any age (including as a very young child), or even as a talking animal. His guises can be highly deformed and animalistic even when Merlin is presenting as a human or humanoid being. In the &quot;Perceval en prose&quot; (also known as the Didot &quot;Perceval&quot; and usually also attributed to Robert), where Merlin is the initiator of the Grail Quest and cannot die until the end of days, he eventually retires after Arthur&#x27;s downfall by turning himself into a bird and entering the mysterious &quot;esplumoir&quot;, never to be seen again.

Among other medieval works dealing with the Merlin legend is the 13th-century &quot;Le Roman de Silence&quot;. The &quot;Prophéties de Merlin&quot; (c. 1276) contains long prophecies of Merlin (mostly concerned with 11th to 13th-century Italian history and contemporary politics), some by his ghost after his death, interspersed with episodes relating Merlin&#x27;s deeds and with assorted Arthurian adventures in which Merlin does not appear at all. It pictures Merlin as a righteous seer chastising people for their sins, as does the 13th-14th Italian story collection &quot;Il Novellino&quot; which draws heavily from it. An even more political Italian text was Joachim of Fiore&#x27;s &quot;Expositio Sybillae et Merlini&quot;, directed against Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor whom the author regarded as the Antichrist. The &quot;Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland&quot;, which sympathizes with Mordred as usual in Scottish chronicle tradition, particularly attributes Merlin&#x27;s supernatural evil influence on Arthur to its very negative portrayal of his rule.

The earliest Merlin text written in Germany was Caesarius of Heisterbach&#x27;s Latin &quot;Dialogus Miraculorum&quot; (1220). Ulrich Füetrer&#x27;s 15th-century &quot;Buch der Abenteuer&quot;, in the section based on Albrecht von Scharfenberg&#x27;s lost &quot;Merlin&quot;, presents Merlin as Uter&#x27;s father, effectively making Merlin&#x27;s grandson Arthur a part-devil too. Bauduin (Baudouin) Butor&#x27;s 1294 romance known as either &quot;Les Fils du Roi Constant&quot; or &quot;Pandragus et Libanor&quot; names Merlin&#x27;s usually unspecified mother as Optima, daughter of King Melias of Demetia (Dyfed), while Paolino Pieri&#x27;s 14th-century Italian &quot;La Storia di Merlino&quot; calls her Marinaia. In the Second Continuation of &quot;Perceval, the Story of the Grail&quot;, a young daughter of Merlin himself, called the Lady of the High Peak of Mont Dolorous, appears to guide Perceval towards the Grail Castle.

The earliest English verse romance concerning Merlin is &quot;Of Arthour and of Merlin&quot; of the late 13th century, which drew from the chronicles and the Vulgate Cycle. In English-language medieval texts that conflate Britain with the Kingdom of England, the Anglo-Saxon enemies against whom Merlin aids first Uther and then Arthur tend to be replaced by the Saracens or simply just invading pagans. The 15th-century English poem &quot;Sir Gowther&quot; presents the titular redeemed half-demon as Merlin&#x27;s half-brother. In Britain, Merlin remained as much as a prophet as a magician up to and including the 16th century, when political content in the style of Agrippa d&#x27;Aubigné continued to be written using Merlin&#x27;s name to guarantee their authenticity.

During the 15th century, Welsh works predicting the Celtic revenge and victory over the Saxons were recast as Merlin&#x27;s (Myrddin&#x27;s) prophecies and used along with Geoffrey by the propaganda of the Welsh-descended Henry VII of England (who fought under the red dragon banner) of the House of Tudor, which traced its lineage directly to Arthur. Later, the Tudors&#x27; Welsh supporters, including bards, interpreted the prophecy of King Arthur&#x27;s return as having been fulfilled after their ascent to the throne of England that they sought to legitimize following the Wars of the Roses. Prophecies attributed to Merlin were also used by the 14th-century Welsh hero Owain Glyndŵr in his fight against the English rule. The vagueness of Merlin&#x27;s prophecies enabled British monarchs and historians to continue using them even in the early modern period. Notably, the King of Scotland and later also of England and Ireland, James VI and I, claimed his 1603 unification of Britain into the United Kingdom had been foretold by Merlin.

Merlin&#x27;s apprentice in chivalric romances is often Arthur&#x27;s half-sister, Morgan le Fay, who is sometimes depicted as Merlin&#x27;s lover and sometimes as just his unrequited love interest. In the &quot;Prophéties de Merlin&quot;, he also tutors Sebile, two other witch queens, and the Lady of the Isle of Avalon (Dama di Isola do Vallone). Others who have learned sorcery from Merlin include the Wise Damsel in the Italian &quot;Historia di Merlino&quot;, and the male wizard Mabon in the Post-Vulgate &quot;Merlin Continuation&quot; and the Prose &quot;Tristan&quot;. His various apprentices gain or expand their magical powers through Merlin, however his prophetic powers cannot be passed on.

===Tales of Merlin&#x27;s end===


In the prose chivalric romance tradition, Merlin has a major weakness that leads him to his relatively early doom: young beautiful women of &quot;femme fatale&quot; archetype. Contrary to many modern works in which they are archenemies, Merlin and Morgan are never opposed to each other in any medieval tradition, other than Morgan forcibly rejecting him in some texts. In fact, his love for Morgan is so great that he even lies to the king to save her in the Huth &quot;Merlin&quot;, which is the only instance of him ever intentionally misleading Arthur.

Instead, Merlin&#x27;s eventual undoing comes from his lusting after another of his female students: the one often named Viviane, among various other names and spellings (including Malory&#x27;s own Nyneve that his editor William Caxton changed to Nymue which in turn eventually became the now-popular Nimue). She is also called a fairy (French &quot;fee&quot;) like Morgan and described as a Lady of the Lake, or the &quot;chief Lady of the Lake&quot; in the case of Malory&#x27;s Nimue. In &quot;Perceforest&quot;, the ancestry of both Merlin and the Lady of the Lake is descended from the ancient fairy Morgane (unrelated to Arthur&#x27;s sister), who cursed their bloodline when she wrongly believed that her daughter was raped by her daughter&#x27;s human lover.

Viviane&#x27;s character in relation to Merlin is first found in the &quot;Lancelot-Grail&quot; cycle, after having been inserted into the legend of Merlin by either de Boron or his continuator. There are many different versions of their story. Common themes in most of them include Merlin actually having the prior prophetic knowledge of her plot against him (one exception is the Spanish Post-Vulgate &quot;Baladro&quot; where his foresight ability is explicitly dampened by sexual desire) but lacking either ability or will to counteract it in any way, along with her using one of his own spells to get rid of him. Usually (including in &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;), having learned everything she could from him, Viviane will then also replace the eliminated Merlin within the story, taking up his role as Arthur&#x27;s adviser and court mage.

However, Merlin&#x27;s fate of either demise or eternal imprisonment, along with his destroyer or captor&#x27;s motivation (from her fear of Merlin and protecting her own virginity, to her jealousy of his relationship with Morgan), is recounted differently in variants of this motif. The exact form of his prison or grave can be also variably a cave, a tree, or hole either within or under a large rock (according to &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;, this happens somewhere in Benwick, the kingdom of Lancelot&#x27;s father), or an invisible tower made of magic with no physical walls. The scene is often placed in the enchanted forest of Brocéliande, a legendary location today identified with the real-life Paimpont forest in Brittany. A Breton tradition cited by Roger Sherman Loomis in &quot;Celtic Myth and Arthurian Romance&quot; (where he also asserts that it &quot;seems almost certain that Morgan le Fay and the Lady of the Lake were originally the same person&quot; in the legend) has Merlin trapped by his mistress inside a tree on the Île de Sein.

Niniane, as the Lady of the Lake student of Merlin is known in the &quot;Livre d&#x27;Artus&quot; continuation of &quot;Merlin&quot;, is mentioned as having broken his heart before his later second relationship with Morgan, but here the text does not tell how exactly Merlin did vanish, other than relating his farewell meeting with Blaise. In the Vulgate &quot;Lancelot&quot;, which predates the later Vulgate &quot;Merlin&quot;, she (aged just 12 at the time) makes Merlin sleep forever in a pit in the forest of Darnantes, &quot;and that is where he remained, for never again did anyone see or hear of him or have news to tell of him.&quot; In the Post-Vulgate &quot;Suite de Merlin&quot;, the young King Bagdemagus (one of the early Knights of the Round Table) manages to find the rock under which Merlin is entombed alive by Niviene, as she is named there. He communicates with Merlin, but is unable to lift the stone; what follows next is supposedly narrated in the mysterious text &quot;Conte del Brait&quot; (&quot;Tale of the Cry&quot;). In &quot;Prophéties de Merlin&quot;, his tomb is unsuccessfully searched for by various parties, including Morgan and her enchantresses, but the tomb cannot be accessed due to the deadly magic traps around it, while the Lady of the Lake comes to taunt Merlin, asking if he has rotted yet.

One notably alternate version that has a happier ending for Merlin is the &quot;Premiers Faits&quot; section of the &quot;Livre du Graal&quot;, where Niniane peacefully confines him in Brocéliande with walls of air, visible only as a mist to others but as a beautiful yet unbreakable crystal tower to him (only Merlin&#x27;s disembodied voice can escape his prison one last time when he speaks to Gawain on the knight&#x27;s quest to find him), where they then spend almost every night together as lovers. Besides evoking the final scenes from &quot;Vita Merlini&quot;, this particular variant of their story also mirrors episodes found in some other texts, wherein Merlin either is an object of one-sided desire by a different amorous sorceress who too (unsuccessfully) plots to trap him or it is Merlin himself who traps an unwilling lover with his magic.

Unrelated to the legend of the Lady of the Lake, other purported sites of Merlin&#x27;s burial include a cave deep inside Merlin&#x27;s Hill (), outside Carmarthen. Carmarthen is also associated with Merlin more generally, including through the 13th-century manuscript known as the &quot;Black Book&quot; and the local lore of Merlin&#x27;s Oak. In North Welsh tradition, Merlin retires to Bardsey Island (), where he lives in a house of glass () with the Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain (). One site of his tomb is said to be Marlborough Mound in Wiltshire, known in medieval times as &quot;Merlebergia&quot; (the Abbot of Cirencester wrote in 1215: &quot;Merlin&#x27;s tumulus gave you your name, Merlebergia&quot;).

Another site associated with Merlin&#x27;s burial, in his &#x27;Merlin Silvestris&#x27; aspect, is the confluence of the Pausalyl Burn and River Tweed in Drumelzier, Scotland. The 15th-century &quot;Scotichronicon&quot; tells that Merlin himself underwent a triple-death, at the hands of some shepherds of the under-king Meldred: stoned and beaten by the shepherds, he falls over a cliff and is impaled on a stake, his head falls forward into the water, and he drowns. The fulfillment of another prophecy, ascribed to Thomas the Rhymer, came about when a spate of the Tweed and Pausayl occurred during the reign of the Scottish James VI and I on the English throne: &quot;When Tweed and Pausayl meet at Merlin&#x27;s grave, / Scotland and England one king shall have.&quot;

== Modern culture ==
Merlin and stories involving him have continued to be popular from the Renaissance to the present day, especially since the renewed interest in the legend of Arthur in modern times. As noted by Arthurian scholar Alan Lupack, &quot;numerous novels, poems and plays center around Merlin. In American literature and popular culture, Merlin is perhaps the most frequently portrayed Arthurian character.&quot; According to Stephen Thomas Knight, Merlin embodies a conflict between knowledge and power: beginning as a symbol of wisdom in the first Welsh stories, he became an advisor to kings in the Middle Ages, and eventually a mentor and teacher to Arthur and others in the works around the world since the 19th century. Since the Romantic period, Merlin has been typically depicted as a wise old man with a long white beard, creating a modern wizard archetype reflected in many fantasy characters, such as J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s Gandalf or J. K. Rowling&#x27;s Dumbledore, who also use some of his other traits. 

While some modern authors write about Merlin positively through an explicitly Christian world-view, some New Age movements instead see Merlin as a druid who accesses all the mysteries of the world. For instance, Merlin appears in the teachings of the Montana-based New Age religious-survivalist group Church Universal and Triumphant as one of their &quot;ascended masters&quot;. Francophone artistic productions since the end of the 20th century have tended to avoid the Christian aspects of the character in favor of the pagan aspects and the &quot;tradition sylvestre&quot; (attributing positive values to one&#x27;s links to forest and wild animals), thus &quot;dechristianizing&quot; Merlin to present him as a champion for the idea of return to nature. Diverging from his traditional role in medieval romances, Merlin is also sometimes portrayed as a villain. As Peter H. Goodrich wrote in &quot;Merlin: A Casebook&quot;:

Things named in honour of the legendary figure have included asteroid 2598 Merlin, the British company Merlin Entertainments, the handheld console Merlin, the literary magazine &quot;Merlin&quot;, the metal band Merlin, and more than a dozen different British warships each called HMS &quot;Merlin&quot;. He was one of eight British magical figures who were commemorated on a series of UK postage stamps issued by the Royal Mail in 2011, and one of the three Arthurian figures (along with Arthur and Morgan) commemorated on the gold and silver British pound coins issued by the Royal Mint in 2023. &quot;Merlinia&quot;, the Ordovician trilobite, is also named after Merlin; the name is given in memory of a Welsh legend in which the broken tail parts of trilobites were identified as butterflies turned to stone by Merlin. 

==See also==

* Garab Dorje, also said to have been conceived by a nun without a human father
* Merlin&#x27;s Cave, a location under Tintagel Castle
==Notes==

== References ==
===Bibliography===
* 

== External links ==

* Merlin: Texts, Images, Basic Information , Camelot Project at the University of Rochester. Numerous texts and art concerning Merlin
* Timeless Myths: The Many Faces of Merlin 
* BBC audio file of the &quot;Merlin&quot; episode of &quot;In Our Time&quot;
* &quot;Merlin — The Legend&quot; , a Chronicle documentary on YouTube
* Prose &quot;Merlin&quot;, Introduction and Text (the University of Rochester TEAMS Middle English text series) edited by John Conlea, 1998. A selection of many passages of the prose Middle English translation of the &quot;Vulgate Merlin&quot; with connecting summary. The sections from &quot;The Birth of Merlin to &quot;Arthur and the Sword in the Stone&quot; cover Robert de Boron&#x27;s &quot;Merlin&quot;
* &quot;Of Arthour and of Merlin&quot; translated and retold in modern English prose, the story from Edinburgh, National Library of Scotland MS Advocates 19.2.1 (the Auchinleck MS) (from the Middle English of the Early English Text Society edition: O D McCrae-Gibson, 1973, &quot;Of Arthour and of Merlin&quot;, 2 vols, EETS and Oxford University Press)
* Phillip Walter (ed.), &quot;LE DEVIN MAUDIT Merlin, Lailoken, Suibhne — Textes et études &quot; by Philippe Walter, Christine Bord, Jean-Charles Berthet and Nathalie Stalmans. Moyen Âge européen, 1999. Earliest Merlin texts and studies on them, available to read for free at OpenEdition Books (in French)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188044" start="0" end="6" title="Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="73" end="84" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="105" end="113" title="Magician (fantasy)" label="magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="293" end="313" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380" start="351" end="366" title="Robert de Boron" label="Robert de Boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283396" start="465" end="472" title="Myrddin Wyllt" label="Myrddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q459606" start="477" end="486" title="Ambrosius Aurelianus" label="Ambrosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="502" end="508" title="Celtic Britons" label="Briton"/>
<link wikidata="Q188044" start="592" end="610" title="Merlin" label="Merlinus Ambrosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806837" start="685" end="690" title="Wales in the Middle Ages" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="905" end="916" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934676" start="981" end="988" title="cambion" label="cambion"/>
<link wikidata="Q378070" start="1020" end="1027" title="incubus" label="incubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="1147" end="1160" title="shapeshifting" label="shapeshifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q854036" start="1565" end="1581" title="Lady of the Lake" label="Lady of the Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="1749" end="1758" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="1791" end="1811" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q514741" start="1851" end="1863" title="Gaston Paris" label="Gaston Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q35214" start="1979" end="1991" title="Anglo-Norman language" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003037" start="2430" end="2461" title="Buile Shuibhne" label="Merlin&amp;#x27;s Irish counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391034" start="2683" end="2697" title="Théodore Claude Henri, vicomte Hersart de la Villemarqué" label="La Villemarqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542444" start="2959" end="2971" title="Welsh Triads" label="Welsh Triads"/>
<link wikidata="Q835835" start="3122" end="3132" title="Carmarthen" label="Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399949" start="3293" end="3302" title="Moridunum (Carmarthen)" label="Moridunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056285" start="3398" end="3410" title="Eric P. Hamp" label="Eric P. Hamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888724" start="3794" end="3802" title="Manannán mac Lir" label="Manannán"/>
<link wikidata="Q597354" start="3816" end="3828" title="Jean Markale" label="Jean Markale"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920" start="4103" end="4109" title="Martin (name)" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133704" start="4186" end="4201" title="Martin of Tours" label="Martin of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="4589" end="4604" title="Hen Ogledd" label="North Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283396" start="4619" end="4632" title="Myrddin Wyllt" label="Myrddin Wyllt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473918" start="4881" end="4889" title="Lailoken" label="Lailoken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003037" start="5038" end="5052" title="Buile Shuibhne" label="Buile Shuibhne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071580" start="5306" end="5326" title="wild man" label="wild man of the wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663355" start="5361" end="5378" title="Caledonian Forest" label="Caledonian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q545175" start="5441" end="5452" title="Saint Mungo" label="Saint Mungo"/>
<link wikidata="Q281786" start="5536" end="5554" title="Prophetiae Merlini" label="Prophetiae Merlini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="5874" end="5883" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142976" start="5977" end="5991" title="Romano-British" label="Romano-British"/>
<link wikidata="Q459606" start="6003" end="6023" title="Ambrosius Aurelianus" label="Ambrosius Aurelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q238693" start="6158" end="6183" title="Historia Regum Britanniae" label="Historia Regum Britanniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q740004" start="6393" end="6411" title="Historia Brittonum" label="Historia Brittonum"/>
<link wikidata="Q132065" start="6432" end="6439" title="Nennius" label="Nennius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434376" start="6491" end="6510" title="King of the Britons" label="King of the Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q354820" start="6553" end="6564" title="Dinas Emrys" label="Dinas Emrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="7022" end="7028" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="7063" end="7077" title="Celtic Britons" label="Celtic Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q657200" start="7556" end="7571" title="Uther Pendragon" label="Uther Pendragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="7819" end="7825" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q378070" start="7868" end="7875" title="incubus" label="incubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q956451" start="7913" end="7926" title="Kingdom of Dyfed" label="King of Dyfed"/>
<link wikidata="Q616149" start="7928" end="7935" title="Demetae" label="Demetae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568894" start="7950" end="7966" title="South West Wales" label="South West Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693243" start="8080" end="8102" title="Brut Chronicle" label="Prose &amp;quot;Brut&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398799" start="8149" end="8155" title="Aurelius Conanus" label="Conaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="8707" end="8717" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q934922" start="8890" end="8905" title="Tintagel Castle" label="Tintagel Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q675705" start="8975" end="8982" title="Igraine" label="Igraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q648344" start="9064" end="9076" title="Lewis Thorpe" label="Lewis Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244674" start="9251" end="9263" title="Vita Merlini" label="Vita Merlini"/>
<link wikidata="Q357835" start="9633" end="9641" title="Taliesin" label="Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q983627" start="9782" end="9802" title="Gwenddoleu ap Ceidio" label="Gwenddoleu ap Ceidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q887367" start="9905" end="9914" title="Rhydderch Hael" label="Rhydderch"/>
<link wikidata="Q96380049" start="10028" end="10037" title="Gwenddydd" label="Gwenddydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="10068" end="10077" title="Cumbrians" label="Cumbrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="10367" end="10372" title="druid" label="druid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401336" start="10402" end="10417" title="Nikolai Tolstoy" label="Nikolai Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q564369" start="10910" end="10926" title="Annales Cambriae" label="Annales Cambriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633662" start="11078" end="11097" title="battle of Arfderydd" label="battle of Arfderydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q692259" start="11747" end="11775" title="The Black Book of Carmarthen" label="The Black Book of Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323741" start="11802" end="11817" title="Rachel Bromwich" label="Rachel Bromwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q187602" start="12084" end="12089" title="Circe" label="Circe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380" start="12283" end="12298" title="Robert de Boron" label="Robert de Boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291073" start="12345" end="12351" title="Merlin (Robert de Boron poem)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="12362" end="12372" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382" start="12395" end="12399" title="Wace" label="Wace"/>
<link wikidata="Q281852" start="12413" end="12426" title="Roman de Brut" label="Roman de Brut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159457" start="12895" end="12912" title="chivalric romance" label="chivalric romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="13055" end="13065" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540642" start="13104" end="13121" title="Harrowing of Hell" label="Harrowing of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="13714" end="13724" title="shapeshift" label="shapeshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q162808" start="13776" end="13786" title="Holy Grail" label="Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q187880" start="14237" end="14257" title="Excalibur" label="sword from the stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q381981" start="14393" end="14404" title="Round Table" label="Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467333" start="15157" end="15171" title="Lancelot-Grail" label="Lancelot-Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="15668" end="15675" title="Picts" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="15713" end="15719" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="16206" end="16211" title="Lohot" label="Lohot"/>
<link wikidata="Q272054" start="16240" end="16249" title="Guinevere" label="Guinevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179725" start="16372" end="16390" title="Post-Vulgate Cycle" label="Post-Vulgate Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187880" start="16661" end="16670" title="Excalibur" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q854036" start="16681" end="16697" title="Lady of the Lake" label="Lady of the Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q528458" start="17285" end="17309" title="self-fulfilling prophecy" label="self-fulfilling prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81109" start="17384" end="17391" title="Mordred" label="Mordred"/>
<link wikidata="Q643474" start="17430" end="17455" title="Massacre of the Innocents" label="Massacre of the Innocents"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="17837" end="17850" title="Thomas Malory" label="Thomas Malory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136104" start="17898" end="17920" title="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur" label="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584977" start="18321" end="18329" title="King Lot" label="King Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467333" start="18446" end="18477" title="Prose Lancelot" label="non-cyclic &amp;quot;Lancelot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="18777" end="18781" title="Divination" label="seer"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="18968" end="18974" title="Magician (fantasy)" label="wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635045" start="19790" end="19799" title="Esplumoir Merlin" label="esplumoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q941658" start="19916" end="19935" title="Le Roman de Silence" label="Le Roman de Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q199991" start="20497" end="20513" title="Joachim of Fiore" label="Joachim of Fiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="20581" end="20613" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105314" start="20668" end="20698" title="Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland" label="Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q649722" start="20948" end="20972" title="Caesarius of Heisterbach" label="Caesarius of Heisterbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q882619" start="21027" end="21041" title="Ulrich Füetrer" label="Ulrich Füetrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83664862" start="21118" end="21143" title="Albrecht von Scharfenberg" label="Albrecht von Scharfenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335337" start="21655" end="21687" title="Perceval, the Story of the Grail" label="Perceval, the Story of the Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q728510" start="21799" end="21807" title="Perceval" label="Perceval"/>
<link wikidata="Q53561998" start="21897" end="21921" title="Of Arthour and of Merlin" label="Of Arthour and of Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q977566" start="22057" end="22064" title="Sub-Roman Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="22074" end="22092" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="22198" end="22205" title="Saracen" label="Saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526995" start="22275" end="22286" title="Sir Gowther" label="Sir Gowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q334950" start="22505" end="22527" title="Agrippa d&amp;#x27;Aubigné" label="Agrippa d&amp;#x27;Aubigné"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="22833" end="22853" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="22902" end="22916" title="House of Tudor" label="House of Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330909" start="23050" end="23075" title="King Arthur&amp;#x27;s messianic return" label="King Arthur&amp;#x27;s return"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="23190" end="23207" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q317279" start="23287" end="23300" title="Owain Glyndŵr" label="Owain Glyndŵr"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="23547" end="23561" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q321305" start="23740" end="23753" title="Morgan le Fay" label="Morgan le Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632760" start="23912" end="23918" title="Sebile" label="Sebile"/>
<link wikidata="Q216901" start="23972" end="23978" title="Avalon" label="Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638513" start="24143" end="24148" title="Mabon ap Modron" label="Mabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q945160" start="24209" end="24234" title="Prose Tristan" label="Prose &amp;quot;Tristan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="24544" end="24556" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q94608" start="25178" end="25192" title="William Caxton" label="William Caxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="25287" end="25292" title="fairy" label="fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375100" start="25454" end="25465" title="Perceforest" label="Perceforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q426969" start="27083" end="27105" title="King Ban" label="Lancelot&amp;#x27;s father"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925919" start="27221" end="27232" title="Brocéliande" label="Brocéliande"/>
<link wikidata="Q924045" start="27291" end="27306" title="Paimpont forest" label="Paimpont forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405543" start="27348" end="27368" title="Roger Sherman Loomis" label="Roger Sherman Loomis"/>
<link wikidata="Q228472" start="27629" end="27640" title="Île de Sein" label="Île de Sein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841526" start="28351" end="28361" title="Bagdemagus" label="Bagdemagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="28380" end="28406" title="Knights of the Round Table" label="Knights of the Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q831685" start="29377" end="29383" title="Gawain" label="Gawain"/>
<link wikidata="Q692259" start="30127" end="30137" title="Black Book of Carmarthen" label="Black Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q264531" start="30166" end="30183" title="Merlin&amp;#x27;s Oak" label="Merlin&amp;#x27;s Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="30188" end="30199" title="North Wales" label="North Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991483" start="30229" end="30243" title="Bardsey Island" label="Bardsey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400089" start="30295" end="30338" title="Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain" label="Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17643298" start="30378" end="30395" title="Marlborough Mound" label="Marlborough Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="30399" end="30408" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121859" start="30475" end="30486" title="Cirencester Abbey" label="Cirencester"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="30710" end="30721" title="River Tweed" label="River Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309154" start="30725" end="30735" title="Drumelzier" label="Drumelzier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754349" start="30770" end="30784" title="Scotichronicon" label="Scotichronicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798031" start="30829" end="30841" title="Threefold death" label="triple-death"/>
<link wikidata="Q18123097" start="30892" end="30899" title="Meldred" label="Meldred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976986" start="31089" end="31106" title="Thomas the Rhymer" label="Thomas the Rhymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="31438" end="31449" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610674" start="31785" end="31806" title="Stephen Thomas Knight" label="Stephen Thomas Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="32095" end="32103" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349934" start="32152" end="32164" title="wise old man" label="wise old man"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="32271" end="32287" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q177499" start="32295" end="32302" title="Gandalf" label="Gandalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="32306" end="32319" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q712548" start="32327" end="32337" title="Albus Dumbledore" label="Dumbledore"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="32485" end="32492" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11773906" start="32681" end="32712" title="Church Universal and Triumphant" label="Church Universal and Triumphant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918500" start="32735" end="32751" title="Ascended master" label="ascended masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q149639" start="33378" end="33389" title="2598 Merlin" label="2598 Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q573278" start="33411" end="33432" title="Merlin Entertainments" label="Merlin Entertainments"/>
<link wikidata="Q458660" start="33455" end="33461" title="Merlin (console)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819758" start="33491" end="33497" title="Merlin (literary magazine)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306550" start="33520" end="33526" title="Merlin (metal band)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633362" start="33589" end="33611" title="HMS Merlin" label="HMS &amp;quot;Merlin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33684" end="33711" title="United Kingdom commemorative stamps 2010–2019#2011" label="series of UK postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="33726" end="33736" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q951830" start="33886" end="33896" title="Royal Mint" label="Royal Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777496" start="33912" end="33920" title="Merlinia" label="Merlinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="33932" end="33942" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="33943" end="33952" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348937" start="34149" end="34160" title="Garab Dorje" label="Garab Dorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819742" start="34229" end="34247" title="Merlin&amp;#x27;s Cave" label="Merlin&amp;#x27;s Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="34423" end="34446" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149655" start="34593" end="34604" title="In Our Time (BBC Radio 4)" label="In Our Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="34737" end="34760" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20810" wikidata="Q215536" url="?curid=20810" title="Merchant">
<text>A merchant is a person who trades in goods produced by other people, especially one who trades with foreign countries. Merchants have been known for as long as humans have engaged in trade and commerce. Merchants and merchant networks operated in ancient Babylonia, Assyria, China, Egypt, Greece, India, Persia, Phoenicia and Rome. During the European medieval period, a rapid expansion in trade and commerce led to the rise of a wealthy and powerful merchant class. The European Age of Discovery opened up new trading routes and gave European consumers access to a much broader range of goods. By the 18th century, a new type of manufacturer-merchant had started to emerge and modern business practices were becoming evident.

The status of the merchant has varied during different periods of history and among different societies. In modern times, the term &quot;merchant&quot; has occasionally been used to refer to a businessperson or someone undertaking activities (commercial or industrial) for the purpose of generating profit, cash flow, sales, and revenue using a combination of human, financial, intellectual and physical capital with a view to fueling economic development and growth.

==Etymology==

The English term, &quot;merchant&quot; comes from the Middle English, , which is derived from Anglo-Norman , which itself originated from the Vulgar Latin or , formed from present participle of (&#x27;to trade, to traffic or to deal in&#x27;). The term refers to any type of reseller, but can also be used with a specific qualifier to suggest a person who deals in a given characteristic such as &quot;speed merchant&quot;, which refer to someone who enjoys fast driving; &quot;noise merchant&quot;, which refers to a group of musical performers; and &quot;dream merchant&quot;, which refers to someone who peddles idealistic visionary scenarios.

==Types of merchants==
Broadly, merchants can be classified into two categories:

* A wholesale merchant operates in the chain between the producer and retail merchant, typically dealing in large quantities of goods. In other words, a wholesaler does not sell directly to end-users. Some wholesale merchants only organize the movement of goods rather than move the goods themselves.
* A retail merchant or retailer sells merchandise to end-users or consumers (including businesses), usually in small quantities. A shop-keeper is an example of a retail merchant.

However, the term &#x27;merchant&#x27; is often used in a variety of specialised contexts such as in &quot;merchant banker&quot;, &quot;merchant navy&quot; or &quot;merchant services&quot;.

==History==
===Merchants in antiquity===

Merchants have existed as long as humans have conducted business, trade or commerce. A merchant class operated in many pre-modern societies. Open-air, public markets, where merchants and traders congregated, functioned in ancient Babylonia and Assyria, China, Egypt, Greece, India, Persia, Phoenicia and Rome. These markets typically occupied a place in the town&#x27;s centre. Surrounding the market, skilled artisans, such as metal-workers and leather workers, occupied premises in alley ways that led to the open market-place. These artisans may have sold wares directly from their premises, but also prepared goods for sale on market days. In ancient Greece markets operated within the agora (open space), and in ancient Rome in the forum. Rome&#x27;s forums included the Forum Romanum, the Forum Boarium and Trajan&#x27;s Forum. The Forum Boarium, one of a series of &quot;fora venalia&quot; or food markets, originated, as its name suggests, as a cattle market.
Trajan&#x27;s Forum was a vast expanse, comprising multiple buildings with shops on four levels. The Roman forum was arguably the earliest example of a permanent retail shop-front.

In antiquity, exchange involved direct selling through permanent or semi-permanent retail premises such as stall-holders at market places or shop-keepers selling from their own premises or through door-to-door direct sales via merchants or peddlers. The nature of direct selling centred around transactional exchange, where the goods were on open display, allowing buyers to evaluate quality directly through visual inspection. Relationships between merchant and consumer were minimal often playing into public concerns about the quality of produce.

The Phoenicians became well known amongst contemporaries as &quot;traders in purple&quot; – a reference to their monopoly over the purple dye extracted from the murex shell. The Phoenicians plied their ships across the Mediterranean, becoming a major trading power by the 9th century BCE. Phoenician merchant traders imported and exported wood, textiles, glass and produce such as wine, oil, dried fruit and nuts. Their trading necessitated a network of colonies along the Mediterranean coast, stretching from modern-day Crete through to Tangiers (in present-day Morocco) and northward to Sardinia. The Phoenicians not only traded in tangible goods, but were also instrumental in transporting the trappings of culture. The Phoenicians&#x27; extensive trade networks necessitated considerable book-keeping and correspondence. In around 1500 BCE, the Phoenicians developed a script which was much easier to learn than the pictographic systems used in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia. Phoenician traders and merchants were largely responsible for spreading their alphabet around the region. Phoenician inscriptions have been found in archaeological sites at a number of former Phoenician cities and colonies around the Mediterranean, such as Byblos (in present-day Lebanon) and Carthage in North Africa.

The social status of the merchant class varied across cultures; ranging from high status (the members even eventually achieving titles such as that of Merchant Prince or Nabob) to low status, as in China, Greece and Roman cultures, owing to the presumed distastefulness of profiting from &quot;mere&quot; trade rather than from labor or the labor of others as in agriculture and craftsmanship. The Romans defined merchants or traders in a very narrow sense. Merchants were those who bought and sold goods, while landowners who sold their own produce were not classed as merchants. Being a landowner was a &quot;respectable&quot; occupation. On the other hand, the Romans did not consider the activities of merchants &quot;respectable&quot;. In the ancient cities of the Middle East, where the bazaar was the city&#x27;s focal point and heartbeat, merchants who worked in bazaar enjoyed high social status and formed part of local elites. In Medieval Western Europe, the Christian church, which closely associated merchants&#x27; activities with the sin of usury, criticised the merchant class, strongly influencing attitudes towards them.

In Greco-Roman society, merchants typically did not have high social status, though they may have enjoyed great wealth. Umbricius Scauras, for example, was a manufacturer and trader of garum in Pompeii, circa 35 C.E. His villa, situated in one of the wealthier districts of Pompeii, was very large and ornately decorated in a show of substantial personal wealth. Mosaic patterns in the floor of his atrium were decorated with images of amphorae bearing his personal brand and inscribed with quality claims. One of the inscriptions on the mosaic amphora reads &quot;G(ari) F(los) SCO[m]/ SCAURI/ EX OFFI[ci]/NA SCAU/RI&quot; which translates as &quot;The flower of garum, made of the mackerel, a product of Scaurus, from the shop of Scaurus&quot;. Scaurus&#x27; fish sauce had a reputation for very high quality across the Mediterranean; its fame travelled as far away as modern southern France. Other notable Roman merchants included Marcus Julius Alexander (16 – 44 CE), Sergius Orata (fl. c. 95 BCE) and Annius Plocamus (1st century CE).

In the Roman world, local merchants served the needs of the wealthier landowners. While the local peasantry, who were generally poor, relied on open-air market places to buy and sell produce and wares, major producers such as the great estates were sufficiently attractive for merchants to call directly at their farm-gates. The very wealthy landowners managed their own distribution, which may have involved exporting. Markets were also important centres of social life, and merchants helped to spread news and gossip.

The nature of export markets in antiquity is well documented in ancient sources and in archaeological case-studies. Both Greek and Roman merchants engaged in long-distance trade. A Chinese text records that a Roman merchant named Lun reached southern China in 226 CE. Archaeologists have recovered Roman objects dating from the period 27 BCE to 37 CE from excavation sites as far afield as the Kushan and Indus ports. The Romans sold purple and yellow dyes, brass and iron; they acquired incense, balsam, expensive liquid myrrh and spices from the Near East and India, fine silk from China and fine white marble destined for the Roman wholesale market from Arabia.
For Roman consumers, the purchase of goods from the East was a symbol of social prestige.

===Merchants in the medieval period===
Medieval England and Europe witnessed a rapid expansion in trade and the rise of a wealthy and powerful merchant class. Blintiff has investigated the early medieval networks of market towns and suggests that by the 12th century there was an upsurge in the number of market towns and the emergence of merchant circuits as traders bulked up surpluses from smaller regional, different day markets and resold them at the larger centralised market towns. Peddlers or itinerant merchants filled any gaps in the distribution system. From the 11th century, the Crusades helped to open up new trade routes in the Near East, while the adventurer and merchant, Marco Polo stimulated interest in the far East in the 13th century. Medieval merchants began to trade in exotic goods imported from distant shores including spices, wine, food, furs, fine cloth (notably silk), glass, jewellery and many other luxury goods. Market towns began to spread across the landscape during the medieval period.

Merchant guilds began to form during the medieval period. A fraternity formed by the merchants of Tiel in Gelderland (in present-day Netherlands) in 1020 is believed to be the first example of a merchant guild. The term, &quot;guild&quot; was first used for &quot;gilda mercatoria&quot; and referred to body of merchants operating out of St. Omer, France in the 11th century. Similarly, London&#x27;s &quot;Hanse&quot; was formed in the 12th century. These guilds controlled the way that trade was to be conducted and codified rules governing the conditions of trade. Rules established by merchant guilds were often incorporated into the charters granted to market towns. In the early 12th century, a confederation of merchant guilds, formed out the German cities of Lübeck and Hamburg, known as &quot;The Hanseatic League&quot; came to dominate trade around the Baltic Sea. By the 13th and 14th centuries, merchant guilds had sufficient resources to have erected guild halls in many major market towns.
 
During the thirteenth century, European businesses became more permanent and were able to maintain sedentary merchants and a system of agents. Merchants specialised in financing, organisation and transport while agents were domiciled overseas and acted on behalf of a principal. These arrangements first appeared on the route from Italy to the Levant, but by the end of the thirteenth century merchant colonies could be found from Paris, London, Bruges, Seville, Barcelona and Montpellier. Over time these partnerships became more commonplace and led to the development of large trading companies. These developments also triggered innovations such as double-entry book-keeping, commercial accountancy, international banking including access to lines of credit, marine insurance and commercial courier services. These developments are sometimes known as the &quot;commercial revolution.&quot;

Luca Clerici has made a detailed study of Vicenza&#x27;s food market during the sixteenth century. He found that there were many different types of merchants operating out of the markets. For example, in the dairy trade, cheese and butter was sold by the members of two craft guilds (i.e., cheesemongers who were shopkeepers) and that of the so-called ‘resellers’ (hucksters selling a wide range of foodstuffs), and by other sellers who were not enrolled in any guild. Cheesemongers’ shops were situated at the town hall and were very lucrative. Resellers and direct sellers increased the number of sellers, thus increasing competition, to the benefit of consumers. Direct sellers, who brought produce from the surrounding countryside, sold their wares through the central market place and priced their goods at considerably lower rates than cheesemongers.

From 1300 through to the 1800s a large number of European chartered and merchant companies were established to exploit international trading opportunities. The Company of Merchant Adventurers of London, chartered in 1407, controlled most of the fine cloth imports while the Hanseatic League controlled most of the trade in the Baltic Sea. A detailed study of European trade between the thirteenth and fifteenth century demonstrates that the European age of discovery acted as a major driver of change. In 1600, goods travelled relatively short distances: grain 5–10 miles; cattle 40–70 miles; wool and wollen cloth 20–40 miles. However, in the years following the opening up of Asia and the discovery of the New World, goods were imported from very long distances: calico cloth from India, porcelain, silk and tea from China, spices from India and South-East Asia and tobacco, sugar, rum and coffee from the New World.

In Mesoamerica, a tiered system of traders developed independently. The local markets, where people purchased their daily needs were known as &quot;tianguis&quot; while &quot;pochteca&quot; referred to long-distance, professional merchants traders who obtained rare goods and luxury items desired by the nobility. This trading system supported various levels of pochteca – from very high status merchants through to minor traders who acted as a type of peddler to fill in gaps in the distribution system. The Spanish conquerors commented on the impressive nature of the local and regional markets in the 15th century. The Mexica (Aztec) market of Tlatelolco was the largest in all the Americas and said to be superior to those in Europe.

In much of Renaissance Europe and even after, merchant trade remained seen as a lowly profession and it was often subject to legal discrimination or restrictions, although in a few areas its status began to improve.

===Merchants in the modern era===

The &quot;modern era&quot; is generally understood to refer to period that started with the rise of consumer culture in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe.
As standards of living improved in the 17th century, consumers from a broad range of social backgrounds began to purchase goods that were in excess of basic necessities. An emergent middle class or bourgeoisie stimulated demand for luxury goods, and the act of shopping came to be seen as a pleasurable pastime or form of entertainment. 16th century Spanish and 17th century English nobles had been enticed into participating in trade by the profitability of colonial expeditions. In the 17th century, members of the nobility in many European countries like France or Spain still disliked engaging in merchant activities, but such attitudes changed in the 18th century with governmental encouragement of nobles to invest in trade, and the lifting of old bans on nobles engaging in economic activities.


As Britain continued colonial expansion, large commercial organisations came to provide a market for more sophisticated information about trading conditions in foreign lands. Daniel Defoe ( 1660–1731), a London merchant, published information on trade and economic resources of England, Scotland and India. Defoe was a prolific pamphleteer. His many publications include titles devoted to trade, including: &quot;Trade of Britain Stated&quot; (1707); &quot;Trade of Scotland with France&quot; (1713); &quot;The Trade to India Critically and Calmly Considered&quot; (1720) and &quot;A Plan of the English Commerce&quot; (1731); all pamphlets that became highly popular with contemporary merchants and business houses.
Armenians operated as a prominent trade nation during the 17th century. They stood out in international trade due to their vast network – mostly built by Armenian migrants spread across Eurasia. Armenians had established prominent trade-relations with all big export players such as India, China, Persia, the Ottoman Empire, England, Venice, the Levant, etc. Soon they captured Eastern and Western Europe, Russia, the Levant, the Middle East, Central Asia, India, and the Far East trade routes, carrying out mostly caravan-trade activities. A significant reason for Armenians&#x27; massive involvement in international trade was their geographic location – the Armenian lands stand at the crossroads between Asia and Europe. Another reason was their religion, as they were a Christian nation isolated between Muslim Iran and Muslim Turkey. European Christians preferred to carry out trade with Christians in the region.

Eighteenth-century merchants who traded in foreign markets developed a network of relationships which crossed national boundaries, religious affiliations, family ties, and gender. The historian, Vannneste, has argued that a new &quot;cosmopolitan merchant mentality&quot; based on trust, reciprocity and a culture of communal support developed and helped to unify the early modern world. Given that these cosmopolitan merchants were embedded within their societies and participated in the highest level of exchange, they transferred a more outward-looking mindset and system of values to their commercial-exchange transactions, and also helped to disseminate a more global awareness to broader society and therefore acted as agents of change for local society. Successful, open-minded cosmopolitan merchants began to acquire a more esteemed social position within the political elites. They were often sought as advisors for high-level political agents. The English nabobs belong to this era.

By the eighteenth century, a new type of manufacturer-merchant was emerging and modern business practices were becoming evident. Many merchants held showcases of goods in their private homes for the benefit of wealthier clients. Samuel Pepys, for example, writing in 1660, describes being invited to the home of a retailer to view a wooden jack. McKendrick, Brewer and Plumb found extensive evidence of eighteenth-century English entrepreneurs and merchants using &quot;modern&quot; marketing techniques, including product differentiation, sales promotion and loss-leader pricing. English industrialists, Josiah Wedgewood (1730–1795) and Matthew Boulton (1728–1809), are often portrayed as pioneers of modern mass-marketing methods. Wedgewood was known to have used marketing techniques such as direct mail, travelling salesmen and catalogues in the eighteenth century. Wedgewood also carried out serious investigations into the fixed and variable costs of production and recognised that increased production would lead to lower unit-costs. He also inferred that selling at lower prices would lead to higher demand and recognised the value of achieving scale economies in production. By cutting costs and lowering prices, Wedgewood was able to generate higher overall profits. Similarly, one of Wedgewood&#x27;s contemporaries, Matthew Boulton, pioneered early mass-production techniques and product differentiation at his Soho Manufactory in the 1760s. He also practiced planned obsolescence and understood the importance of &quot;celebrity marketing&quot; – that is supplying the nobility, often at prices below cost – and of obtaining royal patronage, for the sake of the publicity and kudos generated. Both Wedgewood and Boulton staged expansive showcases of their wares in their private residences or in rented halls.

Eighteenth-century American merchants, who had been operating as importers and exporters, began to specialise in either wholesale or retail roles. They tended not to specialise in particular types of merchandise, often trading as general merchants, selling a diverse range of product types. These merchants were concentrated in the larger cities. They often provided high levels of credit financing for retail transactions. A system of credit was especially important because there was a shortage of cash in Britain and America following the Revolutionary War.

In the nineteenth century, merchants and merchant houses played a role in opening up China and the Pacific to Anglo-American trade interests. Note for example Jardine Matheson &amp; Co. and the merchants of New South Wales. Other merchants profited from natural resources (the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company theoretically controlled much of North America, names like Rockefeller and Nobel dominated trade in oil in the US and in the Russian Empire), while still others made fortunes from exploiting new inventions – selling space on and commodities carried by railways and steamships.

In fully planned economies of the 20th century, planners replaced merchants in organising the distribution of goods and services. However, merchants, increasingly labelled with euphemisms such as &quot;industrialists&quot;, &quot;businessmen&quot;, &quot;entrepreneurs&quot; or &quot;oligarchs&quot;, continue their activities in the 21st century.

==In art==

Elizabeth Honig has argued that artists, especially the painters of Antwerp, developed a fascination with merchants from the mid-16th century. The wealthier merchants also had the means to commission artworks with the result that individual merchants and their families became important subject matter for artists. For instance, Hans Holbein the younger painted a series of portraits of Hanseatic merchants working out of London&#x27;s Steelyard in the 1530s. These included including Georg Giese of Danzig; Hillebrant Wedigh of Cologne; Dirk Tybis of Duisburg; Hans of Antwerp, Hermann Wedigh, Johann Schwarzwald, Cyriacus Kale, Derich Born and Derick Berck. Paintings of groups of merchants, notably officers of the merchant guilds, also became subject matter for artists and documented the rise of important mercantile organisations.

In 2022, Dutch photographer Loes Heerink spend hours on bridges in Hanoi to take pictures of Vietnamese street Merchants. She published a book called Merchants in Motion: the art of Vietnamese Street Vendors.

==In architecture==
Although merchant halls were known in antiquity, they fell into disuse and were not reinvented until Europe&#x27;s medieval period. During the 12th century, powerful guilds which controlled the way that trade was conducted were established and were often incorporated into the charters granted to market towns. By the 13th and 14th centuries, merchant guilds had acquired sufficient resources to erect guild halls in many major market towns. Many buildings have retained the names derived from their former use as the home or place of business of merchants:
== See also ==

* Barker (occupation)
* Businessperson
* Chapmen 
* Commerce
* Costermonger
* Entrepreneur
* Free market
* Free trade
* Guild
* Guildhall
* Hawker
* History of marketing
* Licensed victualler
* Market (place)
* Mercantilism
* Merchant account
* Merchant marine
* Peddler
* Pochteca
* Retail
* Roman commerce

==References==
;References
==Sources and further reading==
* Adams Julia. &quot;The Familial State. Ruling Families and Merchant Capitalism in Early Modern Europe&quot; (Cornell University Press, 2005)
* Braudel, F. &quot;The Wheels of Commerce: Civilization and Capitalism, 15th to 18th Century&quot; (U of California Press, 1992)
* Burset, Christian R. &quot;Merchant courts, arbitration, and the politics of commercial litigation in the eighteenth-century British Empire.&quot; &quot;Law and History Review&quot; 34.3 (2016): 615–647. online
* Casson, Mark. &quot;The entrepreneur: An economic theory&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 1982). Influential scholarly survey
* Enciso, Agustín González. &quot;The merchant and the common good: social paradigms and the state’s influence in Western history.&quot; in &quot;The Challenges of Capitalism for Virtue Ethics and the Common Good&quot; (Edward Elgar Publishing, 2016).
* Julien, Pierre-André, ed. &quot;The state of the art in small business and entrepreneurship&quot; (Routledge, 2018).
* Lindemann, Mary. &quot;The Merchant Republics—Amsterdam, Antwerp, and Hamburg, 1648–1790&quot; (Cambridge UP, 2015)
* Marsden, Magnus, and Vera Skvirskaja. &quot;Merchant identities, trading nodes, and globalization: Introduction to the Special Issue.&quot; &quot;History and Anthropology&quot; 29.sup1 (2018): S1-S13. online
* Smith, Adam, &quot;An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations&quot; (Bantam Classics, Annotated Edition, 4 March 2003) 
* Origo, Iris. &quot;The Merchant of Prato: Daily Life in a Medieval Italian City&quot; (Penguin UK, 2017).
* Outhwaite, R. B. &quot;Merchants and Gentry in North-East England, 1650–1830: The Carrs and the Ellisons.&quot; &quot;English Historical Review&quot; 115.462 (2000): 729–729.
* Persaud, Alexander. &quot;Indian Merchant Migration within the British Empire.&quot; &quot;Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Asian History.&quot; (2020)
* Smith, Edmond. &quot;Merchants: The Community That Shaped England&#x27;s Trade and Empire, 1550-1650&quot; (Yale University Press, 2021) online review
* Williams, E. N. &quot;Our Merchants Are Princes&quot;: The English Middle Classes In The Eighteenth Century&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Aug 196) 2, Vol. 12 Issue 8, pp548–557.

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="2" end="10" title="Merchant" label="merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="255" end="264" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="266" end="273" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="275" end="280" title="Ancient China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="282" end="287" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="289" end="295" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="297" end="302" title="Ancient India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q28926" start="304" end="310" title="Ancient Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="312" end="321" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="326" end="330" title="Roman Empire" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="352" end="367" title="medieval period" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="451" end="465" title="merchant class" label="merchant class"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="480" end="496" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q873451" start="685" end="703" title="business practices" label="business practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="1132" end="1139" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291221" start="2588" end="2605" title="merchant services" label="merchant services"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="2752" end="2757" title="class (social)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772521" start="2775" end="2795" title="pre-modern societies" label="pre-modern societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3303" end="3317" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="3346" end="3351" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3373" end="3385" title="Roman Empire" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062780" start="3393" end="3398" title="Forum (Roman)" label="forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="3432" end="3445" title="Roman forum" label="Forum Romanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q283650" start="3451" end="3464" title="Forum Boarium" label="Forum Boarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q211295" start="3469" end="3488" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748441" start="3528" end="3552" title="forum venalium" label="&amp;quot;fora venalia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="3820" end="3828" title="commerce" label="exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q962382" start="3838" end="3852" title="direct selling" label="direct selling"/>
<link wikidata="Q638172" start="4046" end="4053" title="peddler" label="peddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180360" start="4488" end="4498" title="tyrian purple" label="purple dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q311512" start="4518" end="4523" title="murex" label="murex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4576" end="4589" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="4920" end="4927" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="4946" end="4954" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="5230" end="5236" title="Phoenician script" label="script"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="5486" end="5500" title="archaeological" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q173532" start="5594" end="5600" title="Byblos" label="Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="5617" end="5624" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="5630" end="5638" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q189970" start="5661" end="5674" title="social status" label="social status"/>
<link wikidata="Q355567" start="5808" end="5823" title="titles of nobility" label="Merchant Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017648" start="5827" end="5832" title="Nawab" label="Nabob"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5855" end="5860" title="Four occupations#The shang" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294787" start="6036" end="6049" title="Artisan" label="craftsmanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="6450" end="6456" title="bazaar" label="bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="6713" end="6718" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="6800" end="6811" title="Greco-Roman" label="Greco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178401" start="7233" end="7240" title="amphora" label="amphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062146" start="7731" end="7754" title="Marcus Julius Alexander" label="Marcus Julius Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q513103" start="7769" end="7782" title="Sergius Orata" label="Sergius Orata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769547" start="7803" end="7818" title="Annius Plocamus" label="Annius Plocamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="8753" end="8759" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="8764" end="8769" title="Indus River" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q273131" start="8847" end="8854" title="incense" label="incense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776037" start="8856" end="8862" title="balsam" label="balsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q203635" start="8881" end="8886" title="myrrh" label="myrrh"/>
<link wikidata="Q877546" start="9097" end="9112" title="social prestige" label="social prestige"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="9707" end="9715" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="9804" end="9814" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q949715" start="10046" end="10058" title="luxury goods" label="luxury goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="10148" end="10153" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="10546" end="10551" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="10797" end="10808" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="10945" end="10961" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="11002" end="11012" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961493" start="11103" end="11114" title="guildhall" label="guild halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q261512" start="13057" end="13098" title="Company of Merchant Adventurers of London" label="Company of Merchant Adventurers of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="13171" end="13187" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943868" start="13965" end="13973" title="tianguis" label="tianguis"/>
<link wikidata="Q765296" start="13992" end="14000" title="pochteca" label="pochteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="14439" end="14445" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="14447" end="14452" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q796925" start="14464" end="14474" title="Tlatelolco (altepetl)" label="Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="15170" end="15181" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="15275" end="15282" title="pastime" label="pastime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="15797" end="15815" title="colonialism" label="colonial expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="15951" end="15963" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q124397693" start="16493" end="16502" title="Armenian merchantry" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q203494" start="17008" end="17015" title="Caravan (travellers)" label="caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188843" start="17648" end="17660" title="Cosmopolitanism" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112591" start="18380" end="18385" title="nabob" label="nabob"/>
<link wikidata="Q873451" start="18495" end="18513" title="business practices" label="business practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="18637" end="18649" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200129" start="18923" end="18946" title="product differentiation" label="product differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q695086" start="18968" end="18979" title="loss-leader" label="loss-leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q319331" start="19013" end="19029" title="Josiah Wedgewood" label="Josiah Wedgewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q469269" start="19046" end="19061" title="Matthew Boulton" label="Matthew Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383547" start="19117" end="19131" title="mass-marketing" label="mass-marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851835" start="19203" end="19214" title="direct mail" label="direct mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="19561" end="19576" title="Economies of scale" label="scale economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="19769" end="19784" title="mass-production" label="mass-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967458" start="19880" end="19900" title="planned obsolescence" label="planned obsolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057785" start="19940" end="19959" title="celebrity marketing" label="celebrity marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="20046" end="20061" title="patronage" label="royal patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16923308" start="20953" end="20979" title="History of Jardine Matheson &amp;amp; Co." label="Jardine Matheson &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="21001" end="21016" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="21071" end="21096" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="21156" end="21167" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306052" start="21172" end="21177" title="Branobel" label="Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="21384" end="21401" title="planned economy" label="planned economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897903" start="21485" end="21503" title="goods and services" label="goods and services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006045" start="21653" end="21674" title="Business oligarch" label="&amp;quot;oligarchs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="21804" end="21811" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q48319" start="22065" end="22089" title="Hans Holbein the younger" label="Hans Holbein the younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q72459" start="22221" end="22232" title="Georg Giese" label="Georg Giese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="22236" end="22242" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="22265" end="22272" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100" start="22288" end="22296" title="Duisburg" label="Duisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266005" start="22298" end="22313" title="Hans of Antwerp" label="Hans of Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="22641" end="22646" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="23101" end="23112" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338165" start="23380" end="23399" title="Barker (occupation)" label="Barker (occupation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43845" start="23402" end="23416" title="Businessperson" label="Businessperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073342" start="23419" end="23426" title="Chapmen" label="Chapmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="23430" end="23438" title="Commerce" label="Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175106" start="23441" end="23453" title="Costermonger" label="Costermonger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="23456" end="23468" title="Entrepreneur" label="Entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="23471" end="23482" title="Free market" label="Free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="23485" end="23495" title="Free trade" label="Free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="23498" end="23503" title="Guild" label="Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961493" start="23506" end="23515" title="Guildhall" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555589" start="23518" end="23524" title="Hawker (trade)" label="Hawker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566673" start="23527" end="23547" title="History of marketing" label="History of marketing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23550" end="23569" title="Landlord#Licensed victualler" label="Licensed victualler"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="23572" end="23586" title="Market (place)" label="Market (place)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="23589" end="23601" title="Mercantilism" label="Mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818411" start="23604" end="23620" title="Merchant account" label="Merchant account"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="23623" end="23638" title="Merchant marine" label="Merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q638172" start="23641" end="23648" title="Peddler" label="Peddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q765296" start="23651" end="23659" title="Pochteca" label="Pochteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="23662" end="23668" title="Retail" label="Retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008214" start="23671" end="23685" title="Roman commerce" label="Roman commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="25080" end="25142" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20812" wikidata="Q131136" url="?curid=20812" title="Meteor">
<text>A meteor, known colloquially as a &lt;dfn&gt;shooting star&lt;/dfn&gt;, is a glowing streak of a small body (usually meteoroid) going through Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, after being heated to incandescence by collisions with air molecules in the upper atmosphere, creating a streak of light via its rapid motion and sometimes also by shedding glowing material in its wake. Although a meteor may seem to be a few thousand feet from the Earth, meteors typically occur in the mesosphere at altitudes from . The root word &quot;meteor&quot; comes from the Greek &quot;meteōros&quot;, meaning &quot;high in the air&quot;.

Millions of meteors occur in Earth&#x27;s atmosphere daily. Most meteoroids that cause meteors are about the size of a grain of sand, i.e. they are usually millimeter-sized or smaller. Meteoroid sizes can be calculated from their mass and density which, in turn, can be estimated from the observed meteor trajectory in the upper atmosphere.

Meteors may occur in showers, which arise when Earth passes through a stream of debris left by a comet, or as &quot;random&quot; or &quot;sporadic&quot; meteors, not associated with a specific stream of space debris. A number of specific meteors have been observed, largely by members of the public and largely by accident, but with enough detail that orbits of the meteoroids producing the meteors have been calculated. The atmospheric velocities of meteors result from the movement of Earth around the Sun at about , the orbital speeds of meteoroids, and the gravity well of Earth.

Meteors become visible between about above Earth. They usually disintegrate at altitudes of . Meteors have roughly a fifty percent chance of a daylight (or near daylight) collision with Earth. Most meteors are, however, observed at night, when darkness allows fainter objects to be recognized. For bodies with a size scale larger than to several meters meteor visibility is due to the atmospheric ram pressure (not friction) that heats the meteoroid so that it glows and creates a shining trail of gases and melted meteoroid particles. The gases include vaporised meteoroid material and atmospheric gases that heat up when the meteoroid passes through the atmosphere. Most meteors glow for about a second.

== History ==
Meteors were not known to be an astronomical phenomenon until early in the nineteenth century. Before that, they were seen in the West as an atmospheric phenomenon, like lightning, and were not connected with strange stories of rocks falling from the sky. In 1807, Yale University chemistry professor Benjamin Silliman investigated a meteorite that fell in Weston, Connecticut. Silliman believed the meteor had a cosmic origin, but meteors did not attract much attention from astronomers until the spectacular meteor storm of November 1833. People all across the eastern United States saw thousands of meteors, radiating from a single point in the sky. Careful observers noticed that the radiant, as the point is called, moved with the stars, staying in the constellation Leo.

The astronomer Denison Olmsted extensively studied this storm, concluding that it had a cosmic origin. After reviewing historical records, Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers predicted the storm&#x27;s return in 1867, drawing other astronomers&#x27; attention to the phenomenon. Hubert A. Newton&#x27;s more thorough historical work led to a refined prediction of 1866, which proved correct. With Giovanni Schiaparelli&#x27;s success in connecting the Leonids (as they are called) with comet Tempel-Tuttle, the cosmic origin of meteors was firmly established. Still, they remain an atmospheric phenomenon and retain their name &quot;meteor&quot; from the Greek word for &quot;atmospheric&quot;.

== Fireball ==

A fireball is a brighter-than-usual meteor which can be also seen during daylight. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) defines a fireball as &quot;a meteor brighter than any of the planets&quot; (apparent magnitude −4 or greater). The International Meteor Organization (an amateur organization that studies meteors) has a more rigid definition. It defines a fireball as a meteor that would have at least magnitude of −3 if seen at zenith. This definition corrects for the greater distance between an observer and a meteor near the horizon. For example, a meteor of magnitude −1 at 5 degrees above the horizon would be classified as a fireball because, if the observer had been directly below the meteor, it would have appeared as magnitude −6.

Fireballs reaching apparent magnitude −14 or brighter are called bolides. The IAU has no official definition of &quot;bolide&quot;, and generally considers the term synonymous with &quot;fireball&quot;. Astronomers often use &quot;bolide&quot; to identify an exceptionally bright fireball, particularly one that explodes in a meteor air burst. They are sometimes called detonating fireballs. It may also be used to mean a fireball which creates audible sounds. In the late twentieth century, bolide has also come to mean any object that hits Earth and explodes, with no regard to its composition (asteroid or comet). The word &quot;bolide&quot; comes from the Greek βολίς (&quot;bolis&quot;) which can mean &quot;a missile&quot; or &quot;to flash&quot;. If the magnitude of a bolide reaches −17 or brighter it is known as a superbolide. A relatively small percentage of fireballs hit Earth&#x27;s atmosphere and then pass out again: these are termed Earth-grazing fireballs. Such an event happened in broad daylight over North America in 1972. Another rare phenomenon is a meteor procession, where the meteor breaks up into several fireballs traveling nearly parallel to the surface of Earth.

A steadily growing number of fireballs are recorded at the American Meteor Society every year. There are probably more than 500,000 fireballs a year, but most go unnoticed because most occur over the ocean and half occur during daytime. A European Fireball Network and a NASA All-sky Fireball Network detect and track many fireballs.

== Effect on atmosphere ==

The entry of meteoroids into Earth&#x27;s atmosphere produces three main effects: ionization of atmospheric molecules, dust that the meteoroid sheds, and the sound of passage. During the entry of a meteoroid or asteroid into the upper atmosphere, an ionization trail is created, where the air molecules are ionized by the passage of the meteor. Such ionization trails can last up to 45 minutes at a time.

Small, sand-grain sized meteoroids are entering the atmosphere constantly, essentially every few seconds in any given region of the atmosphere, and thus ionization trails can be found in the upper atmosphere more or less continuously. When radio waves are bounced off these trails, it is called meteor burst communications. Meteor radars can measure atmospheric density and winds by measuring the decay rate and Doppler shift of a meteor trail. Most meteoroids burn up when they enter the atmosphere. The left-over debris is called &quot;meteoric dust&quot; or just meteor dust. Meteor dust particles can persist in the atmosphere for up to several months. These particles might affect climate, both by scattering electromagnetic radiation and by catalyzing chemical reactions in the upper atmosphere. Meteoroids or their fragments achieve dark flight after deceleration to terminal velocity. Dark flight starts when they decelerate to about .
 Larger fragments fall further down the strewn field.

=== Colours ===
The visible light produced by a meteor may take on various hues, depending on the chemical composition of the meteoroid, and the speed of its movement through the atmosphere. As layers of the meteoroid abrade and ionize, the colour of the light emitted may change according to the layering of minerals. Colours of meteors depend on the relative influence of the metallic content of the meteoroid versus the superheated air plasma, which its passage engenders:
* Orange-yellow (sodium)
* Yellow (iron)
* Blue-green (magnesium)
* Violet (calcium)
* Red (atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen)

=== Acoustic manifestations ===
The sound generated by a meteor in the upper atmosphere, such as a sonic boom, typically arrives many seconds after the visual light from a meteor disappears. Occasionally, as with the Leonid meteor shower of 2001, &quot;crackling&quot;, &quot;swishing&quot;, or &quot;hissing&quot; sounds have been reported, occurring at the same instant as a meteor flare. These are sometimes called electrophonic sounds. Similar sounds have also been reported during intense displays of Earth&#x27;s auroras. 

Theories on the generation of these sounds may partially explain them. For example, scientists at NASA suggested that the turbulent ionized wake of a meteor interacts with Earth&#x27;s magnetic field, generating pulses of radio waves. As the trail dissipates, megawatts of electromagnetic power could be released, with a peak in the power spectrum at audio frequencies. Physical vibrations induced by the electromagnetic impulses would then be heard if they are powerful enough to make grasses, plants, eyeglass frames, the hearer&#x27;s own body (see microwave auditory effect), and other conductive materials vibrate. This proposed mechanism, although proven plausible by laboratory work, remains unsupported by corresponding measurements in the field. Sound recordings made under controlled conditions in Mongolia in 1998 support the contention that the sounds are real. &quot;(Also see Bolide.)&quot;

== Meteor shower ==


A meteor shower is the result of an interaction between a planet, such as Earth, and streams of debris from a comet or other source. The passage of Earth through cosmic debris from comets and other sources is a recurring event in many cases. Comets can produce debris by water vapor drag, as demonstrated by Fred Whipple in 1951, and by breakup. Each time a comet swings by the Sun in its orbit, some of its ice vaporizes and a certain amount of meteoroids are shed. The meteoroids spread out along the entire orbit of the comet to form a meteoroid stream, also known as a &quot;dust trail&quot; (as opposed to a comet&#x27;s &quot;dust tail&quot; caused by the very small particles that are quickly blown away by solar radiation pressure).

The frequency of fireball sightings increases by about 10–30% during the weeks of vernal equinox. Even meteorite falls are more common during the northern hemisphere&#x27;s spring season. Although this phenomenon has been known for quite some time, the reason behind the anomaly is not fully understood by scientists. Some researchers attribute this to an intrinsic variation in the meteoroid population along Earth&#x27;s orbit, with a peak in big fireball-producing debris around spring and early summer. Others have pointed out that during this period the ecliptic is (in the northern hemisphere) high in the sky in the late afternoon and early evening. This means that fireball radiants with an asteroidal source are high in the sky (facilitating relatively high rates) at the moment the meteoroids &quot;catch up&quot; with Earth, coming from behind going in the same direction as Earth. This causes relatively low relative speeds and from this low entry speeds, which facilitates survival of meteorites. It also generates high fireball rates in the early evening, increasing chances of eyewitness reports. This explains a part, but perhaps not all of the seasonal variation. Research is in progress for mapping the orbits of the meteors to gain a better understanding of the phenomenon.

== Notable meteors ==


; 1992Peekskill, New York
: The Peekskill Meteorite was recorded on October 9, 1992 by at least 16 independent videographers. Eyewitness accounts indicate the fireball entry of the Peekskill meteorite started over West Virginia at 23:48 UT (±1 min). The fireball, which traveled in a northeasterly direction, had a pronounced greenish colour, and attained an estimated peak visual magnitude of −13. During a luminous flight time that exceeded 40 seconds the fireball covered a ground path of some . One meteorite recovered at Peekskill, New York, for which the event and object gained their name, had a mass of and was subsequently identified as an H6 monomict breccia meteorite. The video record suggests that the Peekskill meteorite had several companions over a wide area. The companions are unlikely to be recovered in the hilly, wooded terrain in the vicinity of Peekskill.
; 2009Bone, Indonesia
: A large fireball was observed in the skies near Bone, Sulawesi, Indonesia on October 8, 2009. This was thought to be caused by an asteroid approximately in diameter. The fireball contained an estimated energy of 50 kilotons of TNT, or about twice the Nagasaki atomic bomb. No injuries were reported.
; 2009Southwestern US
: A large bolide was reported on 18 November 2009 over southeastern California, northern Arizona, Utah, Wyoming, Idaho and Colorado. At 00:07 local time a security camera at the high altitude W. L. Eccles Observatory ( above sea level) recorded a movie of the passage of the object to the north. It had a spherical &quot;ghost&quot; image slightly trailing the main object (likely a lens reflection of the intense fireball), and a bright fireball explosion associated with the breakup of a substantial fraction of the object. An object trail continued northward after the fireball. The shock from the final breakup triggered seven seismological stations in northern Utah. The seismic data yielded a terminal location of the object at 40.286 N, −113.191 W, altitude . This is above the Dugway Proving Grounds, a closed Army testing base.
; 2013Chelyabinsk Oblast, Russia
: The Chelyabinsk meteor was an extremely bright, exploding fireball, or superbolide, measuring about across, with an estimated mass of 11,000 tonnes as the relatively small asteroid entered Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. It was the largest natural object known to have entered Earth&#x27;s atmosphere since the Tunguska event in 1908. Over 1,500 people were injured, mostly by glass from shattered windows caused by the air burst approximately above the environs of Chelyabinsk, Russia on 15 February 2013. An increasingly bright streak was observed during morning daylight with a large contrail lingering behind. At no less than one minute and up to at least three minutes after the object peaked in intensity (depending on distance from trail), a large concussive blast was heard that shattered windows and set-off car alarms, which was followed by a number of smaller explosions.
; 2019Midwestern United States
: On November 11, 2019, a meteor was spotted streaking across the skies of the Midwestern United States. In the St. Louis Area, security cameras, dashcams, webcams, and video doorbells captured the object as it burned up in the earth&#x27;s atmosphere. The superbolide meteor was part of the South Taurids meteor shower. It traveled east to west ending its flight somewhere near Wellsville, Missouri.

== Monitoring ==

In a range of countries networks of sky observing installations have been set up to monitor meteors.

*FRIPON
*North American Meteor Network
*Desert Fireball Network
*European Fireball Network

== Gallery ==
== See also ==

* American Meteor Society
* Bolide
* Desert Fireball Network
* Fireballs Aotearoa
* Green fireballs
* Hydrometeor
* International Meteor Organization
* Leonids
* List of meteor showers
* Lyrids
* Meteor air burst
* North American Meteor Network
* Orionids
* Perseids
* Tollmann&#x27;s hypothetical bolide
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="2" end="8" title="Meteor" label="meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="34" end="70" title="Meteor" label="&amp;lt;dfn&amp;gt;shooting star&amp;lt;/dfn&amp;gt;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012" start="117" end="126" title="meteoroid" label="meteoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q162167" start="470" end="480" title="mesosphere" label="mesosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="549" end="554" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="978" end="985" title="meteor shower" label="showers"/>
<link wikidata="Q275450" start="1160" end="1172" title="space debris" label="space debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q928582" start="1518" end="1530" title="gravity well" label="gravity well"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115097" start="1939" end="1951" title="ram pressure" label="ram pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2528" end="2543" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q817692" start="2564" end="2581" title="Benjamin Silliman" label="Benjamin Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="2597" end="2606" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053060" start="2620" end="2639" title="Weston meteorite" label="Weston, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q258190" start="2947" end="2958" title="Radiant (meteor shower)" label="the radiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334178" start="3056" end="3071" title="Denison Olmsted" label="Denison Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="3180" end="3212" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers" label="Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300213" start="3317" end="3333" title="Hubert Anson Newton" label="Hubert A. Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14281" start="3435" end="3456" title="Giovanni Schiaparelli" label="Giovanni Schiaparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q189698" start="3490" end="3497" title="Leonids" label="Leonids"/>
<link wikidata="Q549166" start="3530" end="3543" title="Tempel-Tuttle" label="Tempel-Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="3837" end="3869" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="3953" end="3971" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q657519" start="3992" end="4025" title="International Meteor Organization" label="International Meteor Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="4188" end="4194" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="4567" end="4573" title="bolide" label="bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628421" start="4828" end="4844" title="meteor air burst" label="meteor air burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="5162" end="5167" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="5326" end="5337" title="superbolide" label="superbolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q603346" start="5452" end="5474" title="Earth-grazing fireball" label="Earth-grazing fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069742" start="5503" end="5544" title="The Great Daylight 1972 Fireball" label="broad daylight over North America in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823444" start="5575" end="5592" title="meteor procession" label="meteor procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744434" start="5755" end="5778" title="American Meteor Society" label="American Meteor Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q450345" start="5935" end="5960" title="European Fireball Network" label="European Fireball Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621662" start="6288" end="6304" title="upper atmosphere" label="upper atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="6366" end="6373" title="ionization" label="ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="6472" end="6482" title="sand-grain" label="sand-grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071127" start="6760" end="6787" title="meteor burst communications" label="meteor burst communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="6862" end="6872" title="decay rate" label="decay rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="6877" end="6890" title="Doppler shift" label="Doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q614981" start="7339" end="7356" title="terminal velocity" label="terminal velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059884" start="7449" end="7461" title="strewn field" label="strewn field"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="7957" end="7963" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="7975" end="7979" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="7995" end="8004" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="8016" end="8023" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="8044" end="8052" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="8057" end="8063" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333268" start="8165" end="8175" title="sonic boom" label="sonic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q189698" start="8283" end="8303" title="Leonid meteor shower" label="Leonid meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598431" start="8484" end="8504" title="electrophonic sounds" label="electrophonic sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="8585" end="8592" title="Aurora (astronomy)" label="auroras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="8768" end="8795" title="geomagnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="8818" end="8828" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="8856" end="8864" title="megawatt" label="megawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="8929" end="8943" title="power spectrum" label="power spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413664" start="8947" end="8964" title="audio frequencies" label="audio frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="8975" end="8984" title="vibration" label="vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q627199" start="9148" end="9173" title="microwave auditory effect" label="microwave auditory effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="9486" end="9492" title="Bolide" label="Bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="9526" end="9539" title="meteor shower" label="meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="9634" end="9639" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q828027" start="9735" end="9750" title="List of meteor showers" label="recurring event"/>
<link wikidata="Q319225" start="9832" end="9844" title="Fred Whipple" label="Fred Whipple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="9913" end="9918" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="10283" end="10291" title="Fireball (meteor)" label="fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="10348" end="10362" title="Equinox" label="vernal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="10369" end="10378" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477392" start="11616" end="11635" title="Peekskill Meteorite" label="Peekskill Meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q218124" start="12061" end="12072" title="ground path" label="ground path"/>
<link wikidata="Q876191" start="12110" end="12129" title="Peekskill, New York" label="Peekskill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103420" start="12489" end="12503" title="2009 Sulawesi superbolide" label="large fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q984451" start="12535" end="12539" title="Watampone" label="Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="12541" end="12549" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188163" start="12738" end="12758" title="Fat Man" label="Nagasaki atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003443" start="13001" end="13025" title="Willard L. Eccles Observatory" label="W. L. Eccles Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661508" start="13685" end="13703" title="Chelyabinsk meteor" label="Chelyabinsk meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="13752" end="13763" title="superbolide" label="superbolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="13853" end="13861" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q125953" start="13985" end="13999" title="Tunguska event" label="Tunguska event"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628421" start="14094" end="14103" title="Meteor air burst" label="air burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714" start="14128" end="14151" title="Chelyabinsk Oblast" label="environs of Chelyabinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="14667" end="14691" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="14700" end="14709" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="14845" end="14856" title="superbolide" label="superbolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q32334" start="14880" end="14893" title="Taurids" label="South Taurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q960182" start="14967" end="14977" title="Wellsville, Missouri" label="Wellsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="14979" end="14987" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q21427321" start="15111" end="15117" title="FRIPON" label="FRIPON"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053810" start="15119" end="15148" title="North American Meteor Network" label="North American Meteor Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015672" start="15150" end="15173" title="Desert Fireball Network" label="Desert Fireball Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q450345" start="15175" end="15200" title="European Fireball Network" label="European Fireball Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744434" start="15234" end="15257" title="American Meteor Society" label="American Meteor Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="15260" end="15266" title="Bolide" label="Bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015672" start="15269" end="15292" title="Desert Fireball Network" label="Desert Fireball Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15295" end="15313" title="Fireballs Aotearoa" label="Fireballs Aotearoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485665" start="15316" end="15331" title="Green fireballs" label="Green fireballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="15334" end="15345" title="Hydrometeor" label="Hydrometeor"/>
<link wikidata="Q657519" start="15348" end="15381" title="International Meteor Organization" label="International Meteor Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q189698" start="15384" end="15391" title="Leonids" label="Leonids"/>
<link wikidata="Q828027" start="15394" end="15416" title="List of meteor showers" label="List of meteor showers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200531" start="15419" end="15425" title="Lyrids" label="Lyrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628421" start="15428" end="15444" title="Meteor air burst" label="Meteor air burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053810" start="15447" end="15476" title="North American Meteor Network" label="North American Meteor Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q374114" start="15479" end="15487" title="Orionids" label="Orionids"/>
<link wikidata="Q173708" start="15490" end="15498" title="Perseids" label="Perseids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561052" start="15501" end="15536" title="Tollmann&amp;#x27;s hypothetical bolide" label="Tollmann&amp;#x27;s hypothetical bolide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20813" wikidata="Q918376" url="?curid=20813" title="Michael Milken">
<text>Michael Robert Milken (born July 4, 1946) is an American financier. He is known for his role in the development of the market for high-yield bonds (&quot;junk bonds&quot;), and his conviction and sentence following a guilty plea on felony charges for violating U.S. securities laws. Milken&#x27;s compensation while head of the high-yield bond department at Drexel Burnham Lambert in the late 1980s exceeded $1 billion over a four-year period, a record for U.S. income at that time. With a net worth of 6 billion as of 2022, he is among the richest people in the world.

Milken was indicted for racketeering and securities fraud in 1989 in an insider trading investigation. In a plea bargain, he pleaded guilty to securities and reporting violations but not to racketeering or insider trading. Milken was sentenced to ten years in prison, fined $600 million (although his personal website claims $200 million) and permanently barred from the securities industry by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. His sentence was later reduced to two years for cooperating with testimony against his former colleagues and for good behavior. Milken was pardoned by President Donald Trump on February 18, 2020.

Since his release from prison, he has become known for his charitable donations. He is co-founder of the Milken Family Foundation, chairman of the Milken Institute, and founder of medical philanthropies funding research into melanoma, cancer, and other life-threatening diseases. A prostate cancer survivor, Milken has devoted significant resources to research on the disease.

==Early life and education==

Milken was born into a middle-class Jewish family in Encino, California.

He graduated from Birmingham High School where he was the head cheerleader and worked while in school at a diner. His classmates included future Disney president Michael Ovitz and actresses Sally Field and Cindy Williams. In 1968, he graduated from the University of California, Berkeley with a B.S. with highest honors. He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and was a member of the Sigma Alpha Mu fraternity. He received his MBA from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. While at Berkeley, Milken was influenced by credit studies authored by W. Braddock Hickman, a former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, who noted that a portfolio of non-investment grade bonds offered &quot;risk-adjusted&quot; returns greater than that of an investment-grade portfolio.

==Career==

Through his Wharton professors, Milken landed a summer job at Drexel Harriman Ripley, an old-line investment bank, in 1969. After completing his MBA, he joined Drexel (by then known as Drexel Firestone) as director of low-grade bond research. He was also given control of some capital and permitted to trade. Over the next 17 years, he had only four down months.

Drexel merged with Burnham and Company in 1973 to form Drexel Burnham. Despite the firm&#x27;s name, Burnham was the nominal survivor; the Drexel name came first only at the insistence of the more powerful investment banks, whose blessing was necessary for the merged firm to inherit Drexel&#x27;s position as a &quot;major&quot; firm.

Milken was one of the few prominent holdovers from the Drexel side of the merger, and he became the merged firm&#x27;s head of convertibles. He persuaded his new boss, fellow Wharton alumnus Tubby Burnham, to let him start a high-yield bond trading department—an operation that soon earned a 100 percent return on investment. By 1976, Milken&#x27;s income at the firm, which had become Drexel Burnham Lambert, was estimated at $5 million a year. In 1978, Milken moved the high-yield bond operation to Century City in Los Angeles.

===High-yield bonds and leveraged buyouts===

By the mid-1980s, Milken&#x27;s network of high-yield bond buyers (notably Fred Carr&#x27;s Executive Life Insurance Company and Tom Spiegel&#x27;s Columbia Savings &amp; Loan) had reached a size that enabled him to raise large amounts of money quickly.

This money-raising ability also facilitated the activities of leveraged buyout (LBO) firms such as Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and of the so-called &quot;greenmailers&quot;. Most of them were armed with a &quot;highly confident letter&quot; from Drexel, a tool Drexel&#x27;s corporate finance wing crafted that promised to raise the necessary debt in time to fulfill the buyer&#x27;s obligations. It carried no legal status, but by that time Milken had a reputation for being able to make markets for any bonds that he underwrote. For this reason, &quot;highly confident letters&quot; were considered to reliably demonstrate capacity to pay. Supporters, like George Gilder in his book &quot;Telecosm&quot; (2000), state that Milken was &quot;a key source of the organizational changes that have impelled economic growth over the last twenty years. Most striking was the productivity surge in capital, as Milken... and others took the vast sums trapped in old-line businesses and put them back into the markets.&quot;

Despite his influence in the financial world during the 1980s, (at least one source called him the most powerful American financier since J. P. Morgan), Milken is an intensely private man who shuns publicity; he reportedly owned almost all photographs taken of him.

===Later career===

Milken and his brother Lowell founded Knowledge Universe in 1996, as well as Knowledge Learning Corporation (KLC), the parent company of KinderCare Learning Centers, the largest for-profit child care provider in the country. Michael Milken was chairman of Knowledge Universe until it was sold in 2015.

He invested in K12 Inc., a publicly traded education management organization (EMO) that provides online schooling, including to charter school students, for whom services are paid by tax dollars, which is the largest EMO in terms of enrollment.

==Scandal==

Dan Stone, a former Drexel executive, wrote in his book &quot;April Fools&quot; that Milken was under nearly constant scrutiny from the Securities and Exchange Commission from 1979 onward due to unethical and sometimes illegal behavior in the high-yield department.

Milken&#x27;s role in such behavior has been much debated. Stone claims that Milken viewed the securities laws, rules, and regulations with a degree of contempt, feeling they hindered the free flow of trade. However, Stone said that while Milken condoned questionable and illegal acts by his colleagues, Milken himself personally followed the rules. Milken often contacted Fred Joseph, Drexel&#x27;s president and CEO, with ethical questions; Joseph was known for his strict view of the securities laws.

On the other hand, several of the sources James B. Stewart used for &quot;Den of Thieves&quot; told him that Milken often tried to get as much as five times the maximum markup on trades that was permitted at the time.

Harvey A. Silverglate, a defense attorney who represented Milken during the appellate process, disputes that view in his book &quot;Three Felonies a Day&quot;: &quot;Milken&#x27;s biggest problem was that some of his most ingenious but entirely lawful maneuvers were viewed, by those who initially did not understand them, as felonious, precisely because they were novel – and often extremely profitable.&quot;

===Ivan Boesky and an intensifying investigation===

The SEC inquiries never advanced beyond the investigation phase until 1986, when arbitrageur Ivan Boesky pleaded guilty to securities fraud as part of a larger insider trading investigation. As part of his plea, Boesky implicated Milken in several illegal transactions, including insider trading, stock manipulation, fraud, and stock parking (buying stocks for the benefit of another). This led to an SEC probe of Drexel, as well as a separate criminal probe by Rudy Giuliani, then United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York. Although both investigations were almost entirely focused on Milken&#x27;s department, Milken refused to talk with Drexel (which launched its own internal investigation) except through his lawyers. It turned out that Milken&#x27;s legal team believed Drexel would be forced to cooperate with the government at some point, believing that a securities firm would not survive the bad publicity of a long criminal and SEC probe.

For two years, Drexel insisted that nothing illegal had occurred, even when the SEC sued Drexel in 1988. Later that year, Giuliani began considering an indictment of Drexel under the powerful Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act. Drexel management, concluding that a financial institution could not possibly survive a RICO indictment, immediately began plea bargain talks. However, talks collapsed on December 19, when Giuliani made several demands that went beyond even what those who believed an indictment would destroy the firm were willing to accept. For example, Giuliani demanded that Milken leave the firm if indicted.

Only a day later, Drexel lawyers discovered suspicious activity in one of the limited partnerships Milken set up to allow members of his department to make their own investments. That entity, MacPherson Partners, had acquired several warrants for the stock of Storer Broadcasting in 1985. At the time, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts was in the midst of a leveraged buyout of Storer, and Drexel was lead underwriter for the bonds being issued. One of Drexel&#x27;s other clients bought several Storer warrants and sold them back to the high-yield bond department. The department in turn sold them to MacPherson. This partnership included Milken, other Drexel executives, and a few Drexel customers. It also included several managers of money market funds who had worked with Milken in the past. It appeared that the money managers bought the warrants for themselves and did not offer the same opportunity to the funds they managed. Some of Milken&#x27;s children also received warrants, according to Stewart, raising the appearance of Milken self-dealing.

The warrants to money managers were especially problematic. At the very least, Milken&#x27;s actions were a serious breach of Drexel&#x27;s internal regulations, and the money managers had breached their fiduciary duty to their clients. At worst, the warrants could have been construed as bribes to the money managers, to influence decisions they made for their funds.

Indeed, several money managers were eventually convicted on bribery charges. The discovery of MacPherson Partners—whose existence had not been known to the public at the time—seriously eroded Milken&#x27;s credibility with the board. On December 21, 1988, Drexel entered an Alford plea to six counts of stock parking and stock manipulation. It allowed Drexel to maintain its innocence while conceding that it &quot;was not in a position to dispute&quot; the allegations made by the government. As part of the deal, Drexel agreed that Milken had to leave the firm if indicted.

===Indictment and sentencing===
In March 1989, a federal grand jury indicted Milken on 98 counts of racketeering and fraud. The indictment accused Milken of a long list of misconduct, including insider trading, stock parking (concealing the real owner of a stock), tax evasion, and numerous instances of repayment of illicit profits. One charge was that Boesky paid Drexel $5.3 million in 1986 for Milken&#x27;s share of profits from illegal trading. This payment was represented as a consulting fee to Drexel. Shortly afterward, Milken resigned from Drexel and formed his own firm, International Capital Access Group.

Milken&#x27;s protege Terren Peizer had worked as a junk bond salesman for Milken, managing an account with which Drexel had an illegal arrangement that included insider trading and phony tax losses. Peizer provided material evidence to prosecutors against Milken. At Milken&#x27;s pre-sentencing hearing for securities fraud in 1990, Peizer testified against Milken in exchange for immunity from both criminal prosecution and SEC sanctions.

On April 24, 1990, Milken pleaded guilty to six counts of securities and tax violations. Three of them involved dealings with Boesky to conceal the real owner of a stock:

*Aiding and abetting another person&#x27;s failure to file an accurate 13d statement with the SEC, since the schedule was not amended to reflect an understanding that any loss would be made up
*Sending confirmation slips through the mail that failed to disclose that a commission was included in the price
*Aiding and abetting another in filing inaccurate broker-dealer reports with the SEC

Two other counts were related to tax evasion in transactions Milken carried out for a client of the firm, David Solomon, a fund manager:

*Selling stock without disclosure of an understanding that the purchaser would not lose money
*Agreeing to sell securities to a customer and to buy those securities back at a real loss to the customer, but with an understanding that he would try to find a future profitable transaction to make up for any losses

The last count was for conspiracy to commit these five violations.

As part of his plea, Milken agreed to pay $200 million in fines. At the same time, he agreed to a settlement with the SEC in which he paid $400 million to investors who had been hurt by his actions. He also accepted a lifetime ban from any involvement in the securities industry. In a related civil lawsuit against Drexel, he agreed to pay $500 million to Drexel&#x27;s investors.

Critics of the government charge that the government indicted Milken&#x27;s brother Lowell to pressure Milken to settle, a tactic some legal scholars condemn as unethical. &quot;I am troubled by – and other scholars are troubled by – the notion of putting relatives on the bargaining table,&quot; said Vivian Berger, a professor at Columbia University Law School, in a 1990 interview with &quot;The New York Times&quot;. As part of the deal, the case against Lowell was dropped. Federal investigators also questioned some of Milken&#x27;s relatives about their investments.

At Milken&#x27;s sentencing, Judge Kimba Wood told him:

In statements to a parole board in 1991, Judge Wood estimated that the &quot;total loss from Milken&#x27;s crimes&quot; was $318,000, less than the government&#x27;s estimate of $4.7 million, and she recommended that he be eligible for parole in three years. Milken&#x27;s sentence was later reduced to two years from ten; he served 22 months.

===2013 SEC investigation===

In February 2013, the SEC announced that they were investigating whether Milken violated his lifetime ban from the securities industry. The investigation concerned Milken&#x27;s allegedly providing investment advice through Guggenheim Partners. Since 2011, the SEC had been investigating Guggenheim&#x27;s relationship with Milken.

===Presidential pardon===

In June 2018, it was reported that some of president Donald Trump&#x27;s supporters and friends, including Kevin McCarthy, Rupert Murdoch, Sheldon Adelson, Elaine Chao, and Rudy Giuliani, the onetime federal prosecutor whose criminal investigation led to Milken&#x27;s conviction, were urging the president to pardon Milken. Milken&#x27;s attempts to secure a presidential pardon spanned multiple administrations.

On February 18, 2020, Trump granted a full pardon to Milken. However, his previous trading license which he lost following his conviction still remained void, and he would still have to reapply and obtain a new trading license in order to return to trading securities.

==Philanthropy==

According to &quot;Forbes&quot;, Milken has given away between 5–10% of his fortune, earning a philanthropy score of 3 out of 5. Upon his release from prison in 1993, Milken founded the Prostate Cancer Foundation for prostate cancer research, which by 2010 was &quot;the largest philanthropic source of funds for research into prostate cancer&quot;. Milken himself was diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer in the same month he was released. His cancer is currently in remission. The Prostate Cancer Foundation works closely with Major League Baseball through its Home Run Challenge program to promote awareness of prostate cancer and raise money for medical research. Each season in the weeks leading up to Father&#x27;s Day, Milken visits many ballparks and appears on TV and radio broadcasts during the games.

In 2003, Milken launched a Washington, D.C.–based think tank called FasterCures, which seeks greater efficiency in researching all serious diseases. Initiatives of FasterCures include TRAIN, Partnering for Cures, and the Philanthropy Advisory Service.

On March 11, 2014, President Steven Knapp of George Washington University in Washington, D.C. announced the university was renaming its public health school after Milken as a result of a total of $80 million in gifts, $50 million from the Milken Institute and the Milken Family Foundation and $30 million gift from Viacom chairman Sumner Redstone. The gifts were designated for research and scholarship on public health issues.

==In popular culture==

Milken became the first recipient of the Ig Nobel Economics Prize in 1991.

Ayad Akhtar&#x27;s 2016 play &quot;&quot;, set during the bond trading scandals of the 1980s, is partly based on Milken&#x27;s &quot;fall from grace&quot;. Milken is the inspiration for the main character in the play.

Milken is referenced by Hank Scorpio in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode “You Only Move Twice”.

Milken is referenced by Chris Stevens in &quot;Northern Exposure&quot; Season 6, Ep. 5 – The Robe (31:29). “Trust and honesty. The age-old quest of Diogenes in a post-Milken universe.”

==Personal life==

Milken is married to Lori Anne Hackel, whom he had dated in high school. The couple have three children. He reportedly follows a vegetarian-like diet rich in fruits and vegetables for its health benefits and has co-authored a vegan cookbook with Beth Ginsberg.

==See also==
* List of people granted executive clemency by Donald Trump
* Savings and loan crisis

==References==
;Notes
;Further reading
* Connie Bruck - &quot;The Predators&#x27; Ball: the inside story of Drexel Burnham and the rise of the junk bond raiders&quot;, New York: American Lawyer/Simon &amp; Schuster, 1988, Penguin paperback (updated), 1989.
* Fenton Bailey - &quot;Fall From Grace: The Untold Story of Michael Milken&quot;, Carol Publishing Corporation (October 1992), .
* James B. Stewart - &quot;Den of Thieves&quot;, New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1991, ().
* Ben Stein - &quot;A License to Steal: the Untold Story of Michael Milken and the Conspiracy to Bilk the Nation&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster, 1992
* Daniel R. Fischel - &quot;Payback: the conspiracy to destroy Michael Milken and his financial revolution&quot;, New York: HarperBusiness, 1995, (). 
* Robert Sobel - &quot;Dangerous Dreamers: The Financial Innovators from Charles Merrill to Michael Milken&quot;&#x27; (1993), ().

==External links==

* &quot;Taking America: How We Got from the First Hostile Takeover to Megamergers, Corporate Raiding, and Scandal&quot;, by Jeff Madrick, Beard Books, 2003. Retrieved March 10, 2019. 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q918376" start="0" end="21" title="Michael Milken" label="Michael Robert Milken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050279" start="130" end="146" title="High-yield debt" label="high-yield bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q177404" start="358" end="380" title="Drexel Burnham Lambert" label="Drexel Burnham Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q493078" start="541" end="568" title="richest people in the world" label="richest people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570975" start="612" end="628" title="securities fraud" label="securities fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="643" end="658" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="679" end="691" title="plea bargain" label="plea bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="942" end="961" title="securities industry" label="securities industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="969" end="1008" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="1171" end="1183" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090319" start="1354" end="1370" title="Milken Institute" label="Milken Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="1432" end="1440" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="1489" end="1504" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1651" end="1657" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190590" start="1668" end="1686" title="Encino, California" label="Encino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916715" start="1707" end="1729" title="Birmingham High School" label="Birmingham High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="1834" end="1840" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q653333" start="1851" end="1864" title="Michael Ovitz" label="Michael Ovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q187033" start="1879" end="1890" title="Sally Field" label="Sally Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q266820" start="1895" end="1909" title="Cindy Williams" label="Cindy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1942" end="1976" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="1984" end="1988" title="B.S." label="B.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="2028" end="2042" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512279" start="2067" end="2081" title="Sigma Alpha Mu" label="Sigma Alpha Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329269" start="2123" end="2137" title="Wharton School" label="Wharton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="2145" end="2171" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945358" start="2244" end="2263" title="W. Braddock Hickman" label="W. Braddock Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384538" start="2291" end="2324" title="Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland" label="Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577635" start="2449" end="2465" title="investment-grade" label="investment-grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994841" start="2552" end="2574" title="Harriman, Ripley and Company" label="Drexel Harriman Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="2588" end="2603" title="investment bank" label="investment bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920382" start="3318" end="3330" title="Convertible security" label="convertibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q177404" start="3577" end="3599" title="Drexel Burnham Lambert" label="Drexel Burnham Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054483" start="3692" end="3704" title="Century City" label="Century City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825781" start="3860" end="3892" title="Executive Life Insurance Company" label="Executive Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q52274864" start="3897" end="3908" title="Tom Spiegel" label="Tom Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="4085" end="4101" title="leveraged buyout" label="leveraged buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="4122" end="4145" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260952" start="4173" end="4182" title="greenmail" label="greenmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759551" start="4230" end="4253" title="highly confident letter" label="highly confident letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760499" start="4678" end="4691" title="George Gilder" label="George Gilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="5175" end="5187" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693242" start="5347" end="5353" title="Lowell Milken" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764736" start="5362" end="5380" title="Knowledge Universe" label="Knowledge Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410551" start="5461" end="5488" title="KinderCare Learning Centers" label="KinderCare Learning Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="5513" end="5523" title="child care" label="child care"/>
<link wikidata="Q6324302" start="5642" end="5650" title="Stride, Inc." label="K12 Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q49000954" start="5670" end="5703" title="education management organization" label="education management organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="5755" end="5769" title="charter school" label="charter school"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="6022" end="6056" title="Securities and Exchange Commission" label="Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495617" start="6526" end="6537" title="Fred Joseph" label="Fred Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129189" start="6700" end="6716" title="James B. Stewart" label="James B. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256514" start="6732" end="6746" title="Den of Thieves (Stewart book)" label="Den of Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485524" start="6877" end="6898" title="Harvey A. Silverglate" label="Harvey A. Silverglate"/>
<link wikidata="Q704997" start="7435" end="7446" title="Ivan Boesky" label="Ivan Boesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q400707" start="7639" end="7657" title="stock manipulation" label="stock manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="7804" end="7817" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889567" start="7824" end="7884" title="United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York" label="United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418478" start="8504" end="8561" title="Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act" label="Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q637156" start="9195" end="9203" title="warrant (finance)" label="warrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381804" start="9221" end="9240" title="Storer Broadcasting" label="Storer Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="9263" end="9286" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="9309" end="9325" title="leveraged buyout" label="leveraged buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="9357" end="9368" title="Underwriting" label="underwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199349" start="9689" end="9706" title="money market fund" label="money market fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="9769" end="9782" title="money manager" label="money manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q537098" start="10214" end="10228" title="fiduciary duty" label="fiduciary duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="10299" end="10305" title="bribery" label="bribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="10654" end="10665" title="Alford plea" label="Alford plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595259" start="11006" end="11024" title="federal grand jury" label="federal grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="11057" end="11069" title="Racket (crime)" label="racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="11222" end="11233" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703434" start="11599" end="11612" title="Terren Peizer" label="Terren Peizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050279" start="11629" end="11638" title="junk bond" label="junk bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570975" start="11886" end="11902" title="securities fraud" label="securities fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317382" start="11960" end="11968" title="Legal immunity" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="11979" end="11999" title="criminal prosecution" label="criminal prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="12004" end="12007" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431040" start="12263" end="12276" title="Schedule 13d" label="13d statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774490" start="12548" end="12561" title="broker-dealer" label="broker-dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693242" start="13569" end="13575" title="Lowell Milken" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149089" start="13817" end="13847" title="Columbia University Law School" label="Columbia University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13880" end="13898" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409750" start="14095" end="14105" title="Kimba Wood" label="Kimba Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139410" start="14136" end="14148" title="parole board" label="parole board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615206" start="14716" end="14735" title="Guggenheim Partners" label="Guggenheim Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="14905" end="14917" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q766866" start="14959" end="14973" title="Kevin McCarthy" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="14975" end="14989" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q319137" start="14991" end="15006" title="Sheldon Adelson" label="Sheldon Adelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q263322" start="15008" end="15019" title="Elaine Chao" label="Elaine Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="15025" end="15038" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="15772" end="15787" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="16087" end="16108" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="16421" end="16431" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090319" start="16439" end="16450" title="FasterCures" label="FasterCures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614920" start="16653" end="16665" title="Steven Knapp" label="Steven Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="16669" end="16697" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924442" start="16939" end="16945" title="Viacom Productions" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q725940" start="16955" end="16970" title="Sumner Redstone" label="Sumner Redstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570243" start="17095" end="17110" title="List of Ig Nobel Prize winners" label="first recipient"/>
<link wikidata="Q184253" start="17118" end="17126" title="Ig Nobel" label="Ig Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830797" start="17153" end="17171" title="Ayad Akhtar" label="Ayad Akhtar&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="17418" end="17430" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q301345" start="17516" end="17533" title="Northern Exposure" label="Northern Exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q59180" start="17617" end="17625" title="Diogenes" label="Diogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55394227" start="17951" end="18008" title="List of people granted executive clemency by Donald Trump" label="List of people granted executive clemency by Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="18011" end="18034" title="Savings and loan crisis" label="Savings and loan crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161832" start="18077" end="18089" title="Connie Bruck" label="Connie Bruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758035" start="18098" end="18122" title="The Predators&amp;#x27; Ball" label="The Predators&amp;#x27; Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="18230" end="18250" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129189" start="18425" end="18441" title="James B. Stewart" label="James B. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256514" start="18450" end="18464" title="Den of Thieves (Stewart book)" label="Den of Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q816605" start="18516" end="18525" title="Ben Stein" label="Ben Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="18634" end="18654" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349905" start="18814" end="18826" title="Robert Sobel" label="Robert Sobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174413" start="19088" end="19100" title="Jeff Madrick" label="Jeff Madrick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20815" wikidata="Q701221" url="?curid=20815" title="Mayerling">
<text>Mayerling is a small village (pop. 200) in Lower Austria belonging to the municipality of Alland in the district of Baden. It is situated on the Schwechat river, in the Wienerwald (&quot;Vienna woods&quot;), southwest of Vienna. From 1550, it was in the possession of the abbey of Heiligenkreuz.

==The Mayerling incident==

In 1886, Crown Prince Rudolf of Austria, only son of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Empress Elisabeth, and heir to the Austro-Hungarian crown, acquired the manor and transformed it into a hunting lodge. It was in this hunting lodge that, on 30 January 1889, he was found dead with his mistress, Baroness Mary Vetsera, apparently as a result of suicide. 

Exactly what happened is unknown, but on 31 July 2015, the Austrian National Library issued copies of Vetsera&#x27;s letters of farewell to her mother and other family members. The letters — written in Mayerling shortly before the deaths — state clearly and unambiguously that Mary Vetsera was preparing to commit suicide alongside Rudolf, out of love.

After the deaths of Rudolf and Vetsera, Emperor Franz Joseph, who wanted to endow a new church building, had the hunting lodge changed into a convent which then was settled by nuns of the Discalced Carmelite Order. The church was dedicated to Our Lady of Mount Carmel, the convent to Saint Joseph. A statue of the Virgin Mary in the Lady Chapel has the facial features of the Empress Elisabeth and a dagger pierces the Immaculate Heart of Mary. The position of the main cross in the chapel is supposed to be where the bed of Rudolf of Austria and Mary Vetsera were situated. Prayers are still said daily by the nuns for the repose of the souls of Rudolf and Mary.

A visitor center nearby the convent was opened in 2014. This center, the restored tea pavilion and some other rooms with objects from the 19th century now form the exhibition of the &quot;Museum Altes Jagdschloss Mayerling&quot;.

==References==
==External links==

* Travel to Austria
* The Mayerling-Information-Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q701221" start="0" end="9" title="Mayerling" label="Mayerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="43" end="56" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q665137" start="90" end="96" title="Alland" label="Alland"/>
<link wikidata="Q279874" start="116" end="121" title="Baden (district of Austria)" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q489972" start="145" end="154" title="Schwechat" label="Schwechat"/>
<link wikidata="Q251246" start="169" end="179" title="Vienna Woods" label="Wienerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="221" end="227" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q697221" start="281" end="294" title="Heiligenkreuz Abbey" label="Heiligenkreuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152923" start="334" end="364" title="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria" label="Crown Prince Rudolf of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="386" end="411" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150782" start="424" end="433" title="Elisabeth of Bavaria" label="Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="451" end="467" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424449" start="520" end="533" title="Jagdschloss" label="hunting lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q233074" start="627" end="648" title="Baroness Mary Vetsera" label="Baroness Mary Vetsera"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="676" end="683" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q304037" start="746" end="771" title="Austrian National Library" label="Austrian National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="1229" end="1254" title="Discalced Carmelites" label="Discalced Carmelite Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065053" start="1284" end="1308" title="Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="1325" end="1337" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800075" start="1374" end="1385" title="Lady Chapel" label="Lady Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q748124" start="1460" end="1484" title="Immaculate Heart of Mary" label="Immaculate Heart of Mary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20816" wikidata="Q901207" url="?curid=20816" title="Musical keyboard">
<text>A musical keyboard is the set of adjacent depressible levers or keys on a musical instrument. Keyboards typically contain keys for playing the twelve notes of the Western musical scale, with a combination of larger, longer keys and smaller, shorter keys that repeats at the interval of an octave. Pressing a key on the keyboard makes the instrument produce sounds—either by mechanically striking a string or tine (acoustic and electric piano, clavichord), plucking a string (harpsichord), causing air to flow through a pipe organ, striking a bell (carillon), or activating an electronic circuit (synthesizer, digital piano, electronic keyboard). Since the most commonly encountered keyboard instrument is the piano, the keyboard layout is often referred to as the piano keyboard or simply piano keys.

==Description==

The twelve notes of the Western musical scale are laid out with the lowest note on the left. The longer keys (for the seven &quot;natural&quot; notes of the C major scale: C, D, E, F, G, A, B) forward. Because these keys were traditionally covered in ivory they are often called the &quot;white notes&quot; or &quot;white keys&quot;. The keys for the remaining five notes—which are not part of the C major scale—(i.e., C/D, D/E, F/G, G/A, A/B) (see Sharp and Flat) are raised and shorter. Because these keys receive less wear, they are often made of black colored wood and called the &quot;black notes&quot; or &quot;black keys&quot;. Black keys form a pentatonic scale. The entire pattern repeats at the interval of an octave.

The arrangement of longer keys for C major with intervening, shorter keys for the intermediate semitones date to the 15th century. Many keyboard instruments dating from before the nineteenth century, such as harpsichords and pipe organs, have a keyboard with the colours of the keys reversed: the &quot;white notes&quot; are made of ebony and the &quot;black notes&quot; are covered with softer white bone. A few electric and electronic instruments from the 1960s and subsequent decades have also done this; Vox&#x27;s electronic organs of the 1960s, Farfisa&#x27;s FAST portable organs, Hohner&#x27;s Clavinet L, one version of the Korg Poly-800 synthesizer and Roland&#x27;s digital harpsichords.

Some 1960s electronic organs used reverse colors or gray sharps or naturals to indicate the lower part (or parts) of a single keyboard divided into two parts, each controlling a different registration or sound. Such keyboards accommodate melody and contrasting accompaniment without the expense of a second manual, and were a regular feature in Spanish and some English organs of the renaissance and baroque eras. The break was between middle C and C-sharp, or outside of Iberia between B and C. Broken keyboards reappeared in 1842 with the harmonium, the split occurring at E4/F4.

The reverse-colored keys on Hammond organs such as the B3, C3 and A100 are latch-style radio buttons for selecting pre-set sounds.

==Size and historical variation==
The chromatic range (also called &quot;&quot;) of keyboard instruments has tended to increase. Harpsichords often extended over five octaves (&gt;60 keys) in the 18th century, while most pianos manufactured since about 1870 have 88 keys. The lowest pitch (frequency: 27.5 Hz) of an 88-key piano is equivalent to a sub contrabass in the range name. Some modern pianos have even more notes (a Bösendorfer 290 &quot;Imperial&quot; has 97 keys, and a Stuart &amp; Sons model has 108 keys). While modern synthesizer keyboards commonly have either 61, 76 or 88 keys, small MIDI controllers are available with 25 keys (digital systems allow shifting octaves, pitch, and &quot;splitting&quot; ranges dynamically, which, in some cases, reduce the need for dedicated keys. However, smaller keyboards will typically limit which musical scores can be played). Organs normally have 61 keys per manual, though some spinet models have 44 or 49. An organ pedalboard is a keyboard with long pedals played by the organist&#x27;s feet. Pedalboards vary in size from 12 to 32 notes or 42 on a touring organ used by Cameron Carpenter.

In a typical keyboard layout, &quot;black note&quot; keys have uniform width, and &quot;white note&quot; keys have uniform width and uniform spacing at the front of the keyboard. In the larger gaps between the &quot;black&quot; keys, the width of the natural notes C, D and E differ slightly from the width of keys F, G, A and B. This allows close to uniform spacing of 12 keys per octave while maintaining uniformity of seven &quot;natural&quot; keys per octave.

Over the last three hundred years, the octave span distance found on historical keyboard instruments (organs, virginals, clavichords, harpsichords, and pianos) has ranged from as little as to as much as .

Modern piano keyboards ordinarily have an octave span of , resulting in the width of black keys averaging and white keys about at the base, disregarding space between keys. 

In recent years, there has been evidence of a correlation between pianists with smaller hand spans and hand or arm injuries. Several reduced-size standards have been proposed for these pianists. A 7/8 size ( octave span) keyboard was developed by Canadian Christopher Donison in the 1970s. This size, along with the 15/16 size ( octave span) and a smaller size (130 mm (5.1 in) octave span) have since been developed and marketed by Steinbuhler &amp; Company in Pennsylvania. These three sizes are registered as DS6.0, DS5.5 and DS5.1. The company was converted to the non-profit DS Standard Foundation in 2018. Hailun USA manufactures pianos in the two alternative DS6.0 and DS5.5 sizes through an agreement with the DS Standard Foundation. Since 2013, a global network of pianists, teachers and performing arts health professionals has been increasingly advocating for change to the &#x27;one size fits all&#x27; approach to piano keyboard manufacturing by major companies. This network is known as PASK (Pianists for Alternatively Sized Keyboards). U.S. pianist Hannah Reimann has promoted piano keyboards with narrower octave spans and has a U.S. patent on the apparatus and methods for modifying existing pianos to provide interchangeable keyboards of different sizes. Narrower keyboards are available from Steinway &amp; Sons USA in new grand pianos or as a retrofit to existing pianos.

There have been variations in the design of the keyboard to address technical and musical issues. The earliest designs of keyboards were based heavily on the notes used in Gregorian chant (the seven diatonic notes plus B-flat) and as such would often include B and B both as diatonic &quot;white notes&quot;, with the B at the leftmost side of the keyboard and the B at the rightmost. Thus, an octave would have &quot;eight&quot; &quot;white keys&quot; and only four &quot;black keys&quot;. The emphasis on these eight notes would continue for a few centuries after the &quot;seven and five&quot; system was adopted, in the form of the short octave: the eight aforementioned notes were arranged at the leftmost side of the keyboard, compressed in the keys between E and C (at the time, accidentals that low were very uncommon and thus not needed). During the sixteenth century, when instruments were often tuned in meantone temperament, some harpsichords were constructed with the G and E keys split into two. One portion of the G key operated a string tuned to G and the other operated a string tuned to A, similarly one portion of the E key operated a string tuned to E, the other portion operating a string tuned to D. This type of keyboard layout, known as the enharmonic keyboard, extended the flexibility of the harpsichord, enabling composers to write keyboard music calling for harmonies containing the so-called &quot;wolf&quot; fifth (G-sharp to E-flat), but without producing aural discomfort in the listeners (see Split sharp). The &quot;broken octave&quot;, a variation of the aforementioned short octave, similarly used split keys to add accidentals left out of the short octave. Other examples of variations in keyboard design include the Jankó keyboard and the chromatic keyboard systems on the chromatic button accordion and bandoneón.

===Electronic keyboards===
Simpler electronic keyboards have switches under each key. Depressing a key connects a circuit, which triggers tone generation. Most keyboards use a keyboard matrix circuit, in which 8 rows and 8 columns of wires cross — thus, 16 wires can provide 8 × 8 = 64 crossings, which the keyboard controller scans to determine which key was pressed. The problem with this system is that it provides only a crude binary on/off signal for each key. Better electronic keyboards employ two sets of slightly offset switches for each key. By determining the timing between the activation of the first and second switches, the velocity of a key press can be determined, greatly improving the performance dynamic of a keyboard. The best electronic keyboards have dedicated circuits for each key, providing polyphonic aftertouch.

Advanced electronic keyboards may provide hundreds of key touch levels and have 88 keys, as most pianos do.

==Playing techniques==
Despite their visual similarity, different keyboard instrument types require different techniques. The piano hammer mechanism produces a louder note the faster the key is pressed, while the harpsichord&#x27;s plectrum mechanism does not perceptibly vary the volume of the note with different touch on the keyboard. The pipe organ&#x27;s volume and timbre are controlled by the flow of air from the bellows and the stops preselected by the player. Players of these instruments therefore use different techniques to color the sound. An arranger keyboard may be preset to produce any of a range of voices as well as percussion and other accompaniments that respond to chords played by the left hand.
Even though the keyboard layout is simple and all notes are easily accessible, playing requires skill. A proficient player has undertaken much training to play accurately and in tempo. Beginners seldom produce a passable rendition of even a simple piece due to lack of . The sequences of movements of the player&#x27;s hands can be very complicated. Problems include wide-spanned chords, which can be difficult for people with small hands, chords requiring unusual hand positions that can initially be uncomfortable, and fast scales, trills and arpeggios.

Playing instruments with &quot;velocity sensitive&quot; (or &quot;dynamic&quot;) keyboards (i.e., that respond to varying playing velocity) may require finger independence, so that some fingers play &quot;harder&quot; while others play more softly. Pianists call this control of touch velocity &quot;voicing&quot; (not to be confused with a piano technician&#x27;s &quot;voicing&quot; of a piano by modifying the hardness of the hammers). Keyboardists speak of playing harder and softer, or with more or less force. This may accurately describe the player&#x27;s experience—but in the mechanics of the keyboard, velocity controls musical dynamics. The faster the player depresses the key, the louder the note. Players must learn to coordinate two hands and use them independently. Most music is written for two hands; typically the right hand plays the melody in the treble range, while the left plays an accompaniment of bass notes and chords in the bass range. Examples of music written for the left hand alone include several of Leopold Godowsky&#x27;s 53 Studies on Chopin&#x27;s Etudes, Maurice Ravel&#x27;s Piano Concerto for the Left Hand and Sergei Prokofiev&#x27;s Piano Concerto No. 4 for the left hand. In music that uses counterpoint technique, both hands play different melodies at the same time.

==Other uses==

A number of percussion instruments—such as the xylophone, marimba, vibraphone, or glockenspiel— have pitched elements arranged in the keyboard layout. Rather than pressing a key, the performer typically strikes each element (e.g., a metal or wood bar) with a mallet.

There are some examples of a musical keyboard layout used for non-musical devices. For example, some of the earliest printing telegraph machines used a layout similar to a piano keyboard.

==Keyboards with alternative sets of keys==
There are some rare variations of keyboards with more or fewer than 12 keys per octave, mostly used in microtonal music, after the discoveries and theoretical developments of musician and inventor Julián Carrillo (1875–1965).

Some free-reed instrument keyboards such as accordions and Indian harmoniums include microtones. Electronic music pioneer Pauline Oliveros played one of these. Egyptian belly-dance musicians like Hassam Ramzy use custom-tuned accordions so they can play traditional scales. The small Garmon accordion played in the Music of Azerbaijan sometimes has keys that can play microtones when a &quot;shift&quot; key is pressed.

==See also==
* Archicembalo, instrument with alternate keyboard with 36 keys
* Electronic keyboard
* Isomorphic keyboard
* Enharmonic keyboard
* Fokker organ, 31TET tuned organ with alternate keyboard
* Keyboard instrument
* Keytar
* Piano key frequencies

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q901207" start="2" end="18" title="Musical keyboard" label="musical keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="74" end="92" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="171" end="184" title="musical scale" label="musical scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="289" end="295" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="414" end="422" title="Piano" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="427" end="441" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q191823" start="443" end="453" title="clavichord" label="clavichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="475" end="486" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="519" end="529" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="548" end="556" title="carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="576" end="594" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="596" end="607" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508837" start="609" end="622" title="digital piano" label="digital piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343007" start="624" end="643" title="electronic keyboard" label="electronic keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="682" end="701" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboard instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="709" end="714" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q901207" start="764" end="778" title="Musical keyboard" label="piano keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q901207" start="789" end="799" title="Musical keyboard" label="piano keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="851" end="864" title="musical scale" label="musical scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022293" start="976" end="983" title="C major" label="C major"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="984" end="989" title="Musical scale" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="1070" end="1075" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542618" start="1268" end="1273" title="Sharp (music)" label="Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001368" start="1278" end="1282" title="Flat (music)" label="Flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="1472" end="1488" title="pentatonic scale" label="pentatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="1539" end="1545" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="2150" end="2158" title="Clavinet" label="Clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274997" start="2181" end="2194" title="Korg Poly-800" label="Korg Poly-800"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309439" start="2436" end="2448" title="Registration (organ)" label="registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978691" start="2555" end="2561" title="Manual (music)" label="manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q843813" start="2684" end="2692" title="middle C" label="middle C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267651" start="2697" end="2704" title="C♯ (musical note)" label="C-sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="2789" end="2798" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362265" start="2823" end="2825" title="Scientific pitch notation" label="E4"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="2859" end="2872" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q178352" start="2918" end="2930" title="radio button" label="radio button"/>
<link wikidata="Q664799" start="3388" end="3399" title="Bösendorfer" label="Bösendorfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626239" start="3444" end="3461" title="Stuart &amp;amp; Sons" label="Stuart &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758965" start="3936" end="3946" title="Pedal keyboard" label="pedalboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q922337" start="4687" end="4696" title="virginals" label="virginals"/>
<link wikidata="Q191823" start="4698" end="4708" title="clavichord" label="clavichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="4711" end="4722" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="4729" end="4734" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6023" end="6037" title="Hannah Reimann" label="Hannah Reimann"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="6524" end="6539" title="Gregorian chant" label="Gregorian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255256" start="6988" end="7000" title="short octave" label="short octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q846648" start="7267" end="7287" title="meantone temperament" label="meantone temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531756" start="7617" end="7636" title="enharmonic keyboard" label="enharmonic keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q996490" start="7779" end="7783" title="Wolf interval" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981433" start="7878" end="7889" title="Split sharp" label="Split sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107170" start="8106" end="8120" title="Jankó keyboard" label="Jankó keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087611" start="8163" end="8189" title="chromatic button accordion" label="chromatic button accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q215032" start="8194" end="8203" title="bandoneón" label="bandoneón"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398229" start="8382" end="8405" title="keyboard matrix (music)" label="keyboard matrix circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="9498" end="9508" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343007" start="9713" end="9730" title="Electronic keyboard" label="arranger keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="10054" end="10059" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="10256" end="10262" title="Chord (music)" label="chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="10402" end="10408" title="Musical scale" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q75859" start="10410" end="10416" title="Trill (music)" label="trills"/>
<link wikidata="Q506986" start="10421" end="10429" title="arpeggio" label="arpeggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="11045" end="11053" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="11286" end="11292" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11300" end="11306" title="Clef#Treble clef" label="treble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11384" end="11388" title="Clef#Bass clef" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q434328" start="11465" end="11481" title="Leopold Godowsky" label="Leopold Godowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143178" start="11489" end="11523" title="Studies on Chopin&amp;#x27;s Études" label="53 Studies on Chopin&amp;#x27;s Etudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="11525" end="11538" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190499" start="11546" end="11578" title="Piano Concerto for the Left Hand (Ravel)" label="Piano Concerto for the Left Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="11583" end="11599" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Sergei Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q230785" start="11607" end="11645" title="Piano Concerto No. 4 (Prokofiev)" label="Piano Concerto No. 4 for the left hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="11666" end="11678" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="11807" end="11816" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q220971" start="11818" end="11825" title="marimba" label="marimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q206987" start="11827" end="11837" title="vibraphone" label="vibraphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="11842" end="11854" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q724743" start="12019" end="12025" title="percussion mallet" label="mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245321" start="12145" end="12163" title="printing telegraph" label="printing telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045756" start="12364" end="12380" title="microtonal music" label="microtonal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q681634" start="12458" end="12473" title="Julián Carrillo" label="Julián Carrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="12532" end="12541" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="12554" end="12563" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q444857" start="12610" end="12626" title="Pauline Oliveros" label="Pauline Oliveros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494360" start="12772" end="12778" title="Garmon" label="Garmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q724104" start="12803" end="12822" title="Music of Azerbaijan" label="Music of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q633604" start="12924" end="12936" title="Archicembalo" label="Archicembalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343007" start="12988" end="13007" title="Electronic keyboard" label="Electronic keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931070" start="13010" end="13029" title="Isomorphic keyboard" label="Isomorphic keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531756" start="13032" end="13051" title="Enharmonic keyboard" label="Enharmonic keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q367575" start="13054" end="13066" title="Fokker organ" label="Fokker organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261142" start="13068" end="13073" title="31TET" label="31TET"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="13112" end="13131" title="Keyboard instrument" label="Keyboard instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112687" start="13134" end="13140" title="Keytar" label="Keytar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455597" start="13143" end="13164" title="Piano key frequencies" label="Piano key frequencies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20817" wikidata="Q858576" url="?curid=20817" title="Musical tuning">
<text>In music, there are two common meanings for tuning:
* Tuning practice, the act of tuning an instrument or voice.
* Tuning systems, the various systems of pitches used to tune an instrument, and their theoretical bases.

==Tuning practice==
Tuning is the process of adjusting the pitch of one or many tones from musical instruments to establish typical intervals between these tones. Tuning is usually based on a fixed reference, such as A = 440 Hz. The term &quot;out of tune&quot; refers to a pitch/tone that is either too high (sharp) or too low (flat) in relation to a given reference pitch. While an instrument might be in tune relative to its own range of notes, it may not be considered &#x27;in tune&#x27; if it does not match the chosen reference pitch. Some instruments become &#x27;out of tune&#x27; with temperature, humidity, damage, or simply time, and must be readjusted or repaired.

Different methods of sound production require different methods of adjustment:
* Tuning to a pitch with one&#x27;s voice is called &quot;matching pitch&quot; and is the most basic skill learned in ear training.
* Turning pegs to increase or decrease the tension on strings so as to control the pitch. Instruments such as the harp, piano, and harpsichord require a wrench to turn the tuning pegs, while others such as the violin can be tuned manually.
* Modifying the length or width of the tube of a wind instrument, brass instrument, pipe, bell, or similar instrument to adjust the pitch. In woodwind instruments, this is usually done by adjusting the instrument&#x27;s mouthpiece or neck to change the pitch. In brass instruments, this is usually done by moving a tuning slide.

The sounds of some instruments, notably unpitched percussion instrument such as cymbals, are of indeterminate pitch, and have irregular overtones not conforming to the harmonic series. See .

Tuning may be done aurally by sounding two pitches and adjusting one of them to match or relate to the other. A tuning fork or electronic tuning device may be used as a reference pitch, though in ensemble rehearsals often a piano is used (as its pitch cannot be adjusted for each performance). Symphony orchestras and concert bands usually tune to an A440 or a B♭, respectively, provided by the principal oboist or clarinetist, who tune to the keyboard if part of the performance.
When only strings are used, then the principal string (violinist) typically has sounded the tuning pitch, but some orchestras have used an electronic tone machine for tuning. Tuning can also be done through a prior recording; this method uses simultaneous audio.

Interference beats are used to objectively measure the accuracy of tuning. As the two pitches approach a harmonic relationship, the frequency of beating decreases. When tuning a unison or octave it is desired to reduce the beating frequency until it cannot be detected. For other intervals, this is dependent on the tuning system being used.

Harmonics may be used to facilitate tuning of strings that are not themselves tuned to the unison. For example, lightly touching the highest string of a cello at the middle (at a node) while bowing produces the same pitch as doing the same a third of the way down its second-highest string. The resulting unison is more easily and quickly judged than the quality of the perfect fifth between the fundamentals of the two strings.

===Open strings===


In music, the term open string refers to the fundamental note of the unstopped, full string.

The strings of a guitar are normally tuned to fourths (excepting the G and B strings in standard tuning, which are tuned to a third), as are the strings of the bass guitar and double bass. Violin, viola, and cello strings are tuned to fifths. However, non-standard tunings (called scordatura) exist to change the sound of the instrument or create other playing options.

To tune an instrument, often only one reference pitch is given. This reference is used to tune one string, to which the other strings are tuned in the desired intervals. On a guitar, often the lowest string is tuned to an E. From this, each successive string can be tuned by fingering the fifth fret of an already tuned string and comparing it with the next higher string played open. This works with the exception of the G string, which must be stopped at the fourth fret to sound B against the open B string above. Alternatively, each string can be tuned to its own reference tone.
Note that while the guitar and other modern stringed instruments with fixed frets are tuned in equal temperament, string instruments without frets, such as those of the violin family, are not. The violin, viola, and cello are tuned to beatless just perfect fifths and ensembles such as string quartets and orchestras tend to play in fifths based Pythagorean tuning or to compensate and play in equal temperament, such as when playing with other instruments such as the piano. For example, the cello, which is tuned down from A220, has three more strings (four total) and the just perfect fifth is about two cents off from the equal tempered perfect fifth, making its lowest string, C−, about six cents more flat than the equal tempered C.

This table lists open strings on some common string instruments and their standard tunings from low to high unless otherwise noted.
===Altered tunings===
Violin scordatura was employed in the 17th and 18th centuries by Italian and German composers, namely, Biagio Marini, Antonio Vivaldi, Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber (who in the &quot;Rosary Sonatas&quot; prescribes a great variety of scordaturas, including crossing the middle strings), Johann Pachelbel and Johann Sebastian Bach, whose &quot;Fifth Suite For Unaccompanied Cello&quot; calls for the lowering of the A string to G. In Mozart&#x27;s &quot;Sinfonia Concertante&quot; in E-flat major (K. 364), all the strings of the solo viola are raised one half-step, ostensibly to give the instrument a brighter tone so the solo violin does not overshadow it.

Scordatura for the violin was also used in the 19th and 20th centuries in works by Niccolò Paganini, Robert Schumann, Camille Saint-Saëns, Gustav Mahler, and Béla Bartók. In Saint-Saëns&#x27; &quot;Danse Macabre&quot;, the high string of the violin is lower half a tone to the E so as to have the most accented note of the main theme sound on an open string. In Mahler&#x27;s Symphony No. 4, the solo violin is tuned one whole step high to produce a harsh sound evoking Death as the Fiddler. In Bartók&#x27;s &quot;Contrasts&quot;, the violin is tuned G-D-A-E to facilitate the playing of tritones on open strings.

American folk violinists of the Appalachians and Ozarks often employ alternate tunings for dance songs and ballads. The most commonly used tuning is A-E-A-E. Likewise banjo players in this tradition use many tunings to play melody in different keys. A common alternative banjo tuning for playing in D is A-D-A-D-E. Many Folk guitar players also used different tunings from standard, such as D-A-D-G-A-D, which is very popular for Irish music.

A musical instrument that has had its pitch deliberately lowered during tuning is said to be &quot;down-tuned&quot; or &quot;tuned down&quot;. Common examples include the electric guitar and electric bass in contemporary heavy metal music, whereby one or more strings are often tuned lower than concert pitch. This is not to be confused with electronically changing the fundamental frequency, which is referred to as pitch shifting.

===Tuning of unpitched percussion instruments===

Many percussion instruments are &quot;tuned&quot; by the player, including pitched percussion instruments such as timpani and tabla, and unpitched percussion instruments such as the snare drum.

Tuning pitched percussion follows the same patterns as tuning any other instrument, but tuning unpitched percussion does not produce a specific pitch. For this reason and others, the traditional terms &quot;tuned percussion&quot; and &quot;untuned percussion&quot; are avoided in recent organology.

==Tuning systems==

A &quot;tuning system&quot; is the system used to define which tones, or pitches, to use when playing music. In other words, it is the choice of number and spacing of frequency values used.

Due to the psychoacoustic interaction of tones and timbres, various tone combinations sound more or less &quot;natural&quot; in combination with various timbres. For example, using harmonic timbres:
* A tone caused by a vibration twice the frequency of another (the ratio of 1:2) forms the natural sounding octave.
* A tone caused by a vibration three times the frequency of another (the ratio of 1:3) forms the natural sounding perfect twelfth, or perfect fifth (ratio of 2:3) when octave-reduced.
More complex musical effects can be created through other relationships.

The creation of a tuning system is complicated because musicians want to make music with more than just a few differing tones. As the number of tones is increased, conflicts arise in how each tone combines with every other. Finding a successful combination of tunings has been the cause of debate, and has led to the creation of many different tuning systems across the world. Each tuning system has its own characteristics, strengths and weaknesses.

===Systems for the twelve-note chromatic scale===

It is impossible to tune the twelve-note chromatic scale so that all intervals are pure. For instance, three pure major thirds stack up to , which at is nearly a quarter tone away from the octave (1200 cents). So there is no way to have both the octave and the major third in just intonation for all the intervals in the same twelve-tone system. Similar issues arise with the fifth , and the minor third , or any other choice of harmonic-series based pure intervals.

Many different compromise methods are used to deal with this, each with its own characteristics, and advantages and disadvantages.

The main ones are:
; Just intonation : 
: In just intonation, the frequencies of the scale notes are related to one another by simple numeric ratios, a common example of this being to define the ratios for the seven notes in a C major scale, plus the return to the tonic an octave up on the 8th (&quot;perfect 8th&quot; or octave). In this example, though many intervals are pure, the interval from D to A ( to ) is instead of the expected . The same issue occurs with most just intonation tunings. This can be dealt with to some extent using alternative pitches for the notes. Even that, however, is only a partial solution, as an example makes clear: If one plays the sequence C G D A E C in just intonation, using the intervals , , and , then the second C in the sequence is higher than the first by a syntonic comma of . This is the infamous &quot;comma pump&quot;. Each time around the comma pump, the pitch continues to spiral upwards. This shows that it is impossible to keep to any small fixed system of pitches if one wants to stack musical intervals this way. So, even with &quot;adaptive tuning&quot;, the musical context may sometimes require playing musical intervals that are not pure. Instrumentalists with the ability to vary the pitch of their instrument may micro-adjust some of the intervals naturally; there are also systems for adaptive tuning in software (microtuners). Harmonic fragment scales form a rare exception to this issue. In tunings such as , all the pitches are chosen from the harmonic series (divided by powers of 2 to reduce them to the same octave), so all the intervals are related to each other by simple numeric ratios. 
; Pythagorean tuning : 
: A Pythagorean tuning is technically both a type of just intonation and a zero-comma meantone tuning, in which the frequency ratios of the notes are all derived from the number ratio 3:2. Using this approach for example, the 12 notes of the Western chromatic scale would be tuned to the following ratios: Also called &quot;3-limit&quot; because it uses no prime factors other than 2 and 3, this Pythagorean system was of primary importance in Western musical development in the Medieval and Renaissance periods. As with nearly all just intonation systems, it has a wolf interval. In the example given, it is the interval between the and the (F to D, if one tunes the to C). The major and minor thirds are also impure, but at the time when this system was at its zenith, the third was considered a dissonance, so this was of no concern. See also: Shí-èr-lǜ.
; Meantone temperament : 
: A system of tuning that averages out pairs of ratios used for the same interval (such as 9:8 and 10:9). The best known form of this temperament is quarter-comma meantone, which tunes major thirds justly in the ratio of 5:4 and divides them into two whole tones of equal size – this is achieved by flattening the fifths of the Pythagorean system slightly (by a quarter of a syntonic comma). However, the fifth may be flattened to a greater or lesser degree than this and the tuning system retains the essential qualities of meantone temperament. Historical examples include  and meantone.
; Well temperament : 
: Any one of a number of systems where the ratios between intervals are unequal, but approximate to ratios used in just intonation. Unlike meantone temperament, the amount of divergence from just ratios varies according to the exact notes being tuned, so that C–E is probably tuned closer to a 5:4 ratio than, say, D–F. Because of this, well temperaments have no wolf intervals.
; Equal temperament : 
: The standard twelve-tone equal temperament is a special case of meantone temperament (extended eleventh-comma), in which the twelve notes are separated by logarithmically equal distances (100 cents): A harmonized C major scale in equal temperament (.ogg format, 96.9 KB). This is the most common tuning system used in Western music, and is the standard system used as a basis for tuning a piano. Since this scale divides an octave into twelve equal-ratio steps and an octave has a frequency ratio of two, the frequency ratio between adjacent notes is then the twelfth root of two, However, the octave can be divided into other than 12 equal divisions, some of which may be more harmonically pleasing, as far as thirds, sixths, and harmonic sevenths (via augmented sixths) are concerned, such as 19 equal temperament (extended meantone), 31 equal temperament (extended quarter-comma meantone) and 53 equal temperament (extended Pythagorean tuning).

Tuning systems that are not produced with exclusively just intervals are usually referred to as &quot;temperaments&quot;.

===Other scale systems===
* Natural overtone scale, a scale derived from the harmonic series
* Slendro, a pentatonic scale used in Indonesian gamelan music
* Pelog, the other main gamelan scale
* Harry Partch&#x27;s 43-tone scale
* Bohlen–Pierce scale
* Alpha, beta, delta, and gamma scales of Wendy Carlos
* Quarter tone scale
* Thirteenth Sound
* 19 equal temperament
* 22 equal temperament
* 31 equal temperament
* 53 equal temperament
* Schismatic temperament
* Miracle temperament
* Hexany

==See also==
* 3rd bridge
* &quot;Beauty in the Beast&quot;
* Chinese musicology
* Dynamic tonality
* Electronic tuner
* Ethnomusicology
* Mathematics of musical scales
* Mersenne&#x27;s laws
* Microtonal music
* Microtuner
* MIDI
* MIDI tuning standard
* Musical theory
* Open chord
* Physics of music
* Pseudo-octave
* Psychoacoustics
* Standard tuning
* Stretched tuning
* Vibrating string
* Xenharmonic
==References==
==Further reading==

*Barbour, J. Murray (1951). &quot;Tuning and Temperament: A Historical Survey&quot;. East Lansing: Michigan State College Press. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="3" end="8" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="44" end="50" title="Musical tuning" label="tuning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54" end="69" title="#Tuning practice" label="Tuning practice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115" end="129" title="#Tuning systems" label="Tuning systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="154" end="161" title="Pitch (music)" label="pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610210" start="437" end="447" title="A440 (pitch standard)" label="A = 440 Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542618" start="530" end="535" title="Sharp (music)" label="sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001368" start="549" end="553" title="Flat (music)" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124586" start="1096" end="1108" title="ear training" label="ear training"/>
<link wikidata="Q303790" start="1120" end="1124" title="Tuning peg" label="pegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="1153" end="1160" title="Tension (mechanics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="1320" end="1326" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173453" start="1399" end="1414" title="wind instrument" label="wind instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q180744" start="1416" end="1432" title="brass instrument" label="brass instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="1434" end="1438" title="Pan pipes" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="1440" end="1444" title="bell (instrument)" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q671722" start="1570" end="1580" title="Mouthpiece (woodwind)" label="mouthpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897283" start="1720" end="1751" title="unpitched percussion instrument" label="unpitched percussion instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="1760" end="1766" title="cymbal" label="cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="1776" end="1795" title="indeterminate pitch" label="indeterminate pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q263961" start="1848" end="1863" title="Harmonic series (music)" label="harmonic series"/>
<link wikidata="Q201898" start="1984" end="1995" title="tuning fork" label="tuning fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="2096" end="2101" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="2166" end="2184" title="Orchestra" label="Symphony orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="2190" end="2202" title="concert band" label="concert band"/>
<link wikidata="Q744346" start="2223" end="2224" title="A (musical note)" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418258" start="2233" end="2235" title="B♭ (musical note)" label="B♭"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="2277" end="2283" title="oboe" label="oboist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="2287" end="2295" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q829522" start="2630" end="2634" title="beat (acoustics)" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2933" end="2946" title="#Tuning systems" label="tuning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="2960" end="2968" title="Harmonic" label="Harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062658" start="3139" end="3143" title="node (physics)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="3414" end="3419" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="3522" end="3528" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028629" start="3551" end="3558" title="perfect fourth" label="fourths"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="3665" end="3676" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="3681" end="3692" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="3694" end="3700" title="Violin" label="Violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="3702" end="3707" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="3713" end="3718" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372854" start="3740" end="3746" title="perfect fifth" label="fifths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053427" start="3786" end="3796" title="scordatura" label="scordatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="4555" end="4572" title="equal temperament" label="equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q829522" start="4695" end="4703" title="beat (acoustics)" label="beatless"/>
<link wikidata="Q836135" start="4806" end="4824" title="Pythagorean tuning" label="Pythagorean tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610210" start="4985" end="4989" title="A440 (pitch standard)" label="A220"/>
<link wikidata="Q724178" start="5067" end="5072" title="Cent (music)" label="cents"/>
<link wikidata="Q369787" start="5457" end="5470" title="Biagio Marini" label="Biagio Marini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="5472" end="5487" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Antonio Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153455" start="5489" end="5515" title="Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber" label="Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76485" start="5638" end="5654" title="Johann Pachelbel" label="Johann Pachelbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="5659" end="5680" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q756843" start="5694" end="5729" title="Cello Suites (Bach)" label="Fifth Suite For Unaccompanied Cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="5784" end="5790" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074060" start="5804" end="5824" title="Sinfonia Concertante for Violin, Viola and Orchestra" label="Sinfonia Concertante"/>
<link wikidata="Q66075" start="6094" end="6110" title="Niccolò Paganini" label="Niccolò Paganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="6112" end="6127" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="6129" end="6148" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="6150" end="6163" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="6169" end="6180" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164860" start="6209" end="6222" title="Danse Macabre (Saint-Saëns)" label="Danse Macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q231216" start="6387" end="6401" title="Symphony No. 4 (Mahler)" label="Symphony No. 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="6659" end="6671" title="Appalachians" label="Appalachians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="6676" end="6682" title="Ozarks" label="Ozarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="7292" end="7309" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571955" start="7366" end="7379" title="concert pitch" label="concert pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="7441" end="7462" title="fundamental frequency" label="fundamental frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q60630" start="7488" end="7502" title="pitch shifting" label="pitch shifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198871" start="7630" end="7659" title="pitched percussion instrument" label="pitched percussion instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="7669" end="7676" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="7681" end="7686" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897283" start="7692" end="7723" title="unpitched percussion instrument" label="unpitched percussion instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="7737" end="7747" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="7894" end="7899" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198871" start="7957" end="7973" title="tuned percussion" label="tuned percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897283" start="7990" end="8008" title="untuned percussion" label="untuned percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q899293" start="8037" end="8047" title="organology" label="organology"/>
<link wikidata="Q738785" start="8133" end="8138" title="semitone" label="tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="8143" end="8148" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="8172" end="8177" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="8237" end="8246" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q557399" start="8272" end="8286" title="psychoacoustics" label="psychoacoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="8312" end="8318" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="8568" end="8574" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372854" start="8690" end="8705" title="perfect twelfth" label="perfect twelfth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372854" start="8710" end="8723" title="perfect fifth" label="perfect fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="9378" end="9393" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q189962" start="9406" end="9414" title="interval (music)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q752518" start="9958" end="9973" title="Just intonation" label="Just intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="10233" end="10266" title="octave" label="&amp;quot;perfect 8th&amp;quot; or octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075846" start="10742" end="10756" title="syntonic comma" label="syntonic comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q114363396" start="10789" end="10799" title="comma pump" label="comma pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434737" start="11315" end="11325" title="microtuner" label="microtuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q836135" start="11600" end="11618" title="Pythagorean tuning" label="Pythagorean tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075846" start="11702" end="11707" title="syntonic comma" label="comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q996490" start="12188" end="12201" title="wolf interval" label="wolf interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q716377" start="12469" end="12478" title="Shí-èr-lǜ" label="Shí-èr-lǜ"/>
<link wikidata="Q846648" start="12482" end="12502" title="Meantone temperament" label="Meantone temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269247" start="12655" end="12677" title="quarter-comma meantone" label="quarter-comma meantone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075846" start="12881" end="12895" title="syntonic comma" label="syntonic comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q846648" start="13031" end="13051" title="meantone temperament" label="meantone temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q301849" start="13081" end="13081" title="19 equal temperament" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q667313" start="13098" end="13114" title="Well temperament" label="Well temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q996490" start="13481" end="13494" title="wolf interval" label="wolf interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="13499" end="13516" title="Equal temperament" label="Equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="13677" end="13686" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305063" start="13902" end="13916" title="Piano tuning" label="tuning a piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919430" start="14082" end="14101" title="twelfth root of two" label="twelfth root of two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971526" start="14253" end="14269" title="harmonic seventh" label="harmonic seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q301849" start="14317" end="14337" title="19 equal temperament" label="19 equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261142" start="14359" end="14379" title="31 equal temperament" label="31 equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417163" start="14418" end="14438" title="53 equal temperament" label="53 equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080022" start="14573" end="14585" title="Musical temperament" label="temperaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q431434" start="14689" end="14696" title="Slendro" label="Slendro"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="14700" end="14716" title="pentatonic scale" label="pentatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q194492" start="14725" end="14749" title="Gamelan" label="Indonesian gamelan music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094781" start="14752" end="14757" title="Pelog" label="Pelog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671491" start="14790" end="14823" title="Harry Partch&amp;#x27;s 43-tone scale" label="Harry Partch&amp;#x27;s 43-tone scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q890803" start="14826" end="14845" title="Bohlen–Pierce scale" label="Bohlen–Pierce scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735173" start="14848" end="14853" title="Alpha scale" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897303" start="14855" end="14859" title="beta scale" label="beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254798" start="14861" end="14866" title="delta scale" label="delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520319" start="14872" end="14883" title="gamma scale" label="gamma scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q44641" start="14888" end="14900" title="Wendy Carlos" label="Wendy Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326914" start="14903" end="14921" title="Quarter tone scale" label="Quarter tone scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561879" start="14924" end="14940" title="Thirteenth Sound" label="Thirteenth Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q301849" start="14943" end="14963" title="19 equal temperament" label="19 equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114278" start="14966" end="14986" title="22 equal temperament" label="22 equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261142" start="14989" end="15009" title="31 equal temperament" label="31 equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417163" start="15012" end="15032" title="53 equal temperament" label="53 equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431501" start="15035" end="15057" title="Schismatic temperament" label="Schismatic temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872500" start="15060" end="15079" title="Miracle temperament" label="Miracle temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748840" start="15082" end="15088" title="Hexany" label="Hexany"/>
<link wikidata="Q529070" start="15105" end="15115" title="3rd bridge" label="3rd bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877948" start="15124" end="15143" title="Beauty in the Beast" label="Beauty in the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100846" start="15152" end="15170" title="Chinese musicology" label="Chinese musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319029" start="15173" end="15189" title="Dynamic tonality" label="Dynamic tonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298056" start="15192" end="15208" title="Electronic tuner" label="Electronic tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="15211" end="15226" title="Ethnomusicology" label="Ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237415" start="15229" end="15258" title="Mathematics of musical scales" label="Mathematics of musical scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820536" start="15261" end="15281" title="Mersenne&amp;#x27;s laws" label="Mersenne&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045756" start="15284" end="15300" title="Microtonal music" label="Microtonal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434737" start="15303" end="15313" title="Microtuner" label="Microtuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="15316" end="15320" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081149" start="15323" end="15343" title="MIDI Tuning Standard" label="MIDI tuning standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="15346" end="15360" title="Musical theory" label="Musical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436358" start="15363" end="15373" title="Open chord" label="Open chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q510293" start="15376" end="15392" title="Physics of music" label="Physics of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254438" start="15395" end="15408" title="Pseudo-octave" label="Pseudo-octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q557399" start="15411" end="15426" title="Psychoacoustics" label="Psychoacoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584980" start="15429" end="15444" title="Standard tuning" label="Standard tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355290" start="15447" end="15463" title="Stretched tuning" label="Stretched tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252739" start="15466" end="15482" title="Vibrating string" label="Vibrating string"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043468" start="15485" end="15496" title="Xenharmonic" label="Xenharmonic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20818" wikidata="Q1173900" url="?curid=20818" title="Musical">
<text>Musical is the adjective of music.

Musical may also refer to:
* Musical theatre, a performance art that combines songs, spoken dialogue, acting and dance
* Musical film and television, a genre of film and television that incorporates into the narrative songs sung by the characters
* MusicAL, an Albanian television channel
* Musical isomorphism, the canonical isomorphism between the tangent and cotangent bundles

==See also==
* Lists of musicals
* Music (disambiguation)
* Musica (disambiguation)
* Musicality, the ability to perceive music or to create music</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1173900" start="0" end="7" title="Musical" label="Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="28" end="33" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173900" start="36" end="43" title="Musical" label="Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="65" end="80" title="Musical theatre" label="Musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="157" end="169" title="Musical film" label="Musical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941391" start="285" end="292" title="MusicAL" label="MusicAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915448" start="327" end="346" title="Musical isomorphism" label="Musical isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647122" start="432" end="449" title="Lists of musicals" label="Lists of musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q226593" start="452" end="474" title="Music (disambiguation)" label="Music (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q239983" start="477" end="500" title="Musica (disambiguation)" label="Musica (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130159" start="503" end="513" title="Musicality" label="Musicality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20821" wikidata="Q208625" url="?curid=20821" title="Miller–Urey experiment">
<text>The Miller–Urey experiment, or Miller experiment, was an experiment in chemical synthesis carried out in 1952 that simulated the conditions thought at the time to be present in the atmosphere of the early, prebiotic Earth. It is seen as one of the first successful experiments demonstrating the synthesis of organic compounds from inorganic constituents in an origin of life scenario. The experiment used methane (CH4), ammonia (NH3), hydrogen (H2), in ratio 2:1:2, and water (H2O). Applying an electric arc (simulating lightning) resulted in the production of amino acids.

It is regarded as a groundbreaking experiment, and the classic experiment investigating the origin of life (abiogenesis). It was performed in 1952 by Stanley Miller, supervised by Nobel laureate Harold Urey at the University of Chicago, and published the following year. At the time, it supported Alexander Oparin&#x27;s and J. B. S. Haldane&#x27;s hypothesis that the conditions on the primitive Earth favored chemical reactions that synthesized complex organic compounds from simpler inorganic precursors.

After Miller&#x27;s death in 2007, scientists examining sealed vials preserved from the original experiments were able to show that more amino acids were produced in the original experiment than Miller was able to report with paper chromatography. While evidence suggests that Earth&#x27;s prebiotic atmosphere might have typically had a composition different from the gas used in the Miller experiment, prebiotic experiments continue to produce racemic mixtures of simple-to-complex organic compounds, including amino acids, under varying conditions. Moreover, researchers have shown that transient, hydrogen-rich atmospheres – conducive to Miller-Urey synthesis – would have occurred after large asteroid impacts on early Earth.

== History ==

=== Foundations of organic synthesis and the origin of life ===
Until the 19th century, there was considerable acceptance of the theory of spontaneous generation, the idea that &quot;lower&quot; animals, such as insects or rodents, arose from decaying matter. However, several experiments in the 19th century – particularly Louis Pasteur&#x27;s swan neck flask experiment in 1859 — disproved the theory that life arose from decaying matter. Charles Darwin published &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot; that same year, describing the mechanism of biological evolution. While Darwin never publicly wrote about the first organism in his theory of evolution, in a letter to Joseph Dalton Hooker, he speculated:But if (and oh what a big if) we could conceive in some warm little pond with all sorts of ammonia and phosphoric salts, light, heat, electricity etcetera present, that a protein compound was chemically formed, ready to undergo still more complex changes [...]&quot;

At this point, it was known that organic molecules could be formed from inorganic starting materials, as Friedrich Wöhler had described Wöhler synthesis of urea from ammonium cyanate in 1828. Several other early seminal works in the field of organic synthesis followed, including Alexander Butlerov&#x27;s synthesis of sugars from formaldehyde and Adolph Strecker&#x27;s synthesis of the amino acid alanine from acetaldehyde, ammonia, and hydrogen cyanide. In 1913, Walther Löb synthesized amino acids by exposing formamide to silent electric discharge, so scientists were beginning to produce the building blocks of life from simpler molecules, but these were not intended to simulate any prebiotic scheme or even considered relevant to origin of life questions.

But the scientific literature of the early 20th century contained speculations on the origin of life. In 1903, physicist Svante Arrhenius hypothesized that the first microscopic forms of life, driven by the radiation pressure of stars, could have arrived on Earth from space in the panspermia hypothesis. In the 1920s, Leonard Troland wrote about a primordial enzyme that could have formed by chance in the primitive ocean and catalyzed reactions, and Hermann J. Muller suggested that the formation of a gene with catalytic and autoreplicative properties could have set evolution in motion. Around the same time, Alexander Oparin&#x27;s and J. B. S. Haldane&#x27;s &quot;Primordial soup&quot; ideas were emerging, which hypothesized that a chemically-reducing atmosphere on early Earth would have been conducive to organic synthesis in the presence of sunlight or lightning, gradually concentrating the ocean with random organic molecules until life emerged. In this way, frameworks for the origin of life were coming together, but at the mid-20th century, hypotheses lacked direct experimental evidence.

=== Stanley Miller and Harold Urey ===

At the time of the Miller–Urey experiment, Harold Urey was a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Chicago who had a well-renowned career, including receiving the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1934 for his isolation of deuterium and leading efforts to use gaseous diffusion for uranium isotope enrichment in support of the Manhattan Project. In 1952, Urey postulated that the high temperatures and energies associated with large impacts in Earth&#x27;s early history would have provided an atmosphere of methane (CH4), water (H2O), ammonia (NH3), and hydrogen (H2), creating the reducing environment necessary for the Oparin-Haldane &quot;primordial soup&quot; scenario.

Stanley Miller arrived at the University of Chicago in 1951 to pursue a PhD under nuclear physicist Edward Teller, another prominent figure in the Manhattan Project. Miller began to work on how different chemical elements were formed in the early universe, but, after a year of minimal progress, Teller was to leave for California to establish Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and further nuclear weapons research. Miller, having seen Urey lecture on his 1952 paper, approached him about the possibility of a prebiotic synthesis experiment. While Urey initially discouraged Miller, he agreed to allow Miller to try for a year. By February 1953, Miller had mailed a manuscript as sole author reporting the results of his experiment to &quot;Science.&quot; Urey refused to be listed on the manuscript because he believed his status would cause others to underappreciate Miller&#x27;s role in designing and conducting the experiment and so encouraged Miller to take full credit for the work. Despite this the set-up is still most commonly referred to including both their names. After not hearing from &quot;Science&quot; for a few weeks, a furious Urey wrote to the editorial board demanding an answer, stating, &quot;If &quot;Science&quot; does not wish to publish this promptly we will send it to the &quot;Journal of the American Chemical Society&quot;.&quot; Miller&#x27;s manuscript was eventually published in &quot;Science&quot; in May 1953.

== Experiment ==

In the original 1952 experiment, methane (CH4), ammonia (NH3), and hydrogen (H2) were all sealed together in a 2:2:1 ratio (1 part H2) inside a sterile 5-L glass flask connected to a 500-mL flask half-full of water (H2O). The gas chamber was intended to represent Earth&#x27;s prebiotic atmosphere, while the water simulated an ocean. The water in the smaller flask was boiled such that water vapor entered the gas chamber and mixed with the &quot;atmosphere&quot;. A continuous electrical spark was discharged between a pair of electrodes in the larger flask. The spark passed through the mixture of gases and water vapor, simulating lightning. A condenser below the gas chamber allowed aqueous solution to accumulate into a U-shaped trap at the bottom of the apparatus, which was sampled.

After a day, the solution that had collected at the trap was pink, and after a week of continuous operation the solution was deep red and turbid, which Miller attributed to organic matter adsorbed onto colloidal silica. The boiling flask was then removed, and mercuric chloride (a poison) was added to prevent microbial contamination. The reaction was stopped by adding barium hydroxide and sulfuric acid, and evaporated to remove impurities. Using paper chromatography, Miller identified five amino acids present in the solution: glycine, α-alanine and β-alanine were positively identified, while aspartic acid and α-aminobutyric acid (AABA) were less certain, due to the spots being faint.

Materials and samples from the original experiments remained in 2017 under the care of Miller&#x27;s former student, Jeffrey Bada, a professor at the UCSD, Scripps Institution of Oceanography who also conducts origin of life research. , the apparatus used to conduct the experiment was on display at the Denver Museum of Nature and Science.

==Chemistry of experiment==
In 1957 Miller published research describing the chemical processes occurring inside his experiment. Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and aldehydes (e.g., formaldehyde) were demonstrated to form as intermediates early on in the experiment due to the electric discharge. This agrees with current understanding of atmospheric chemistry, as HCN can generally be produced from reactive radical species in the atmosphere that arise when CH4 and nitrogen break apart under ultraviolet (UV) light. Similarly, aldehydes can be generated in the atmosphere from radicals resulting from CH4 and H2O decomposition and other intermediates like methanol. Several energy sources in planetary atmospheres can induce these dissociation reactions and subsequent hydrogen cyanide or aldehyde formation, including lightning, ultraviolet light, and galactic cosmic rays.

For example, here is a set photochemical reactions of species in the Miller-Urey atmosphere that can result in formaldehyde:

: H2O + &quot;hv&quot; → H + OH
: CH4 + OH → CH3 + HOH
: CH3 + OH → CH3OH
: CH3OH + &quot;hv&quot; → CH2O (formaldehyde) + H2
A photochemical path to HCN from NH3 and CH4 is:

: NH3 + &quot;hv&quot; → NH2 + H
: NH2 + CH4 → NH3 + CH3
: NH2 + CH3 → CH5N
: CH5N + &quot;hv&quot; → HCN + 2H2

Other active intermediate compounds (acetylene, cyanoacetylene, etc.) have been detected in the aqueous solution of Miller–Urey-type experiments, but the immediate HCN and aldehyde production, the production of amino acids accompanying the plateau in HCN and aldehyde concentrations, and slowing of amino acid production rate during HCN and aldehyde depletion provided strong evidence that Strecker amino acid synthesis was occurring in the aqueous solution.

Strecker synthesis describes the reaction of an aldehyde, ammonia, and HCN to a simple amino acid through an aminoacetonitrile intermediate:

: CH2O + HCN + NH3 → NH2-CH2-CN (aminoacetonitrile) + H2O
: NH2-CH2-CN + 2H2O → NH3 + NH2-CH2-COOH (glycine)

Furthermore, water and formaldehyde can react via Butlerov&#x27;s reaction to produce various sugars like ribose.

The experiments showed that simple organic compounds, including the building blocks of proteins and other macromolecules, can abiotically be formed from gases with the addition of energy.

== Related experiments and follow-up work ==

=== Contemporary experiments ===

There were a few similar spark discharge experiments contemporaneous with Miller-Urey. An article in &quot;The New York Times&quot; (March 8, 1953) titled &quot;Looking Back Two Billion Years&quot; describes the work of Wollman M. MacNevin at Ohio State University, before the Miller Science paper was published in May 1953. MacNevin was passing 100,000V sparks through methane and water vapor and produced &quot;resinous solids&quot; that were &quot;too complex for analysis.&quot; Furthermore, K. A. Wilde submitted a manuscript to &quot;Science&quot; on December 15, 1952, before Miller submitted his paper to the same journal in February 1953. Wilde&#x27;s work, published on July 10, 1953, used voltages up to only 600V on a binary mixture of carbon dioxide (CO2) and water in a flow system and did not note any significant reduction products. According to some, the reports of these experiments explain why Urey was rushing Miller&#x27;s manuscript through &quot;Science&quot; and threatening to submit to the &quot;Journal of the American Chemical Society.&quot;

By introducing an experimental framework to test prebiotic chemistry, the Miller–Urey experiment paved the way for future origin of life research. In 1961, Joan Oró produced milligrams of the nucleobase adenine from a concentrated solution of HCN and NH3 in water. Oró found that several amino acids were also formed from HCN and ammonia under those conditions. Experiments conducted later showed that the other RNA and DNA nucleobases could be obtained through simulated prebiotic chemistry with a reducing atmosphere. Other researchers also began using UV-photolysis in prebiotic schemes, as the UV flux would have been much higher on early Earth. For example, UV-photolysis of water vapor with carbon monoxide was found to yield various alcohols, aldehydes, and organic acids. In the 1970s, Carl Sagan used Miller-Urey-type reactions to synthesize and experiment with complex organic particles dubbed &quot;tholins&quot;, which likely resemble particles formed in hazy atmospheres like that of Titan.

=== Modified Miller–Urey experiments ===
Much work has been done since the 1950s toward understanding how Miller-Urey chemistry behaves in various environmental settings. In 1983, testing different atmospheric compositions, Miller and another researcher repeated experiments with varying proportions of H2, H2O, N2, CO2 or CH4, and sometimes NH3. They found that the presence or absence of NH3 in the mixture did not significantly impact amino acid yield, as NH3 was generated from N2 during the spark discharge. Additionally, CH4 proved to be one of the most important atmospheric ingredients for high yields, likely due to its role in HCN formation. Much lower yields were obtained with more oxidized carbon species in place of CH4, but similar yields could be reached with a high H2/CO2 ratio. Thus, Miller-Urey reactions work in atmospheres of other compositions as well, depending on the ratio of reducing and oxidizing gases. More recently, Jeffrey Bada and H. James Cleaves, graduate students of Miller, hypothesized that the production of nitrites, which destroy amino acids, in CO2 and N2-rich atmospheres may explain low amino acids yields. In a Miller-Urey setup with a less-reducing (CO2 + N2 + H2O) atmosphere, when they added calcium carbonate to buffer the aqueous solution and ascorbic acid to inhibit oxidation, yields of amino acids greatly increased, demonstrating that amino acids can still be formed in more neutral atmospheres under the right geochemical conditions. In a prebiotic context, they argued that seawater would likely still be buffered and ferrous iron could inhibit oxidation.

In 1999, after Miller suffered a stroke, he donated the contents of his laboratory to Bada. In an old cardboard box, Bada discovered unanalyzed samples from modified experiments that Miller had conducted in the 1950s. In a &quot;volcanic&quot; apparatus, Miller had amended an aspirating nozzle to shoot a jet of steam into the reaction chamber. Using high-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, Bada&#x27;s lab analyzed old samples from a set of experiments Miller conducted with this apparatus and found some higher yields and a more diverse suite of amino acids. Bada speculated that injecting the steam into the spark could have split water into H and OH radicals, leading to more hydroxylated amino acids during Strecker synthesis. In a separate set of experiments, Miller added hydrogen sulfide (H2S) to the reducing atmosphere, and Bada&#x27;s analyses of the products suggested order-of-magnitude higher yields, including some amino acids with sulfur moieties.

A 2021 work highlighted the importance of the high-energy free electrons present in the experiment. It is these electrons that produce ions and radicals, and represent an aspect of the experiment that needs to be better understood.

After comparing Miller–Urey experiments conducted in borosilicate glassware with those conducted in Teflon apparatuses, a 2021 paper suggests that the glass reaction vessel acts as a mineral catalyst, implicating silicate rocks as important surfaces in prebiotic Miller-Urey reactions.

== Early Earth&#x27;s prebiotic atmosphere ==
While there is a lack of geochemical observations to constrain the exact composition of the prebiotic atmosphere, recent models point to an early &quot;weakly reducing&quot; atmosphere; that is, early Earth&#x27;s atmosphere was likely dominated by CO2 and N2 and not CH4 and NH3 as used in the original Miller–Urey experiment. This is explained, in part, by the chemical composition of volcanic outgassing. Geologist William Rubey was one of the first to compile data on gases emitted from modern volcanoes and concluded that they are rich in CO2, H2O, and likely N2, with varying amounts of H2, sulfur dioxide (SO2), and H2S. Therefore, if the redox state of Earth&#x27;s mantle — which dictates the composition of outgassing – has been constant since formation, then the atmosphere of early Earth was likely weakly reducing, but there are some arguments for a more-reducing atmosphere for the first few hundred million years.

While the prebiotic atmosphere could have had a different redox condition than that of the Miller–Urey atmosphere, the modified Miller–Urey experiments described in the above section demonstrated that amino acids can still be abiotically produced in less-reducing atmospheres under specific geochemical conditions. Furthermore, harkening back to Urey&#x27;s original hypothesis of a &quot;post-impact&quot; reducing atmosphere, a recent atmospheric modeling study has shown that an iron-rich impactor with a minimum mass around 4×1020 – 5×1021 kg would be enough to transiently reduce the entire prebiotic atmosphere, resulting in a Miller-Urey-esque H2-, CH4-, and NH3-dominated atmosphere that persists for millions of years. Previous work has estimated from the lunar cratering record and composition of Earth&#x27;s mantle that between four and seven such impactors reached the Hadean Earth.

A large factor controlling the redox budget of early Earth&#x27;s atmosphere is the rate of atmospheric escape of H2 after Earth&#x27;s formation. Atmospheric escape – common to young, rocky planets — occurs when gases in the atmosphere have sufficient kinetic energy to overcome gravitational energy. It is generally accepted that the timescale of hydrogen escape is short enough such that H2 made up &lt; 1% of the atmosphere of prebiotic Earth, but, in 2005, a hydrodynamic model of hydrogen escape predicted escape rates two orders of magnitude lower than previously thought, maintaining a hydrogen mixing ratio of 30%. A hydrogen-rich prebiotic atmosphere would have large implications for Miller-Urey synthesis in the Hadean and Archean, but later work suggests solutions in that model might have violated conservation of mass and energy. That said, during hydrodynamic escape, lighter molecules like hydrogen can &quot;drag&quot; heavier molecules with them through collisions, and recent modeling of xenon escape has pointed to a hydrogen atmospheric mixing ratio of at least 1% or higher at times during the Archean.

Taken together, the view that early Earth&#x27;s atmosphere was weakly reducing, with transient instances of highly-reducing compositions following large impacts is generally supported.

== Extraterrestrial sources of amino acids ==

Conditions similar to those of the Miller–Urey experiments are present in other regions of the Solar System, often substituting ultraviolet light for lightning as the energy source for chemical reactions. The Murchison meteorite that fell near Murchison, Victoria, Australia in 1969 was found to contain an amino acid distribution remarkably similar to Miller-Urey discharge products. Analysis of the organic fraction of the Murchison meteorite with Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry detected over 10,000 unique compounds, albeit at very low (ppb–ppm) concentrations. In this way, the organic composition of the Murchison meteorite is seen as evidence of Miller-Urey synthesis outside Earth.

Comets and other icy outer-solar-system bodies are thought to contain large amounts of complex carbon compounds (such as tholins) formed by processes akin to Miller-Urey setups, darkening surfaces of these bodies. Some argue that comets bombarding the early Earth could have provided a large supply of complex organic molecules along with the water and other volatiles, however very low concentrations of biologically-relevant material combined with uncertainty surrounding the survival of organic matter upon impact make this difficult to determine.

==Relevance to the origin of life==
The Miller–Urey experiment was proof that the building blocks of life could be synthesized abiotically from gases, and introduced a new prebiotic chemistry framework through which to study the origin of life. Simulations of protein sequences present in the last universal common ancestor (LUCA), or the last shared ancestor of all extant species today, show an enrichment in simple amino acids that were available in the prebiotic environment according to Miller-Urey chemistry. This suggests that the genetic code from which all life evolved was rooted in a smaller suite of amino acids than those used today. Thus, while creationist arguments focus on the fact that Miller–Urey experiments have not generated all 22 genetically-encoded amino acids, this does not actually conflict with the evolutionary perspective on the origin of life.

Another common criticism is that the racemic (containing both L and D enantiomers) mixture of amino acids produced in a Miller–Urey experiment is not exemplary of abiogenesis theories, as life on Earth today uses almost exclusively L-amino acids. While it is true that Miller-Urey setups produce racemic mixtures, the origin of homochirality is a separate area in origin of life research.

Recent work demonstrates that magnetic mineral surfaces like magnetite can be templates for the enantioselective crystallization of chiral molecules, including RNA precursors, due to the chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS) effect. Once an enantioselective bias is introduced, homochirality can then propagate through biological systems in various ways. In this way, enantioselective synthesis is not required of Miller-Urey reactions if other geochemical processes in the environment are introducing homochirality.

Finally, Miller-Urey and similar experiments primarily deal with the synthesis of monomers; polymerization of these building blocks to form peptides and other more complex structures is the next step of prebiotic chemistry schemes. Polymerization requires condensation reactions, which are thermodynamically unfavored in aqueous solutions because they expel water molecules. Scientists as far back as John Desmond Bernal in the late 1940s thus speculated that clay surfaces would play a large role in abiogenesis, as they might concentrate monomers. Several such models for mineral-mediated polymerization have emerged, such as the interlayers of layered double hydroxides like green rust over wet-dry cycles. Some scenarios for peptide formation have been proposed that are even compatible with aqueous solutions, such as the hydrophobic air-water interface and a novel &quot;sulfide-mediated α-aminonitrile ligation&quot; scheme, where amino acid precursors come together to form peptides. Polymerization of life&#x27;s building blocks is an active area of research in prebiotic chemistry.

==Amino acids identified==
Below is a table of amino acids produced and identified in the &quot;classic&quot; 1952 experiment, as analyzed by Miller in 1952 and more recently by Bada and collaborators with modern mass spectrometry, the 2008 re-analysis of vials from the volcanic spark discharge experiment, and the 2010 re-analysis of vials from the H2S-rich spark discharge experiment. While not all proteinogenic amino acids have been produced in spark discharge experiments, it is generally accepted that early life used a simpler set of prebiotically-available amino acids.

==References==
==External links==
* A simulation of the Miller–Urey Experiment along with a video Interview with Stanley Miller by Scott Ellis from CalSpace (UCSD)
* Origin-Of-Life Chemistry Revisited: Reanalysis of famous spark-discharge experiments reveals a richer collection of amino acids were formed.
* Miller–Urey experiment explained
* Miller experiment with Lego bricks
* &quot;Stanley Miller&#x27;s Experiment: Sparking the Building Blocks of Life&quot; on PBS
* The Miller-Urey experiment website
* Details of 2008 re-analysis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208625" start="4" end="26" title="Miller–Urey experiment" label="Miller–Urey experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q208625" start="31" end="48" title="Miller–Urey experiment" label="Miller experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q273499" start="71" end="89" title="chemical synthesis" label="chemical synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q112567794" start="181" end="221" title="Prebiotic atmosphere" label="atmosphere of the early, prebiotic Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="308" end="324" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="331" end="353" title="inorganic compound" label="inorganic constituents"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="360" end="374" title="Abiogenesis" label="origin of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="405" end="412" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="420" end="427" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="435" end="443" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="561" end="571" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="683" end="694" title="abiogenesis" label="abiogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130347" start="725" end="739" title="Stanley Miller" label="Stanley Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q179777" start="770" end="781" title="Harold Urey" label="Harold Urey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="789" end="810" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q44483" start="872" end="888" title="Alexander Oparin" label="Alexander Oparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="900" end="916" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="J. B. S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q898473" start="1310" end="1330" title="paper chromatography" label="paper chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q112567794" start="1374" end="1394" title="prebiotic atmosphere" label="prebiotic atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q467717" start="1530" end="1545" title="racemic mixture" label="racemic mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="1782" end="1790" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="1791" end="1798" title="impact event" label="impacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q178263" start="1970" end="1992" title="spontaneous generation" label="spontaneous generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="2155" end="2168" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11936221" start="2176" end="2191" title="swan neck flask" label="swan neck flask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="2272" end="2286" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="2303" end="2327" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="2378" end="2398" title="Evolution" label="biological evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q157501" start="2502" end="2522" title="Joseph Dalton Hooker" label="Joseph Dalton Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q58575" start="2911" end="2927" title="Friedrich Wöhler" label="Friedrich Wöhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721213" start="2942" end="2958" title="Wöhler synthesis" label="Wöhler synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="2962" end="2966" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q426321" start="2972" end="2988" title="ammonium cyanate" label="ammonium cyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153832" start="3048" end="3065" title="organic synthesis" label="organic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q315160" start="3086" end="3104" title="Alexander Butlerov" label="Alexander Butlerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q416211" start="3112" end="3131" title="Butlerov reaction" label="synthesis of sugars"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="3137" end="3149" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q63747" start="3154" end="3169" title="Adolph Strecker" label="Adolph Strecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q218642" start="3205" end="3212" title="alanine" label="alanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q61457" start="3218" end="3230" title="acetaldehyde" label="acetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="3232" end="3239" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="3245" end="3261" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q283917" start="3320" end="3329" title="formamide" label="formamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q58313" start="3333" end="3358" title="Dielectric barrier discharge" label="silent electric discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q80956" start="3692" end="3708" title="Svante Arrhenius" label="Svante Arrhenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q649036" start="3778" end="3796" title="radiation pressure" label="radiation pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q188458" start="3853" end="3863" title="panspermia" label="panspermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171398" start="3890" end="3905" title="Leonard T. Troland" label="Leonard Troland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="3931" end="3937" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839806" start="3978" end="3993" title="Paleoceanography" label="primitive ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q83598" start="4023" end="4040" title="Hermann Joseph Muller" label="Hermann J. Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="4075" end="4079" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994232" start="4242" end="4257" title="Primordial soup" label="Primordial soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306351" start="4311" end="4341" title="Reducing atmosphere" label="chemically-reducing atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="4778" end="4800" title="Professor of Chemistry" label="Professor of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="4808" end="4829" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="4886" end="4910" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="4940" end="4949" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138138" start="4977" end="4994" title="gaseous diffusion" label="gaseous diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="4999" end="5006" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q920846" start="5007" end="5025" title="Isotope separation" label="isotope enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="5044" end="5061" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="5144" end="5157" title="Impact event" label="large impacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="5225" end="5232" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="5253" end="5260" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="5272" end="5280" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="5475" end="5492" title="Nuclear physics" label="nuclear physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="5493" end="5506" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="5597" end="5613" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="5737" end="5775" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="6139" end="6146" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q898902" start="6706" end="6746" title="Journal of the American Chemical Society" label="Journal of the American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q112567794" start="7129" end="7162" title="Prebiotic atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s prebiotic atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q836722" start="7513" end="7522" title="Condenser (laboratory)" label="condenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="7553" end="7569" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q898574" start="7795" end="7801" title="turbid" label="turbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q906330" start="7859" end="7875" title="colloidal silica" label="colloidal silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q143200" start="7917" end="7934" title="Mercury(II) chloride" label="mercuric chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q407605" start="8027" end="8043" title="barium hydroxide" label="barium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="8048" end="8061" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q898473" start="8106" end="8126" title="paper chromatography" label="paper chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="8188" end="8195" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q218642" start="8197" end="8206" title="Alanine" label="α-alanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310919" start="8211" end="8220" title="Beta-Alanine" label="β-alanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178450" start="8255" end="8268" title="aspartic acid" label="aspartic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q285687" start="8273" end="8292" title="Alpha-Aminobutyric acid" label="α-aminobutyric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043099" start="8467" end="8479" title="Jeffrey Bada" label="Jeffrey Bada"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="8500" end="8504" title="University of California, San Diego" label="UCSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q604029" start="8506" end="8541" title="Scripps Institution of Oceanography" label="Scripps Institution of Oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330052" start="8654" end="8689" title="Denver Museum of Nature and Science" label="Denver Museum of Nature and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="8848" end="8856" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q287919" start="9022" end="9043" title="atmospheric chemistry" label="atmospheric chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="9092" end="9107" title="Radical (chemistry)" label="radical species"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="9177" end="9199" title="Ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet (UV) light"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="9341" end="9349" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="9538" end="9558" title="Cosmic ray" label="galactic cosmic rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q188651" start="9588" end="9601" title="Photochemistry" label="photochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303639" start="9701" end="9703" title="Photon energy" label="hv"/>
<link wikidata="Q133145" start="10013" end="10022" title="acetylene" label="acetylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q867172" start="10024" end="10038" title="cyanoacetylene" label="cyanoacetylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q899132" start="10366" end="10395" title="Strecker amino acid synthesis" label="Strecker amino acid synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48819" start="10545" end="10562" title="aminoacetonitrile" label="aminoacetonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="10678" end="10685" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q416211" start="10738" end="10762" title="Formose reaction" label="Butlerov&amp;#x27;s reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="10794" end="10800" title="ribose" label="ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11179" end="11197" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="11315" end="11336" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="11485" end="11490" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="11820" end="11834" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q783922" start="12299" end="12307" title="Joan Oró" label="Joan Oró"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="12335" end="12345" title="nucleobase" label="nucleobase"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="12346" end="12353" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="12555" end="12578" title="Nucleobase" label="RNA and DNA nucleobases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306351" start="12642" end="12661" title="reducing atmosphere" label="reducing atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="12698" end="12700" title="Ultraviolet" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16814" start="12701" end="12711" title="photolysis" label="photolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="12840" end="12855" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="12883" end="12891" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohols"/>
<link wikidata="Q421948" start="12908" end="12920" title="organic acid" label="organic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="12937" end="12947" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q73017" start="13053" end="13059" title="tholin" label="tholin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="13140" end="13145" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043099" start="14095" end="14107" title="Jeffrey L. Bada" label="Jeffrey Bada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="14388" end="14405" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="14409" end="14415" title="Buffer (chemistry)" label="buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193598" start="14441" end="14454" title="Chemistry of ascorbic acid" label="ascorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="14613" end="14624" title="Geochemistry" label="geochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="14722" end="14734" title="Iron(II) compounds" label="ferrous iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="14990" end="14998" title="Volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q381233" start="15113" end="15151" title="high-performance liquid chromatography" label="high-performance liquid chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="15156" end="15173" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q898497" start="15464" end="15476" title="Hydroxylation" label="hydroxylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="15563" end="15579" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="15731" end="15737" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23005640" start="15738" end="15746" title="Moiety (chemistry)" label="moieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422588" start="16035" end="16053" title="borosilicate glass" label="borosilicate glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="16082" end="16088" title="Polytetrafluoroethylene" label="Teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="16173" end="16181" title="Catalysis" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q382364" start="16733" end="16746" title="William Walden Rubey" label="William Rubey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="16912" end="16926" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q101949" start="16976" end="16995" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="17069" end="17078" title="Formation of Earth" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="17634" end="17645" title="Impact event" label="post-impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="18010" end="18032" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar cratering record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568436" start="18234" end="18252" title="atmospheric escape" label="atmospheric escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="18327" end="18340" title="Terrestrial planet" label="rocky planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="18395" end="18409" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297853" start="18422" end="18442" title="gravitational energy" label="gravitational energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038934" start="18606" end="18643" title="Hydrodynamic escape" label="hydrodynamic model of hydrogen escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q171293" start="18745" end="18757" title="mixing ratio" label="mixing ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q104460" start="18866" end="18872" title="Hadean" label="Hadean"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="18877" end="18884" title="Archean" label="Archean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="19150" end="19155" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="19598" end="19610" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="19631" end="19642" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164183" start="19712" end="19731" title="Murchison meteorite" label="Murchison meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328055" start="19747" end="19766" title="Murchison, Victoria" label="Murchison, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400735" start="19953" end="19994" title="Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance" label="Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="20072" end="20075" title="Parts per billion" label="ppb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="20076" end="20079" title="Parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="20222" end="20227" title="Comet" label="Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="20239" end="20268" title="Trans-Neptunian object" label="icy outer-solar-system bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q849168" start="21067" end="21097" title="last universal common ancestor" label="last universal common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="21433" end="21444" title="Creationism" label="creationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241589" start="21528" end="21559" title="Proteinogenic amino acid" label="genetically-encoded amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q467717" start="21688" end="21695" title="Racemic mixture" label="racemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q494483" start="21721" end="21731" title="enantiomer" label="enantiomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q903478" start="21979" end="21992" title="homochirality" label="homochirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="22071" end="22079" title="Magnetism" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="22102" end="22111" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q903429" start="22137" end="22153" title="enantioselective" label="enantioselective"/>
<link wikidata="Q284256" start="22154" end="22169" title="crystallization" label="crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="22201" end="22204" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q247994" start="22205" end="22215" title="Precursor (chemistry)" label="precursors"/>
<link wikidata="Q121775002" start="22228" end="22266" title="Chirality-induced spin selectivity" label="chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q178827" start="22642" end="22649" title="monomer" label="monomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="22652" end="22666" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="22700" end="22707" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q910058" start="22816" end="22837" title="condensation reaction" label="condensation reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q168362" start="22961" end="22980" title="J. D. Bernal" label="John Desmond Bernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078098" start="23207" end="23232" title="layered double hydroxides" label="layered double hydroxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401194" start="23238" end="23248" title="green rust" label="green rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q221205" start="23437" end="23444" title="sulfide" label="sulfide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20823" wikidata="Q1053304" url="?curid=20823" title="Majority function">
<text>In Boolean logic, the majority function (also called the [[median]] operator) is the Boolean function that evaluates to false when half or more arguments are false and true otherwise, i.e. the value of the function equals the value of the majority of the inputs.

== Boolean circuits ==

A &quot;majority gate&quot; is a logical gate used in circuit complexity and other applications of Boolean circuits. A majority gate returns true if and only if more than 50% of its inputs are true.

For instance, in a full adder, the carry output is found by applying a majority function to the three inputs, although frequently this part of the adder is broken down into several simpler logical gates.

Many systems have triple modular redundancy; they use the majority function for majority logic decoding to implement error correction.

A major result in circuit complexity asserts that the majority function cannot be computed by AC0 circuits of subexponential size.

== Properties ==

For any &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, and &quot;z&quot;, the ternary median operator 〈&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot;〉 satisfies the following equations.
* 〈&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, &quot;y&quot;〉 = &quot;y&quot;
* 〈&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot;〉 = 〈&quot;z&quot;, &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;〉
* 〈&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot;〉 = 〈&quot;x&quot;, &quot;z&quot;, &quot;y&quot;〉
* 〈〈&quot;x&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, &quot;y&quot;〉, &quot;w&quot;, &quot;z&quot;〉 = 〈&quot;x&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, 〈&quot;y&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, &quot;z&quot;〉〉

An abstract system satisfying these as axioms is a median algebra.

== Ties ==
Most applications deliberately force an odd number of inputs so they don&#x27;t have to deal with the question of what happens when exactly half the inputs are 0 and exactly half the inputs are 1. The few systems that calculate the majority function on an even number of inputs are often biased towards &quot;0&quot; – they produce &quot;0&quot; when exactly half the inputs are 0 – for example, a 4-input majority gate has a 0 output only when two or more 0&#x27;s appear at its inputs. In a few systems, the tie can be broken randomly.

== Monotone formulae for majority ==

For &quot;n&quot; = 1 the median operator is just the unary identity operation &quot;x&quot;. For &quot;n&quot; = 3 the ternary median operator can be expressed using conjunction and disjunction as &quot;xy&quot; + &quot;yz&quot; + &quot;zx&quot;.

For an arbitrary &quot;n&quot; there exists a monotone formula for majority of size O(&quot;n&quot;5.3). This is proved using probabilistic method. Thus, this formula is non-constructive.

Approaches exist for an explicit formula for majority of polynomial size:
* Take the median from a sorting network, where each compare-and-swap &quot;wire&quot; is simply an OR gate and an AND gate. The Ajtai–Komlós–Szemerédi (AKS) construction is an example.
* Combine the outputs of smaller majority circuits.
* Derandomize the Valiant proof of a monotone formula.

== See also ==
* Boolean algebra (structure)
* Boolean algebras canonically defined
* Boyer–Moore majority vote algorithm
* Majority problem (cellular automaton)

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="3" end="16" title="Boolean logic" label="Boolean logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053304" start="22" end="39" title="Majority function" label="majority function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053304" start="57" end="67" title="Majority function" label="[[median]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053304" start="68" end="76" title="Majority function" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q942353" start="85" end="101" title="Boolean function" label="Boolean function"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="321" end="333" title="logical gate" label="logical gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055112" start="342" end="360" title="circuit complexity" label="circuit complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q837479" start="387" end="403" title="Boolean circuits" label="Boolean circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q376953" start="507" end="517" title="Adder (electronics)" label="full adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998979" start="711" end="736" title="triple modular redundancy" label="triple modular redundancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738439" start="773" end="796" title="majority logic decoding" label="majority logic decoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="810" end="826" title="error correction" label="error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055112" start="847" end="865" title="circuit complexity" label="circuit complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q287954" start="923" end="935" title="AC0" label="AC0 circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806108" start="1613" end="1627" title="median algebra" label="median algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333679" start="2593" end="2613" title="probabilistic method" label="probabilistic method"/>
<link wikidata="Q646477" start="2755" end="2770" title="sorting network" label="sorting network"/>
<link wikidata="Q92843" start="2859" end="2864" title="Miklós Ajtai" label="Ajtai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116241" start="2865" end="2871" title="János Komlós (mathematician)" label="Komlós"/>
<link wikidata="Q439709" start="2872" end="2881" title="Endre Szemerédi" label="Szemerédi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="3041" end="3068" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra (structure)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943350" start="3071" end="3107" title="Boolean algebras canonically defined" label="Boolean algebras canonically defined"/>
<link wikidata="Q18814414" start="3110" end="3145" title="Boyer–Moore majority vote algorithm" label="Boyer–Moore majority vote algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738440" start="3148" end="3185" title="Majority problem (cellular automaton)" label="Majority problem (cellular automaton)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20824" wikidata="Q2428476" url="?curid=20824" title="Modula">
<text>The Modula programming language is a descendant of the Pascal language. It was developed in Switzerland, at ETH Zurich, in the mid-1970s by Niklaus Wirth, the same person who designed Pascal. The main innovation of Modula over Pascal is a module system, used for grouping sets of related declarations into program units; hence the name &quot;Modula&quot;. The language is defined in a report by Wirth called &quot;Modula. A language for modular multiprogramming&quot; published 1976.

Modula was first implemented by Wirth on a PDP-11. Very soon, other implementations followed, most importantly, the compilers developed for University of York Modula, and one at Philips Laboratories named PL Modula, which generated code for the LSI-11 microprocessor.

The development of Modula was discontinued soon after its publication. Wirth then concentrated his efforts on Modula&#x27;s successor, Modula-2.

== See also ==
* Modula-2
* Modula-2+
* Modula-3

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2428476" start="4" end="10" title="Modula" label="Modula"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="11" end="31" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="55" end="61" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="92" end="103" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="108" end="118" title="ETH Zurich" label="ETH Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q92604" start="140" end="153" title="Niklaus Wirth" label="Niklaus Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="239" end="252" title="Modular programming" label="module system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="528" end="534" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="601" end="609" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q967165" start="625" end="643" title="University of York" label="University of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="663" end="670" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="730" end="736" title="LSI-11" label="LSI-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="737" end="751" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q777358" start="889" end="897" title="Modula-2" label="Modula-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q777358" start="917" end="925" title="Modula-2" label="Modula-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942241" start="928" end="937" title="Modula-2+" label="Modula-2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928222" start="940" end="948" title="Modula-3" label="Modula-3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20825" wikidata="Q720353" url="?curid=20825" title="Monolithic kernel">
<text>A monolithic kernel is an operating system architecture with the entire operating system running in kernel space. The monolithic model differs from other architectures such as the microkernel in that it alone defines a high-level virtual interface over computer hardware. A set of primitives or system calls implement all operating system services such as process management, concurrency, and memory management. 

Device drivers can be added to the kernel as loadable kernel modules.

==Examples==
*Some Unix-like operating system kernels 
**Linux kernel
**FreeBSD
**OpenBSD
**NetBSD
*MS-DOS
*Windows 9x

==Loadable modules==
Modular operating systems such as OS-9 and most modern monolithic-kernel operating systems such as OpenVMS, Linux, FreeBSD, NetBSD, DragonFly BSD, Solaris, and AIX can dynamically load (and unload) executable kernel modules at runtime. 

This modularity of the operating system is at the binary (image) level and not at the architecture level. Modular monolithic operating systems are not to be confused with the architectural level of modularity inherent in server-client operating systems (and its derivatives sometimes marketed as hybrid kernel) which use microkernels and servers (not to be mistaken for modules or daemons).

Practically speaking, dynamically loading modules is simply a more flexible way of handling the operating system image at runtime—as opposed to rebooting with a different operating system image. The modules allow easy extension of the operating systems&#x27; capabilities as required. Dynamically loadable modules incur a small overhead when compared to building the module into the operating system image. 

However, in some cases, loading modules dynamically (as-needed) helps to keep the amount of code running in kernel space to a minimum; for example, to minimize operating system footprint for embedded devices or those with limited hardware resources. Namely, an unloaded module need not be stored in scarce random access memory.

==See also==
*Exokernel
*Hybrid kernel
*Kernel (operating system)
*Microkernel
*Nanokernel
*Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate

== References ==
&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="2" end="19" title="Monolithic kernel" label="monolithic kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="26" end="42" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="43" end="55" title="software architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="100" end="112" title="kernel space" label="kernel space"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="180" end="191" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="253" end="270" title="computer hardware" label="computer hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q722192" start="295" end="306" title="system call" label="system call"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="356" end="374" title="Process (computing)" label="process management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414548" start="376" end="387" title="Concurrency (computer science)" label="concurrency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="393" end="410" title="memory management" label="memory management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739331" start="459" end="481" title="loadable kernel module" label="loadable kernel module"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="504" end="513" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="542" end="554" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="557" end="564" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="567" end="574" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="577" end="583" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="585" end="591" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q609733" start="593" end="603" title="Windows 9x" label="Windows 9x"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008085" start="660" end="664" title="OS-9" label="OS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="725" end="732" title="OpenVMS" label="OpenVMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="734" end="739" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="741" end="748" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="750" end="756" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q751067" start="758" end="771" title="DragonFly BSD" label="DragonFly BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="773" end="780" title="Oracle Solaris" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="786" end="789" title="AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739331" start="835" end="849" title="loadable kernel module" label="kernel modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="1085" end="1098" title="microkernel" label="server-client"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141941" start="1160" end="1173" title="hybrid kernel" label="hybrid kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="1773" end="1785" title="kernel space" label="kernel space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="1971" end="1991" title="random access memory" label="random access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350261" start="2008" end="2017" title="Exokernel" label="Exokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141941" start="2019" end="2032" title="Hybrid kernel" label="Hybrid kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="2034" end="2059" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="Kernel (operating system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="2061" end="2072" title="Microkernel" label="Microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="2074" end="2084" title="Nanokernel" label="Nanokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576065" start="2086" end="2111" title="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate" label="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20826" wikidata="Q219903" url="?curid=20826" title="Mithraism">
<text>Mithraism, also known as the Mithraic mysteries or the Cult of Mithras, was a Iranian mystery religion centered on the god Mithras. Although inspired by Iranian worship of the Zoroastrian divinity (&quot;yazata&quot;) Mithra, the Roman Mithras was linked to a new and distinctive imagery, and the degree of continuity between Persian and Greco-Roman practice remains debatable.
The mysteries were popular among the Imperial Roman army from the 1st to the 4th century AD.

Worshippers of Mithras had a complex system of seven grades of initiation and communal ritual meals. Initiates called themselves &quot;syndexioi&quot;, those &quot;united by the handshake&quot;. They met in dedicated &quot;mithraea&quot; (singular &quot;mithraeum&quot;), underground temples that survive in large numbers. The cult appears to have had its centre in Rome, and was popular throughout the western half of the empire, as far south as Roman Africa and Numidia, as far east as Roman Dacia, as far north as Roman Britain, and to a lesser extent in Roman Syria in the east.

Mithraism is viewed as a rival of early Christianity. In the 4th century, Mithraists faced persecution from Christians, and the religion was subsequently suppressed and eliminated in the Roman Empire by the end of the century.

Numerous archaeological finds, including meeting places, monuments, and artifacts, have contributed to modern knowledge about Mithraism throughout the Roman Empire.
The iconic scenes of Mithras show him being born from a rock, slaughtering a bull, and sharing a banquet with the god Sol (the Sun). About 420 sites have yielded materials related to the cult. Among the items found are about 1000 inscriptions, 700 examples of the bull-killing scene (tauroctony), and about 400 other monuments.
It has been estimated that there would have been at least 680 mithraea in the city of Rome. No written narratives or theology from the religion survive; limited information can be derived from the inscriptions and brief or passing references in Greek and Latin literature. Interpretation of the physical evidence remains problematic and contested.

==Name==
The term &quot;Mithraism&quot; is a modern convention. Writers of the Roman era referred to it by phrases such as &quot;Mithraic mysteries&quot;, &quot;mysteries of Mithras&quot; or &quot;mysteries of the Persians&quot;.
Modern sources sometimes refer to the Greco-Roman religion as &quot;Roman Mithraism&quot; or &quot;Western Mithraism&quot; to distinguish it from Persian worship of Mithra.

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;Mithras&quot; (Latin, equivalent to Greek &quot;Μίθρας&quot;) is a form of &quot;Mithra&quot;, the name of an old, pre-Zoroastrian, and, later on, Zoroastrian, god – a relationship understood by Mithraic scholars since the days of Franz Cumont.
An early example of the Greek form of the name is in a 4th century BCE work by Xenophon, the &quot;Cyropaedia&quot;, which is a biography of the Persian king Cyrus the Great.

The exact form of a Latin or classical Greek word varies due to the grammatical process of inflection. There is archaeological evidence that in Latin worshippers wrote the nominative form of the god&#x27;s name as &quot;Mithras&quot;. Porphyry&#x27;s Greek text &quot;De Abstinentia&quot; (), has a reference to the now-lost histories of the Mithraic mysteries by Euboulus and Pallas, the wording of which suggests that these authors treated the name &quot;Mithra&quot; as an indeclinable foreign word.

Related deity-names in other languages include:
* Vedic Sanskrit Mitra, &quot;friend, friendship,&quot; as the name of a god praised in the &quot;Rigveda&quot;.
In Sanskrit, &quot;mitra&quot; is an unusual name of the sun god, mostly known as &quot;Surya&quot; or &quot;Aditya&quot;, however.
* the form &quot;mi-it-ra-&quot;, found in an inscribed peace treaty between the Hittites and the kingdom of Mitanni, from about 1400 BCE. between the king of the Hittites, Subbiluliuma, and the king of Mitanni, Mativaza. ... It is the earliest evidence of Mithras in Asia Minor.

Iranian &quot;Mithra&quot; and Sanskrit &quot;Mitra&quot; are believed to come from the Indo-Iranian word &quot;mitrás&quot;, meaning &quot;contract, agreement, covenant&quot;.

Modern historians have different conceptions about whether these names refer to the same god or not. John R. Hinnells has written of Mitra / Mithra / Mithras as a single deity, worshipped in several different religions. On the other hand, David Ulansey considers the bull-slaying Mithras to be a new god who began to be worshipped in the 1st century BCE, and to whom an old name was applied.

Mary Boyce, an academic researcher on ancient Iranian religions, writes that even though Roman Mithraism seems to have had less Iranian content than ancient Romans or modern historians used to think, nonetheless &quot;as the name &quot;Mithras&quot; alone shows, this content was of some importance&quot;.

==Iconography==
Much about the cult of Mithras is only known from reliefs and sculptures. There have been many attempts to interpret this material.

Mithras-worship in the Roman Empire was characterized by images of the god slaughtering a bull. Other images of Mithras are found in the Roman temples, for instance Mithras banqueting with Sol, and depictions of the birth of Mithras from a rock. But the image of bull-slaying (tauroctony) is always in the central niche. Textual sources for a reconstruction of the theology behind this iconography are very rare. (See section Interpretations of the bull-slaying scene below.)

The practice of depicting the god slaying a bull seems to be specific to Roman Mithraism. According to David Ulansey, this is &quot;perhaps the most important example&quot; of evident difference between Iranian and Roman traditions: &quot;... there is no evidence that the Iranian god Mithra ever had anything to do with killing a bull.&quot;

=== Bull-slaying scene ===

In every mithraeum the centerpiece was a representation of Mithras killing a sacred bull, an act called the tauroctony.
The image may be a relief, or free-standing, and side details may be present or omitted. The centre-piece is Mithras clothed in Anatolian costume and wearing a Phrygian cap; who is kneeling on the exhausted bull, holding it by the nostrils with his left hand, and stabbing it with his right. As he does so, he looks over his shoulder towards the figure of Sol. A dog and a snake reach up towards the blood. A scorpion seizes the bull&#x27;s genitals. A raven is flying around or is sitting on the bull. One or three ears of wheat are seen coming out from the bull&#x27;s tail, sometimes from the wound. The bull was often white. The god is sitting on the bull in an unnatural way with his right leg constraining the bull&#x27;s hoof and the left leg is bent and resting on the bull&#x27;s back or flank. The two torch-bearers on either side are dressed like Mithras: &quot;Cautes&quot; with his torch pointing up, and &quot;Cautopates&quot; with his torch pointing down. Sometimes Cautes and Cautopates carry shepherds&#x27; crooks instead of torches.

The event takes place in a cavern, into which Mithras has carried the bull, after having hunted it, ridden it and overwhelmed its strength. Sometimes the cavern is surrounded by a circle, on which the twelve signs of the zodiac appear. Outside the cavern, top left, is Sol the sun, with his flaming crown, often driving a quadriga. A ray of light often reaches down to touch Mithras. At the top right is Luna, with her crescent moon, who may be depicted driving a biga.

In some depictions, the central tauroctony is framed by a series of subsidiary scenes to the left, top and right, illustrating events in the Mithras narrative; Mithras being born from the rock, the water miracle, the hunting and riding of the bull, meeting Sol who kneels to him, shaking hands with Sol and sharing a meal of bull-parts with him, and ascending to the heavens in a chariot. In some instances, as is the case in the stucco icon at Santa Prisca Mithraeum in Rome, the god is shown heroically nude. Some of these reliefs were constructed so that they could be turned on an axis. On the back side was another, more elaborate feasting scene. This indicates that the bull killing scene was used in the first part of the celebration, then the relief was turned, and the second scene was used in the second part of the celebration.
Besides the main cult icon, a number of mithraea had several secondary tauroctonies, and some small portable versions, probably meant for private devotion, have also been found.

===Banquet===
The second most important scene after the tauroctony in Mithraic art is the so-called banquet scene. The banquet scene features Mithras and Sol Invictus banqueting on the hide of the slaughtered bull. On the specific banquet scene on the Fiano Romano relief, one of the torchbearers points a caduceus towards the base of an altar, where flames appear to spring up. Robert Turcan has argued that since the caduceus is an attribute of Mercury, and in mythology Mercury is depicted as a psychopomp, the eliciting of flames in this scene is referring to the dispatch of human souls and expressing the Mithraic doctrine on this matter. Turcan also connects this event to the tauroctony: The blood of the slain bull has soaked the ground at the base of the altar, and from the blood the souls are elicited in flames by the caduceus.

===Birth from a rock===

Mithras is depicted as being born from a rock. He is shown as emerging from a rock, already in his youth, with a dagger in one hand and a torch in the other. He is nude, standing with his legs together, and is wearing a Phrygian cap.

In some variations, he is shown coming out of the rock as a child, and in one holds a globe in one hand; sometimes a thunderbolt is seen. There are also depictions in which flames are shooting from the rock and also from Mithras&#x27; cap. One statue had its base perforated so that it could serve as a fountain, and the base of another has the mask of a water god. Sometimes Mithras also has other weapons such as bows and arrows, and there are also animals such as dogs, serpents, dolphins, eagles, other birds, lions, crocodiles, lobsters and snails around. On some reliefs, there is a bearded figure identified as the water god Oceanus, and on some there are the gods of the four winds. In these reliefs, the four elements could be invoked together. Sometimes Victoria, Luna, Sol, and Saturn also seem to play a role. Saturn in particular is often seen handing over the dagger or short sword to Mithras, used later in the tauroctony.

In some depictions, Cautes and Cautopates are also present; sometimes they are depicted as shepherds.

On some occasions, an amphora is seen, and a few instances show variations like an egg birth or a tree birth. Some interpretations show that the birth of Mithras was celebrated by lighting torches or candles.

===Lion-headed figure===

One of the most characteristic and poorly-understood features of the Mysteries is the naked lion-headed figure often found in Mithraic temples, named by the modern scholars with descriptive terms such as &quot;leontocephaline&quot; (lion-headed) or &quot;leontocephalus&quot; (lion-head).

His body is a naked man&#x27;s, entwined by a serpent (or two serpents, like a caduceus), with the snake&#x27;s head often resting on the lion&#x27;s head. The lion&#x27;s mouth is often open. He is usually represented as having four wings, two keys (sometimes a single key), and a sceptre in his hand. Sometimes the figure is standing on a globe inscribed with a diagonal cross. On the figure from the Ostia Antica Mithraeum (left, CIMRM 312), the four wings carry the symbols of the four seasons, and a thunderbolt is engraved on his chest. At the base of the statue are the hammer and tongs of Vulcan and Mercury&#x27;s cock and wand (caduceus). A rare variation of the same figure is also found with a human head and a lion&#x27;s head emerging from its chest.

Although animal-headed figures are prevalent in contemporary Egyptian and Gnostic mythological representations, no exact parallel to the Mithraic leontocephaline figure has been found.

Based on dedicatory inscriptions for altars, the name of the figure is conjectured to be &quot;Arimanius&quot;, a Latinized form of the name &quot;Ahriman&quot;
– perplexingly, a demonic figure in the Zoroastrian pantheon. Arimanius is known from inscriptions to have been a god in the Mithraic cult as seen, for example, in images from the &quot;Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae&quot; (CIMRM) such as CIMRM 222 from Ostia, CIMRM 369 from Rome, and CIMRM 1773 and 1775 from Pannonia.

Some scholars identify the lion-man as Aion, or Zurvan, or Cronus, or Chronos, while others assert that it is a version of the Zoroastrian Ahriman or the more benign Vedic Aryaman.
Although the exact identity of the lion-headed figure is debated by scholars, it is largely agreed that the god is associated with time and seasonal change.
==Rituals and worship==
According to M.J. Vermaseren and C.C. van Essen, the Mithraic New Year and the birthday of Mithras was on 25 December.
Beck disagreed strongly.
Clauss states:
: &quot;The Mithraic Mysteries had no public ceremonies of its own. The festival of &quot;Natalis Invicti&quot;, held on 25 December, was a general festival of the Sun, and by no means specific to the Mysteries of Mithras.&quot;

Mithraic initiates were required to swear an oath of secrecy and dedication.

Mithras was thought to be a &quot;warrior hero&quot; similar to Greek heroes.

===Mithraic catechism===
Apparently, some grade rituals involved the recital of a catechism, wherein the initiate was asked a series of questions pertaining to the initiation symbolism and had to reply with specific answers. An example of such a catechism, apparently pertaining to the Leo grade, was discovered in a fragmentary Egyptian papyrus (Papyrus Berolinensis 21196), and reads:

Almost no Mithraic scripture or first-hand account of its highly secret rituals survives; with the exception of the aforementioned oath and catechism, and the document known as the Mithras Liturgy, from 4th century Egypt, whose status as a Mithraist text has been questioned by scholars including Franz Cumont. The walls of mithraea were commonly whitewashed, and where this survives, it tends to carry extensive repositories of graffiti; and these, together with inscriptions on Mithraic monuments, form the main source for Mithraic texts.

===Feasting===
It is clear from the archaeology of numerous mithraea that most rituals were associated with feasting – as eating utensils and food residues are almost invariably found. These tend to include both animal bones and also very large quantities of fruit residues. The presence of large amounts of cherry-stones in particular would tend to confirm mid-summer (late June, early July) as a season especially associated with Mithraic festivities. The Virunum &quot;album&quot;, in the form of an inscribed bronze plaque, records a Mithraic festival of commemoration as taking place on 26 June 184. Beck argues that religious celebrations on this date are indicative of special significance being given to the summer solstice; but this time of the year coincides with ancient recognition of the solar maximum at midsummer, when iconographically identical holidays such as Litha, Saint John&#x27;s Eve, and Jāņi are also observed.

For their feasts, Mithraic initiates reclined on stone benches arranged along the longer sides of the mithraeumtypically there might be room for 15 to 30 diners, but very rarely many more than 40 men. Counterpart dining rooms, or &quot;triclinia&quot;, were to be found above ground in the precincts of almost any temple or religious sanctuary in the Roman empire, and such rooms were commonly used for their regular feasts by Roman &#x27;clubs&#x27;, or &quot;collegia&quot;. Mithraic feasts probably performed a very similar function for Mithraists as the &quot;collegia&quot; did for those entitled to join them; indeed, since qualification for Roman &quot;collegia&quot; tended to be restricted to particular families, localities or traditional trades, Mithraism may have functioned in part as providing clubs for the unclubbed. The size of the mithraeum is not necessarily an indication of the size of the congregation.

===Altars, iconography, and suspected doctrinal diversity===
Each mithraeum had several altars at the further end, underneath the representation of the tauroctony, and also commonly contained considerable numbers of subsidiary altars, both in the main mithraeum chamber and in the ante-chamber or narthex. These altars, which are of the standard Roman pattern, each carry a named dedicatory inscription from a particular initiate, who dedicated the altar to Mithras &quot;in fulfillment of his vow&quot;, in gratitude for favours received.

Burned residues of animal entrails are commonly found on the main altars, indicating regular sacrificial use, though mithraea do not commonly appear to have been provided with facilities for ritual slaughter of sacrificial animals (a highly specialised function in Roman religion), and it may be presumed that a mithraeum would have made arrangements for this service to be provided for them in co-operation with the professional &quot;victimarius&quot; of the civic cult. Prayers were addressed to the Sun three times a day, and Sunday was especially sacred.

It is doubtful whether Mithraism had a monolithic and internally consistent doctrine.
It may have varied from location to location. The iconography is relatively coherent. It had no predominant sanctuary or cultic centre; and, although each mithraeum had its own officers and functionaries, there was no central supervisory authority. In some mithraea, such as that at Dura Europos, wall paintings depict prophets carrying scrolls, but no named Mithraic sages are known, nor does any reference give the title of any Mithraic scripture or teaching. It is known that initiates could transfer with their grades from one Mithraeum to another.

===Mithraeum===


Temples of Mithras are sunk below ground, windowless, and very distinctive. In cities, the basement of an apartment block might be converted; elsewhere they might be excavated and vaulted over, or converted from a natural cave. Mithraic temples are common in the empire; although unevenly distributed, with considerable numbers found in Rome, Ostia, Numidia, Dalmatia, Britain and along the Rhine/Danube frontier, while being somewhat less common in Greece, Egypt, and Syria. According to Walter Burkert, the secret character of Mithraic rituals meant that Mithraism could only be practiced within a Mithraeum. Some new finds at Tienen show evidence of large-scale feasting and suggest that the mystery religion may not have been as secretive as was generally believed.

For the most part, mithraea tend to be small, externally undistinguished, and cheaply constructed; the cult generally preferring to create a new centre rather than expand an existing one. The mithraeum represented the cave to which Mithras carried and then killed the bull; and where stone vaulting could not be afforded, the effect would be imitated with lath and plaster. They are commonly located close to springs or streams; fresh water appears to have been required for some Mithraic rituals, and a basin is often incorporated into the structure. There is usually a narthex or ante-chamber at the entrance, and often other ancillary rooms for storage and the preparation of food. The extant mithraea present us with actual physical remains of the architectural structures of the sacred spaces of the Mithraic cult. &quot;Mithraeum&quot; is a modern coinage and mithraists referred to their sacred structures as &quot;speleum&quot; or &quot;antrum&quot; (cave), &quot;crypta&quot; (underground hallway or corridor), &quot;fanum&quot; (sacred or holy place), or even &quot;templum&quot; (a temple or a sacred space).

In their basic form, mithraea were entirely different from the temples and shrines of other cults. In the standard pattern of Roman religious precincts, the temple building functioned as a house for the god, who was intended to be able to view, through the opened doors and columnar portico, sacrificial worship being offered on an altar set in an open courtyard – potentially accessible not only to initiates of the cult, but also to &quot;colitores&quot; or non-initiated worshippers. Mithraea were the antithesis of this.

===Degrees of initiation===
In the &quot;Suda&quot; under the entry &quot;Mithras&quot;, it states that &quot;No one was permitted to be initiated into them (the mysteries of Mithras), until he should show himself holy and steadfast by undergoing several graduated tests.&quot; Gregory Nazianzen refers to the &quot;tests in the mysteries of Mithras&quot;.

There were seven grades of initiation into Mithraism, which are listed by St. Jerome. Manfred Clauss states that the number of grades, seven, must be connected to the planets. A mosaic in the Mithraeum of Felicissimus, Ostia Antica depicts these grades, with symbolic emblems that are connected either to the grades or are symbols of the planets. The grades also have an inscription beside them commending each grade into the protection of the different planetary gods. In ascending order of importance, the initiatory grades were:

Elsewhere, as at Dura-Europos, Mithraic graffiti survive giving membership lists, in which initiates of a mithraeum are named with their Mithraic grades. At Virunum, the membership list or &quot;album sacratorum&quot; was maintained as an inscribed plaque, updated year by year as new members were initiated. By cross-referencing these lists it is possible to track some initiates from one mithraeum to another; and also speculatively to identify Mithraic initiates with persons on other contemporary lists such as military service rolls and lists of devotees of non-Mithraic religious sanctuaries. Names of initiates are also found in the dedication inscriptions of altars and other cult objects.

Clauss noted in 1990 that overall, only about 14% of Mithraic names inscribed before 250 CE identify the initiate&#x27;s grade – and hence questioned the traditional view that all initiates belonged to one of the seven grades. Clauss argues that the grades represented a distinct class of priests, &quot;sacerdotes&quot;. Gordon maintains the former theory of Merkelbach and others, especially noting such examples as Dura where all names are associated with a Mithraic grade. Some scholars maintain that practice may have differed over time, or from one Mithraeum to another.

The highest grade, &quot;pater&quot;, is by far the most common one found on dedications and inscriptions – and it would appear not to have been unusual for a mithraeum to have several men with this grade. The form &quot;pater patrum&quot; (father of fathers) is often found, which appears to indicate the &quot;pater&quot; with primary status. There are several examples of persons, commonly those of higher social status, joining a mithraeum with the status &quot;pater&quot; – especially in Rome during the &#x27;pagan revival&#x27; of the 4th century. It has been suggested that some mithraea may have awarded honorary &quot;pater&quot; status to sympathetic dignitaries.

The initiate into each grade appears to have been required to undertake a specific ordeal or test, involving exposure to heat, cold or threatened peril. An &#x27;ordeal pit&#x27;, dating to the early 3rd century, has been identified in the mithraeum at Carrawburgh. Accounts of the cruelty of the emperor Commodus describes his amusing himself by enacting Mithraic initiation ordeals in homicidal form. By the later 3rd century, the enacted trials appear to have been abated in rigor, as &#x27;ordeal pits&#x27; were floored over.

Admission into the community was completed with a handshake with the &quot;pater&quot;, just as Mithras and Sol shook hands. The initiates were thus referred to as &quot;syndexioi&quot; (those united by the handshake). The term is used in an inscription by Proficentius
and derided by Firmicus Maternus in &quot;De errore profanarum religionum&quot;,
a 4th century Christian work attacking paganism. In ancient Iran, taking the right hand was the traditional way of concluding a treaty or signifying some solemn understanding between two parties.

===Ritual re-enactments===

Activities of the most prominent deities in Mithraic scenes, Sol and Mithras, were imitated in rituals by the two most senior officers in the cult&#x27;s hierarchy, the &quot;Pater&quot; and the &quot;Heliodromus&quot;. The initiates held a sacramental banquet, replicating the feast of Mithras and Sol.

Reliefs on a cup found in Mainz appear to depict a Mithraic initiation. On the cup, the initiate is depicted as being led into a location where a &quot;Pater&quot; would be seated in the guise of Mithras with a drawn bow. Accompanying the initiate is a mystagogue, who explains the symbolism and theology to the initiate. The Rite is thought to re-enact what has come to be called the &#x27;Water Miracle&#x27;, in which Mithras fires a bolt into a rock, and from the rock now spouts water.

Roger Beck has hypothesized a third processional Mithraic ritual, based on the Mainz cup and Porphyrys. This scene, called &#x27;Procession of the Sun-Runner&#x27;, shows the &quot;Heliodromus&quot; escorted by two figures representing Cautes and Cautopates (see below) and preceded by an initiate of the grade &quot;Miles&quot; leading a ritual enactment of the solar journey around the mithraeum, which was intended to represent the cosmos.

Consequently, it has been argued that most Mithraic rituals involved a re-enactment by the initiates of episodes in the Mithras narrative, a narrative whose main elements were: birth from the rock, striking water from stone with an arrow shot, the killing of the bull, Sol&#x27;s submission to Mithras, Mithras and Sol feasting on the bull, the ascent of Mithras to heaven in a chariot. A noticeable feature of this narrative (and of its regular depiction in surviving sets of relief carvings) is the absence of female personages (the sole exception being Luna watching the 
tauroctony in the upper corner opposite Helios, and the presumable presence of Venus as patroness of the &quot;nymphus&quot; grade).

===Membership===
Only male names appear in surviving inscribed membership lists. Historians including Cumont and Richard Gordon have concluded that the cult was for men only.

The ancient scholar Porphyry refers to female initiates in Mithraic rites.
The early 20th-century historian A.S. Geden wrote that this may be due to a misunderstanding. According to Geden, while the participation of women in the ritual was not unknown in the Eastern cults, the predominant military influence in Mithraism makes it unlikely in this instance. It has recently been suggested by David Jonathan that &quot;Women were involved with Mithraic groups in at least some locations of the empire.&quot;

Soldiers were strongly represented amongst Mithraists, and also merchants, customs officials and minor bureaucrats. Few, if any, initiates came from leading aristocratic or senatorial families until the &#x27;pagan revival&#x27; of the mid-4th century; but there were always considerable numbers of freedmen and slaves.

===Ethics===
Clauss suggests that a statement by Porphyry, that people initiated into the Lion grade must keep their hands pure from everything that brings pain and harm and is impure, means that moral demands were made upon members of congregations.

A passage in the &quot;Caesares&quot; of Julian the Apostate refers to &quot;commandments of Mithras&quot;.
Tertullian, in his treatise &quot;On the Military Crown&quot; records that Mithraists in the army were officially excused from wearing celebratory coronets on the basis of the Mithraic initiation ritual that included refusing a proffered crown, because &quot;their only crown was Mithras&quot;.

==History and development==

===Mithras before the Roman Mysteries===

According to the archaeologist Maarten Vermaseren, evidence from Commagene from the 1st century BCE demonstrates the &quot;reverence paid to Mithras&quot; but does not refer to &quot;the mysteries&quot;.
In the colossal statuary erected by King Antiochus I (69–34 BCE) at Mount Nemrut, Mithras is shown beardless, wearing a Phrygian cap
(or the similar headdress – a Persian tiara), in Iranian (Parthian) clothing, and was originally seated on a throne alongside other deities and the king himself.
On the back of the thrones there is an inscription in Greek, which includes the compound name &quot;Apollo-Mithras-Helios&quot; in the genitive case (&quot;Ἀπόλλωνος Μίθρου Ἡλίου&quot;).
Vermaseren also reports about a Mithras cult in Fayum in the 3rd century BCE

R.D. Barnett has argued that the royal seal of King Saussatar of the Mitanni from depicts a tauroctonous Mithras.

===Beginnings of Roman Mithraism===
The origins and spread of the Mysteries have been intensely debated among scholars and there are radically differing views on these issues. According to Clauss, mysteries of Mithras were not practiced until the 1st century CE. According to Ulansey, the earliest evidence for the Mithraic mysteries places their appearance in the middle of the 1st century BCE: The historian Plutarch says that in 67 BCE the pirates of Cilicia (a province on the southeastern coast of Asia Minor, that provided sea access to adjacent Commagene) were practicing &quot;secret rites&quot; of Mithras.
According to C.M. Daniels, whether any of this relates to the origins of the mysteries is unclear.
The unique underground temples or mithraea appear suddenly in the archaeology in the last quarter of the 1st century CE.

====Earliest archaeology====
Inscriptions and monuments related to the Mithraic Mysteries are catalogued in a two volume work by Maarten J. Vermaseren, the &quot;Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae&quot; (or CIMRM). The earliest monument showing Mithras slaying the bull is thought to be CIMRM 593, found in Rome. There is no date, but the inscription tells us that it was dedicated by a certain Alcimus, steward of T. Claudius Livianus. Vermaseren and Gordon believe that this Livianus is a certain Livianus who was commander of the Praetorian guard in 101 CE, which would give an earliest date of 98–99 CE.

Five small terracotta plaques of a figure holding a knife over a bull have been excavated near Kerch in the Crimea, dated by Beskow and Clauss to the second half of the 1st century BCE, and by Beck to 50 BCE – 50 CE. These may be the earliest tauroctonies, if they are accepted to be a depiction of Mithras.
The bull-slaying figure wears a Phrygian cap, but is described by Beck and Beskow as otherwise unlike standard depictions of the tauroctony. Another reason for not connecting these artifacts with the Mithraic Mysteries is that the first of these plaques was found in a woman&#x27;s tomb.

An altar or block from near SS. Pietro e Marcellino on the Esquiline in Rome was inscribed with a bilingual inscription by an Imperial freedman named T. Flavius Hyginus, probably between 80 and 100 CE. It is dedicated to &quot;Sol Invictus Mithras&quot;.

CIMRM 2268 is a broken base or altar from Novae/Steklen in Moesia Inferior, dated 100 CE, showing Cautes and Cautopates.

Other early archaeology includes the Greek inscription from Venosia by Sagaris &quot;actor&quot; probably from 100–150 CE; the Sidon &quot;cippus&quot; dedicated by Theodotus priest of Mithras to Asclepius, 140–141 CE; and the earliest military inscription, by C. Sacidius Barbarus, centurion of XV Apollinaris, from the bank of the Danube at Carnuntum, probably before 114 CE.

According to C.M. Daniels, the Carnuntum inscription is the earliest Mithraic dedication from the Danube region, which along with Italy is one of the two regions where Mithraism first struck root.
The earliest dateable mithraeum outside Rome dates from 148 CE. The Mithraeum at Caesarea Maritima is the only one in Palestine and the date is inferred.

====Earliest cult locations====
According to Roger Beck, the attested locations of the Roman cult in the earliest phase () are as follows:

Mithraea datable from pottery
* Nida/Heddernheim III (Germania Sup.)
* Mogontiacum (Germania Sup.)
* Pons Aeni (Noricum)
* Caesarea Maritima (Judaea)
Datable dedications
* Nida/Heddernheim I (Germania Sup.) (CIMRM 1091, 1092, &amp; 1098)
* Carnuntum III (Pannonia Sup.) (CIMRM 1718)
* Novae (Moesia Inf.) (CIMRM 2268 &amp; 2269)
* Oescus (Moesia Inf.) (CIMRM 2250)
* Rome (CIMRM 362, 593, &amp; 594)

===Classical literature about Mithras and the Mysteries===

According to Boyce, the earliest literary references to the mysteries are by the Latin poet Statius, about 80 CE, and Plutarch (c. 100 CE).

====Statius====
The Thebaid () an epic poem by Statius, pictures Mithras in a cave, wrestling with something that has horns.
The context is a prayer to the god Phoebus.
The cave is described as &quot;persei&quot;, which in this context is usually translated &quot;Persian&quot;. According to the translator J.H. Mozley it literally means &quot;Persean&quot;, referring to &quot;Perses&quot;, the son of Perseus and Andromeda, this Perses being the ancestor of the Persians according to Greek legend.

====Justin Martyr====
Writing in approximately 145 CE, the early Christian apologist Justin Martyr charges the cult of Mithras with imitating the Christian communion,
:Which the wicked devils have imitated in the mysteries of Mithras, commanding the same things to be done. For, that bread and a cup of water are placed, with certain incantations, in the mystic rites of one who is being initiated, you either know or can learn.

====Plutarch====
The Greek biographer Plutarch (46–127 CE) says that &quot;secret mysteries ... of Mithras&quot; were practiced by the pirates of Cilicia, the coastal province in the southeast of Anatolia, who were active in the 1st century BCE: &quot;They likewise offered strange sacrifices; those of Olympus I mean; and they celebrated certain secret mysteries, among which those of Mithras continue to this day, being originally instituted by them.&quot;
He mentions that the pirates were especially active during the Mithridatic wars (between the Roman Republic and King Mithridates VI of Pontus) in which they supported the king. The association between Mithridates and the pirates is also mentioned by the ancient historian Appian.
The 4th century commentary on Vergil by Servius says that Pompey settled some of these pirates in Calabria in southern Italy.

====Dio Cassius====
The historian Dio Cassius (2nd to 3rd century CE) tells how the name of Mithras was spoken during the state visit to Rome of Tiridates I of Armenia, during the reign of Nero. (Tiridates was the son of Vonones II of Parthia, and his coronation by Nero in 66 CE confirmed the end of a war between Parthia and Rome.) Dio Cassius writes that Tiridates, as he was about to receive his crown, told the Roman emperor that he revered him &quot;as Mithras&quot;. Roger Beck thinks it possible that this episode contributed to the emergence of Mithraism as a popular religion in Rome.

====Porphyry====

The philosopher Porphyry (3rd–4th century CE) gives an account of the origins of the Mysteries in his work &quot;De antro nympharum&quot; (&quot;The Cave of the Nymphs&quot;). Citing Eubulus as his source, Porphyry writes that the original temple of Mithras was a natural cave, containing fountains, which Zoroaster found in the mountains of Persia. To Zoroaster, this cave was an image of the whole world, so he consecrated it to Mithras, the creator of the world. Later in the same work, Porphyry links Mithras and the bull with planets and star-signs: Mithras himself is associated with the sign of Aries and the planet Mars, while the bull is associated with Venus.

Porphyry is writing close to the demise of the cult, and Robert Turcan has challenged the idea that Porphyry&#x27;s statements about Mithraism are accurate. His case is that far from representing what Mithraists believed, they are merely representations by the Neoplatonists of what it suited them in the late 4th century to read into the mysteries.
Merkelbach &amp; Beck believed Porphyry&#x27;s work &quot;is in fact thoroughly coloured with the doctrines of the Mysteries&quot;.
Beck holds that classical scholars have neglected Porphyry&#x27;s evidence and have taken an unnecessarily skeptical view of Porphyry.
According to Beck, Porphyry&#x27;s &quot;De antro&quot; is the only clear text from antiquity which tells us about the intent of the Mithraic mysteries and how that intent was realized.
David Ulansey finds it important that Porphyry &quot;confirms ... that astral conceptions played an important role in Mithraism.&quot;

====Mithras Liturgy====
In later antiquity, the Greek name of Mithras (Μίθρας) occurs in the text known as the &quot;Mithras Liturgy&quot;, a part of the &quot;Paris Greek Magical Papyrus&quot;
here Mithras is given the epithet &quot;the great god&quot;, and is identified with the sun god Helios.
There have been different views among scholars as to whether this text is an expression of Mithraism as such. Franz Cumont argued that it isn&#x27;t;
Marvin Meyer thinks it is;
while Hans Dieter Betz sees it as a synthesis of Greek, Egyptian, and Mithraic traditions.

===Modern debate on origin===

====Cumont&#x27;s hypothesis: from Persian state religion====
Scholarship on Mithras begins with Franz Cumont, who published a two volume collection of source texts and images of monuments in French in 1894–1900, &quot;Textes et monuments figurés relatifs aux mystères de Mithra&quot; [French: &quot;Texts and Illustrated Monuments Relating to the Mysteries of Mithra&quot;]. An English translation of part of this work was published in 1903, with the title &quot;The Mysteries of Mithra&quot;. Cumont&#x27;s hypothesis, as the author summarizes it in the first 32 pages of his book, was that the Roman religion was &quot;the Roman form of Mazdaism&quot;, the Persian state religion, disseminated from the East. He identified the ancient Aryan deity who appears in Persian literature as Mithras with the Hindu god Mitra of the Vedic hymns. According to Cumont, the god Mithra came to Rome &quot;accompanied by a large representation of the Mazdean Pantheon.&quot; Cumont considers that while the tradition &quot;underwent some modification in the Occident ... the alterations that it suffered were largely superficial.&quot;

====Criticisms and reassessments of Cumont====
Cumont&#x27;s theories came in for severe criticism from John R. Hinnells and R.L. Gordon at the First International Congress of Mithraic Studies held in 1971. John Hinnells was unwilling to reject entirely the idea of Iranian origin, but wrote: &quot;we must now conclude that his reconstruction simply will not stand. It receives no support from the Iranian material and is in fact in conflict with the ideas of that tradition as they are represented in the extant texts. Above all, it is a theoretical reconstruction which does not accord with the actual Roman iconography.&quot; He discussed Cumont&#x27;s reconstruction of the bull-slaying scene and stated &quot;that the portrayal of Mithras given by Cumont is not merely unsupported by Iranian texts but is actually in serious conflict with known Iranian theology.&quot; Another paper by R.L. Gordon argued that Cumont severely distorted the available evidence by forcing the material to conform to his predetermined model of Zoroastrian origins. Gordon suggested that the theory of Persian origins was completely invalid and that the Mithraic mysteries in the West were an entirely new creation.

A similar view has been expressed by Luther H. Martin: &quot;Apart from the name of the god himself, in other words, Mithraism seems to have developed largely in and is, therefore, best understood from the context of Roman culture.&quot;

According to Hopfe, &quot;All theories of the origin of Mithraism acknowledge a connection, however vague, to the Mithra/Mitra figure of ancient Aryan religion.&quot; Reporting on the Second International Congress of Mithraic Studies, 1975, Ugo Bianchi says that although he welcomes &quot;the tendency to question in historical terms the relations between Eastern and Western Mithraism&quot;, it &quot;should not mean obliterating what was clear to the Romans themselves, that Mithras was a &#x27;Persian&#x27; (in wider perspective: an Indo-Iranian) god.&quot;

Boyce wrote, &quot;no satisfactory evidence has yet been adduced to show that, before Zoroaster, the concept of a supreme god existed among the Iranians, or that among them Mithra – or any other divinity – ever enjoyed a separate cult of his or her own outside either their ancient or their Zoroastrian pantheons.&quot; She also said that although recent studies have minimized the Iranizing aspects of the self-consciously Persian religion &quot;at least in the form which it attained under the Roman Empire&quot;, the name &quot;Mithras&quot; is enough to show &quot;that this aspect is of some importance.&quot; She also says that &quot;the Persian affiliation of the Mysteries is acknowledged in the earliest literary references to them.&quot;

Beck tells us that since the 1970s scholars have generally rejected Cumont, but adds that recent theories about how Zoroastrianism was during the period BCE now make some new form of Cumont&#x27;s east–west transfer possible. He says that

... an indubitable residuum of things Persian in the Mysteries and a better knowledge of what constituted actual Mazdaism have allowed modern scholars to postulate for Roman Mithraism a continuing Iranian theology. This indeed is the main line of Mithraic scholarship, the Cumontian model which subsequent scholars accept, modify, or reject. For the transmission of Iranian doctrine from East to West, Cumont postulated a plausible, if hypothetical, intermediary: the Magusaeans of the Iranian diaspora in Anatolia. More problematic – and never properly addressed by Cumont or his successors – is how real-life Roman Mithraists subsequently maintained a quite complex and sophisticated Iranian theology behind an occidental facade. Other than the images at Dura of the two &#x27;magi&#x27; with scrolls, there is no direct and explicit evidence for the carriers of such doctrines. ... Up to a point, Cumont&#x27;s Iranian paradigm, especially in Turcan&#x27;s modified form, is certainly plausible.

He also says that &quot;the old Cumontian model of formation in, and diffusion from, Anatolia ... is by no means dead – nor should it be.&quot;

====Modern theories====
Beck theorizes that the cult was created in Rome, by a single founder who had some knowledge of both Greek and Oriental religion, but suggests that some of the ideas used may have passed through the Hellenistic kingdoms. He observes that &quot;Mithras – moreover, a Mithras who was identified with the Greek Sun god Helios&quot; was among the gods of the syncretic Greco-Armenian-Iranian royal cult at Nemrut, founded by Antiochus I of Commagene in the mid 1st century BCE. While proposing the theory, Beck says that his scenario may be regarded as Cumontian in two ways. Firstly, because it looks again at Anatolia and Anatolians, and more importantly, because it hews back to the methodology first used by Cumont.

Merkelbach suggests that its mysteries were essentially created by a particular person or persons and created in a specific place, the city of Rome, by someone from an eastern province or border state who knew the Iranian myths in detail, which he wove into his new grades of initiation; but that he must have been Greek and Greek-speaking because he incorporated elements of Greek Platonism into it. The myths, he suggests, were probably created in the milieu of the imperial bureaucracy, and for its members. Clauss tends to agree. Beck calls this &quot;the most likely scenario&quot; and states &quot;Until now, Mithraism has generally been treated as if it somehow evolved Topsy-like from its Iranian precursor – a most implausible scenario once it is stated explicitly.&quot;

Archaeologist Lewis M. Hopfe notes that there are only three mithraea in Roman Syria, in contrast to further west. He writes: &quot;Archaeology indicates that Roman Mithraism had its epicenter in Rome ... the fully developed religion known as Mithraism seems to have begun in Rome and been carried to Syria by soldiers and merchants.&quot;

Taking a different view from other modern scholars, Ulansey argues that the Mithraic mysteries began in the Greco-Roman world as a religious response to the discovery by the Greek astronomer Hipparchus of the astronomical phenomenon of the precession of the equinoxes – a discovery that amounted to discovering that the entire cosmos was moving in a hitherto unknown way. This new cosmic motion, he suggests, was seen by the founders of Mithraism as indicating the existence of a powerful new god capable of shifting the cosmic spheres and thereby controlling the universe.

A. D. H. Bivar, L. A. Campbell, and G. Widengren have variously argued that Roman Mithraism represents a continuation of some form of Iranian Mithra worship. More recently, Parvaneh Pourshariati has made similar claims.

According to Antonia Tripolitis, Roman Mithraism originated in Vedic India and picked up many features of the cultures which it encountered in its westward journey.

===Later history===
The first important expansion of the mysteries in the Empire seems to have happened quite quickly, late in the reign of Antoninus Pius (b. 121 CE, d. 161 CE) and under Marcus Aurelius. By this time all the key elements of the mysteries were in place.

Mithraism reached the apogee of its popularity during the 2nd and 3rd centuries, spreading at an &quot;astonishing&quot; rate at the same period when the worship of Sol Invictus was incorporated into the state-sponsored cults.
At this period a certain Pallas devoted a monograph to Mithras, and a little later Euboulus wrote a &quot;History of Mithras&quot;, although both works are now lost.
According to the 4th century Historia Augusta, the emperor Commodus participated in its mysteries but it never became one of the state cults.

The historian Jacob Burckhardt writes:

===Persecution and Christianization===
The religion and its followers faced persecution in the 4th century from Christianization, and Mithraism came to an end at some point between its last decade and the 5th century. Ulansey states that &quot;Mithraism declined with the rise to power of Christianity, until the beginning of the fifth century, when Christianity became strong enough to exterminate by force rival religions such as Mithraism.&quot;
According to Speidel, Christians fought fiercely with this feared enemy and suppressed it during the late 4th century. Mithraic sanctuaries were destroyed and religion was no longer a matter of personal choice.
According to L.H. Martin, Roman Mithraism came to an end with the anti-pagan decrees of the Christian emperor Theodosius during the last decade of the 4th century.

Clauss states that inscriptions show Mithras as one of the cults listed on inscriptions by Roman senators who had not converted to Christianity, as part of the &quot;pagan revival&quot; among the elite in the second half of the 4th century.
Beck states that &quot;Quite early in the [fourth] century the religion was as good as dead throughout the empire.&quot; Archaeological evidence indicates the continuance of the cult of Mithras up until the end of the 4th century. In particular, large numbers of votive coins deposited by worshippers have been recovered at the Mithraeum at Pons Sarravi (Sarrebourg) in Gallia Belgica, in a series that runs from Gallienus (r. 253–268) to Theodosius I (r. 379–395). These were scattered over the floor when the mithraeum was destroyed, as Christians apparently regarded the coins as polluted; therefore, providing reliable dates for the functioning of the mithraeum up until near the end of the century.

Franz Cumont states that Mithraism may have survived in certain remote cantons of the Alps and Vosges into the 5th century. According to Mark Humphries, the deliberate concealment of Mithraic cult objects in some areas suggests that precautions were being taken against Christian attacks. In areas like the Rhine frontier, barbarian invasions may have also played a role in the end of Mithraism.

At some of the mithraeums that have been found below churches, such as the Santa Prisca Mithraeum and the San Clemente Mithraeum, the ground plan of the church above was made in a way to symbolize Christianity&#x27;s domination of Mithraism. The cult disappeared earlier than that of Isis. Isis was still remembered in the Middle Ages as a pagan deity, but Mithras was already forgotten in late antiquity.

==Interpretations of the bull-slaying scene==
According to Cumont, the imagery of the tauroctony was a Graeco-Roman representation of an event in Zoroastrian cosmogony described in a 9th-century Zoroastrian text, the Bundahishn. In this text the evil spirit Ahriman (not Mithra) slays the primordial creature Gavaevodata, which is represented as a bovine.
Cumont held that a version of the myth must have existed in which Mithras, not Ahriman, killed the bovine. But according to Hinnells, no such variant of the myth is known, and that this is merely speculation: &quot;In no known Iranian text [either Zoroastrian or otherwise] does Mithra slay a bull.&quot;

David Ulansey finds astronomical evidence from the mithraeum itself. He reminds us that the Platonic writer Porphyry wrote in the 3rd century CE that the cave-like temple Mithraea depicted &quot;an image of the world&quot; and that Zoroaster consecrated a cave resembling the world fabricated by Mithras.
The ceiling of the Caesarea Maritima Mithraeum retains traces of blue paint, which may mean the ceiling was painted to depict the sky and the stars.

Beck has given the following celestial composition of the Tauroctony:

Several celestial identities for the Tauroctonous Mithras (TM) himself have been proposed. Beck summarizes them in the table below.


Ulansey has proposed that Mithras seems to have been derived from the constellation of Perseus, which is positioned just above Taurus in the night sky. He sees iconographic and mythological parallels between the two figures: both are young heroes, carry a dagger, and wear a Phrygian cap. He also mentions the similarity of the image of Perseus killing the Gorgon and the tauroctony, both figures being associated with caverns and both having connections to Persia as further evidence.
Michael Speidel associates Mithras with the constellation of Orion because of the proximity to Taurus, and the consistent nature of the depiction of the figure as having wide shoulders, a garment flared at the hem, and narrowed at the waist with a belt, thus taking on the form of the constellation.

In opposition to the theories above, which link Mithras to specific constellations, Jelbert suggests that the deity represented the Milky Way. Jelbert argues that within the tauroctony image, Mithras&#x27; body is analogous to the path of the Milky Way that bridges Taurus and Scorpius, and that this bifurcated section mirrors the shape, scale and position of the deity relative to the other characters in the scene. The notion of Mithras as the Milky Way would have resonated with his status as god of light and lord of genesis, suggests Jelbert, due to the luminosity of this celestial feature, as well as the location of the traditional soul gates at Taurus-Gemini and Scorpius- Sagittarius, portals once believed to represent the points of entry for the soul at birth and death respectively.

Beck has criticized Speidel and Ulansey of adherence to a literal cartographic logic, describing their theories as a &quot;will-o&#x27;-the-wisp&quot; that &quot;lured them down a false trail&quot;. He argues that a literal reading of the tauroctony as a star chart raises two major problems: it is difficult to find a constellation counterpart for Mithras himself (despite efforts by Speidel and Ulansey) and that, unlike in a star chart, each feature of the tauroctony might have more than a single counterpart. Rather than seeing Mithras as a constellation, Beck argues that Mithras is the prime traveller on the celestial stage (represented by the other symbols of the scene), the Unconquered Sun moving through the constellations. But again, Meyer holds that the Mithras Liturgy reflects the world of Mithraism and may be a confirmation for Ulansey&#x27;s theory of Mithras being held responsible for the precession of equinoxes.

Peter Chrisp posits that the killing was of a &quot;sacred bull&quot; and that the &quot;act [was] believed&quot; to create the universe&#x27;s life force and maintain it.

==Comparable belief systems==

The cult of Mithras was part of the syncretic nature of ancient Roman religion. Almost all Mithraea contain statues dedicated to gods of other cults, and it is common to find inscriptions dedicated to Mithras in other sanctuaries, especially those of Jupiter Dolichenus. Mithraism was not an alternative to Rome&#x27;s other traditional religions, but was one of many forms of religious practice, and many Mithraic initiates can also be found participating in the civic religion, and as initiates of other mystery cults.

===Christianity===

Early Christian apologists noted similarities between Mithraic and Christian rituals, but nonetheless took an extremely negative view of Mithraism: they interpreted Mithraic rituals as evil copies of Christian ones. For instance, Tertullian wrote that as a prelude to the Mithraic initiation ceremony, the initiate was given a ritual bath and at the end of the ceremony, received a mark on the forehead. This mark on the forehead may have likely been the Latin letter, &quot;M&quot;, which stood for the name of their messianic god-king Mithras. Turtullian also described these rites as a diabolical counterfeit of the baptism and chrismation of Christians. Justin Martyr contrasted Mithraic initiation communion with the Eucharist:
:Wherefore also the evil demons in mimicry have handed down that the same thing should be done in the Mysteries of Mithras. For that bread and a cup of water are in these mysteries set before the initiate with certain speeches you either know or can learn.

Ernest Renan suggested in 1882 that, under different circumstances, Mithraism might have risen to the prominence of modern-day Christianity. Renan wrote: &quot;If the growth of Christianity had been arrested by some mortal malady, the world would have been Mithraic&quot;.
This theory has since been contested. Leonard Boyle wrote in 1987 that &quot;too much ... has been made of the &#x27;threat&#x27; of Mithraism to Christianity&quot;,
pointing out that there are only fifty known mithraea in the entire city of Rome. J.A. Ezquerra holds that since the two religions did not share similar aims, there was never any real threat of Mithraism taking over the Roman world.
Mithraism had backing from the Roman aristocracy during a time when their conservative values were seen as under attack during the rising tides of Christianity.

According to Mary Boyce, Mithraism was a potent enemy for Christianity in the West, though she is sceptical about its hold in the East.
F. Coarelli (1979) has tabulated forty actual or possible Mithraea and estimated that Rome would have had &quot;not less than 680–690&quot; mithraea.
L.M. Hopfe states that more than 400 Mithraic sites have been found. These sites are spread all over the Roman empire from places as far as Dura-Europos in the east, and England in the west. He, too, says that Mithraism may have been a rival of Christianity. David Ulansey thinks Renan&#x27;s statement &quot;somewhat exaggerated&quot;, but does consider Mithraism &quot;one of Christianity&#x27;s major competitors in the Roman Empire&quot;.

==See also==
* London Mithraeum
* Maitreya
* Mithra
* Mehregan
* Roman–Iranian relations
* Santo Stefano al Monte Celio#Mithraeum
* Tienen Mithraeum
* Mithraic Reliefs of Jort
* Helmet of Coțofenești - dated to about 450 BCE, before the beginning of Roman Mithraism

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Athanassiadi, P. &quot;A contribution to Mithraic Theology: The Emperor Julian&#x27;s Hymn to King Helios&quot;.
* Mary Beard, John A. North, S. R. F. Price, &quot;Religions of Rome: A history&quot; .
* Mary Beard, John A. North, S. R. F. Price, &quot;Religions of Rome: A Sourcebook&quot; .
* Bianchi, Ugo, &quot;The history of religions&quot; .
* Bivar, A. D. H., &quot;The personalities of Mithra in archaeology and literature&quot;
* Bromiley, Geoffrey W., revised edition edited by Kyle, Melvin Grove, &quot;The international standard Bible encyclopedia&quot; 
* Clauss, Manfred (1992). &quot;Cultores Mithrae. Die Anhängerschaft des Mithras-Kultes&quot; [Cultores Mithrae. The followers of the Mithras cult]. Heidelberger Althistorische Beiträge und Epigraphische Studien, vol. 10. Stuttgart: Steiner, .
* Duchesne-Guillemin, Jacques, &quot;Etudes mithriaques: actes du 2e congrès international&quot; . (Some portions are in English).
* Gwynn, David M., &quot;Religious diversity in late antiquity&quot;.
* Harris, J. R. &quot;Mithras at Hermopolis and Memphis&quot;, in Donald M. Bailey (ed), &quot;Archaeological Research in Roman Egypt&quot; (2004). Journal of Roman Archaeology.
* Hutton, Ronald, &quot;The Pagan Religions of the Ancient British Isles: Their Nature and Legacy&quot;.
* Kaper, Olaf E., &quot;Mithras im ptolemäischen Ägypten&quot;, in Peter C. Bol, Gabriele Kaminski, and Caterina Maderna (eds), &quot;Fremdheit-Eigenheit: Ägypten, Griechenland und Rom : Austausch und Verständnis&quot; (2004). Prestel.
* Lane Fox, Robin, &quot;Pagans and Christians&quot;.
* Marleen Martens, Guy De Boe, &quot;Roman Mithraism&quot;, (2004).
* Mastrocinque, Attilio, &quot;Studi sul mitraismo: il mitraismo e la magia&quot;.
* Mastrocinque, Attilio, &quot;Des Mysteres de Mithra Aux Mysteres de Jesus&quot;.
* 
* 
* Moga, Iulian, &quot;Mithra în asia mică şi în regiunile limitrofe. Mirajul originilor&quot;. [Mithra in Asia Minor and in regions close].
* Nicholson, Oliver, &quot;The end of Mithraism&quot;, Antiquity, Volume: 69 Number: 263 Page: 358–362.
* Nilsson, Martin P., &quot;Geschichte der griechischen Religion, Volume 2&quot;.
* Roll, Israel, &quot;The mysteries of Mithras in the Roman Orient: the problem of origin&quot;.
* Sauer, Eberhard, &quot;The end of paganism in the north-western provinces of the Roman Empire:The example of the Mithras cult&quot; .
* Turcan, Robert, &quot;The Gods of Ancient Rome: Religion in everyday life from archaic to imperial&quot; .
* Turcan, Robert, &quot;Note sur la liturgie mithriaque&quot; [Note on the Mithraic Liturgy].
* 
* Walters, Vivienne J., &quot;The cult of Mithras in the Roman provinces of Gaul&quot; , Brill
* Will, Ernest, &quot;Le relief cultuel gréco-romain&quot;, (1955).
==External links==

* Ostia Antica Mithraeum at the Baths of Mithras . (YouTube video)
* Mithraeum A website with a collection of monuments and bibliography about Mithraism.
* Cumont, &quot;The Mysteries Of Mithra&quot; 
* Google Maps: Map of the locations of Mithraea
* Archaeology magazine A publication of the Archaeological Institute of America
* A list of Mithraea
* Article on Franz Cumont 
* Ostia Mithraea 
* Literary sources 
* A gallery of monuments and inscriptions 
* Cult of Mithras Explained (YouTube video - with references)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219903" start="0" end="9" title="Mithraism" label="Mithraism"/>
<link wikidata="Q219903" start="29" end="47" title="Mithraism" label="Mithraic mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q219903" start="55" end="70" title="Mithraism" label="Cult of Mithras"/>
<link wikidata="Q505821" start="86" end="102" title="mystery religion" label="mystery religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="153" end="160" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="176" end="187" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="188" end="196" title="divinity" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193804" start="204" end="210" title="yazata" label="yazata"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="218" end="224" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772741" start="415" end="434" title="Imperial Roman army" label="Imperial Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="535" end="545" title="initiation" label="initiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151014" start="695" end="703" title="mithraeum" label="mithraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="756" end="763" title="Roman temple" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="799" end="803" title="cult (religious practice)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="838" end="842" title="ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="875" end="901" title="Western Roman Empire" label="western half of the empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="919" end="931" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Roman Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="936" end="943" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="960" end="971" title="Roman Dacia" label="Roman Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="989" end="1002" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="1030" end="1041" title="Roman Syria" label="Roman Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="1090" end="1108" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170074" start="1147" end="1174" title="Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire" label="persecution from Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="1453" end="1466" title="iconography" label="iconic scenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199937" start="1567" end="1570" title="Sol (Roman mythology)" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138068" start="1733" end="1743" title="tauroctony" label="tauroctony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151014" start="1839" end="1847" title="mithraea" label="mithraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="2022" end="2027" title="ancient Greek literature" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="2032" end="2048" title="Latin literature" label="Latin literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="2521" end="2527" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="2642" end="2648" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380415" start="2792" end="2804" title="Franz Cumont" label="Franz Cumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="2885" end="2893" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145374" start="2905" end="2915" title="Cyropaedia" label="Cyropaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="2964" end="2979" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="3073" end="3083" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="3154" end="3164" title="nominative" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="3217" end="3225" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332956" start="3551" end="3556" title="Mitra (Hindu god)" label="Mitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="3632" end="3639" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="3860" end="3868" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="3888" end="3895" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q33514" start="4148" end="4160" title="Indo-Iranian languages" label="Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988" start="4631" end="4641" title="Mary Boyce" label="Mary Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5513" end="5554" title="#Interpretations of the bull-slaying scene" label="Interpretations of the bull-slaying scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="5849" end="5855" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="6184" end="6192" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213240" start="6216" end="6228" title="Phrygian cap" label="Phrygian cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051640" start="7037" end="7058" title="Cautes and Cautopates" label="Cautes and Cautopates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199937" start="7378" end="7381" title="Sol (Roman mythology)" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q155987" start="7431" end="7439" title="quadriga" label="quadriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235172" start="7513" end="7517" title="Luna (mythology)" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132651" start="7573" end="7577" title="biga (chariot)" label="biga"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="7879" end="7882" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750627" start="8025" end="8037" title="Santa Prisca Church (Rome)" label="Santa Prisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064465" start="8074" end="8089" title="heroic nudity" label="heroically nude"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="8904" end="8912" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="9045" end="9052" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="9096" end="9106" title="psychopomp" label="psychopomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="10183" end="10190" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="10233" end="10240" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="10332" end="10339" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131585" start="10474" end="10478" title="Selene" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="10480" end="10483" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q134388" start="10489" end="10495" title="Saturn (mythology)" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q178401" start="10764" end="10771" title="amphora" label="amphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="11347" end="11355" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="11701" end="11706" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640" start="11865" end="11871" title="Vulcan (mythology)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="11876" end="11890" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="11891" end="11895" title="rooster" label="cock"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="11906" end="11914" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790686" start="12315" end="12324" title="Arimanius" label="Arimanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q223805" start="12367" end="12374" title="Ahriman" label="Ahriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="12567" end="12625" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="12663" end="12668" title="Ostia Antica" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="12720" end="12728" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164846" start="12770" end="12774" title="Aion (deity)" label="Aion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423009" start="12779" end="12785" title="Zurvan" label="Zurvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="12790" end="12796" title="Cronus" label="Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272918" start="12801" end="12808" title="Chronos" label="Chronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q223805" start="12870" end="12877" title="Ahriman" label="Ahriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q145664" start="12903" end="12910" title="Aryaman" label="Aryaman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13342" end="13357" title="Sol Invictus#Festival of Dies Natalis Solis Invicti" label="Natalis Invicti"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="13412" end="13419" title="Sol Invictus" label="the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="13630" end="13634" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q189279" start="13721" end="13730" title="catechism" label="catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="13977" end="13984" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881675" start="14208" end="14223" title="Mithras Liturgy" label="Mithras Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380415" start="14324" end="14336" title="Franz Cumont" label="Franz Cumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="14456" end="14464" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q701582" start="15027" end="15034" title="Virunum" label="Virunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="15292" end="15300" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q154502" start="15447" end="15452" title="Litha" label="Litha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10398273" start="15454" end="15475" title="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672817" start="15481" end="15485" title="Jāņi" label="Jāņi"/>
<link wikidata="Q914598" start="15742" end="15751" title="triclinium" label="triclinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237621" start="15967" end="15975" title="collegia" label="collegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="16520" end="16525" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208576" start="16729" end="16736" title="narthex" label="narthex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17409" end="17420" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#victimarius" label="victimarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q464266" start="17903" end="17915" title="Dura Europos" label="Dura Europos"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="18529" end="18533" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="18535" end="18540" title="Ostia Antica" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="18542" end="18549" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330965" start="18551" end="18559" title="Dalmatia (Roman province)" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="18561" end="18568" title="Roman Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497438" start="18642" end="18648" title="Roman Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="18650" end="18655" title="Roman Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="18661" end="18666" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q456550" start="18821" end="18827" title="Tienen" label="Tienen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208576" start="19534" end="19541" title="narthex" label="narthex"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="20651" end="20655" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q44011" start="20888" end="20905" title="Gregory Nazianzen" label="Gregory Nazianzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="21187" end="21199" title="Ostia Antica" label="Ostia Antica"/>
<link wikidata="Q464266" start="21518" end="21530" title="Dura-Europos" label="Dura-Europos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23288" end="23313" title="Julian the Apostate#Restoration of state paganism" label="&amp;#x27;pagan revival&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046041" start="23708" end="23719" title="Carrawburgh" label="Carrawburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="23760" end="23768" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q367422" start="24272" end="24289" title="Firmicus Maternus" label="Firmicus Maternus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="24894" end="24899" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956886" start="25121" end="25131" title="mystagogue" label="mystagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235172" start="26360" end="26364" title="Luna (goddess)" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="26419" end="26425" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="26458" end="26463" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="26709" end="26717" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="27811" end="27830" title="Julian (emperor)" label="Julian the Apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="27878" end="27888" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q332137" start="28310" end="28319" title="Commagene" label="Commagene"/>
<link wikidata="Q462768" start="28490" end="28501" title="Antiochus I of Commagene" label="Antiochus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q207917" start="28517" end="28529" title="Mount Nemrut" label="Mount Nemrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q213240" start="28569" end="28581" title="Phrygian cap" label="Phrygian cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q749249" start="28620" end="28625" title="tiara" label="tiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170231" start="28631" end="28638" title="Iranian clothing" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="29078" end="29085" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741306" start="29567" end="29585" title="Cilician pirates" label="pirates of Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="30123" end="30181" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="30192" end="30197" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="30272" end="30277" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q157065" start="30689" end="30694" title="Kerch" label="Kerch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="30702" end="30708" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="31447" end="31452" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q508815" start="31912" end="31921" title="Carnuntum" label="Carnuntum"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="32494" end="32502" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q571790" start="32511" end="32522" title="Roman Mogontiacum" label="Mogontiacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="32552" end="32559" title="Noricum" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="32563" end="32580" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea Maritima"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="32582" end="32588" title="Judaea" label="Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="32648" end="32653" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="32695" end="32703" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="32711" end="32716" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257083" start="32725" end="32730" title="Novae (fortress)" label="Novae"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="32732" end="32738" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="32746" end="32751" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110806" start="32771" end="32777" title="Oescus" label="Oescus"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="32793" end="32798" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q74678" start="32813" end="32818" title="Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae" label="CIMRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988" start="32914" end="32919" title="Mary Boyce" label="Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708117" start="33062" end="33069" title="Thebaid (Latin poem)" label="Thebaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="33089" end="33096" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="33202" end="33209" title="Phoebus" label="Phoebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351992" start="33414" end="33432" title="Perses (son of Andromeda and Perseus)" label="&amp;quot;Perses&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="33445" end="33452" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161582" start="33457" end="33466" title="Andromeda (mythology)" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="33608" end="33627" title="Christian apologetics" label="Christian apologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="33628" end="33641" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="33689" end="33708" title="Eucharist" label="Christian communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="34011" end="34019" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="34119" end="34126" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="34169" end="34177" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616064" start="34495" end="34511" title="Mithridatic wars" label="Mithridatic wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="34525" end="34539" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185126" start="34549" end="34573" title="Mithridates VI of Pontus" label="Mithridates VI of Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="34704" end="34710" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="34742" end="34748" title="Vergil" label="Vergil"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="34752" end="34759" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="34770" end="34776" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="34810" end="34818" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="34873" end="34884" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q317042" start="34984" end="35006" title="Tiridates I of Armenia" label="Tiridates I of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="35028" end="35032" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q318152" start="35060" end="35081" title="Vonones II of Parthia" label="Vonones II of Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="35154" end="35161" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="35469" end="35477" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27649594" start="35566" end="35584" title="On the Cave of the Nymphs in the Odyssey" label="De antro nympharum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35811" start="35759" end="35768" title="Zoroaster" label="Zoroaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q32067" start="36055" end="36060" title="Aries (astrology)" label="Aries"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="36076" end="36080" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="36116" end="36121" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881675" start="37180" end="37195" title="Mithras Liturgy" label="Mithras Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186625" start="37223" end="37250" title="Greek Magical Papyri" label="Paris Greek Magical Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="37353" end="37359" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380415" start="37471" end="37483" title="Franz Cumont" label="Franz Cumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778424" start="37511" end="37523" title="Marvin Meyer" label="Marvin Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649925" start="37544" end="37560" title="Hans Dieter Betz" label="Hans Dieter Betz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380415" start="37758" end="37770" title="Franz Cumont" label="Franz Cumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="38301" end="38309" title="Mazdaism" label="Mazdaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="38399" end="38404" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332956" start="38475" end="38480" title="Mitra (Vedic)" label="Mitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="38530" end="38536" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="40373" end="40378" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988" start="40792" end="40797" title="Mary Boyce" label="Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="40965" end="40971" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="43266" end="43272" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q207917" start="43352" end="43358" title="Mount Nemrut" label="Nemrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q462768" start="43371" end="43382" title="Antiochus I Theos of Commagene" label="Antiochus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q332137" start="43386" end="43395" title="Commagene" label="Commagene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130378" start="43881" end="43894" title="Persian mythology" label="Iranian myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="44049" end="44058" title="Platonism" label="Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44344" end="44349" title="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin#Other characters" label="Topsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="44522" end="44533" title="Roman Syria" label="Roman Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="44981" end="44991" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83094" start="45030" end="45057" title="precession of the equinoxes" label="precession of the equinoxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945707" start="45365" end="45379" title="Adrian David Hugh Bivar" label="A. D. H. Bivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712027" start="45538" end="45559" title="Parvaneh Pourshariati" label="Parvaneh Pourshariati"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="45649" end="45660" title="Vedic India" label="Vedic India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="45892" end="45906" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="45940" end="45955" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="46189" end="46201" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="46446" end="46462" title="Augustan History" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="46476" end="46484" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59945" start="46574" end="46590" title="Jacob Burckhardt" label="Jacob Burckhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="46712" end="46728" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110359" start="47326" end="47344" title="Persecution of pagans under Theodosius I" label="anti-pagan decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="47370" end="47380" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="47516" end="47530" title="Roman senate" label="Roman senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q104475" start="48079" end="48088" title="Gallienus" label="Gallienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="48105" end="48117" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="48678" end="48683" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q385910" start="48874" end="48886" title="Basilica of San Clemente al Laterano" label="San Clemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="49052" end="49056" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="49158" end="49172" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005362" start="49392" end="49402" title="Bundahishn" label="Bundahishn"/>
<link wikidata="Q223805" start="49433" end="49440" title="Ahriman" label="Ahriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603864" start="49484" end="49495" title="Gavaevodata" label="Gavaevodata"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="49945" end="49953" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511" start="50567" end="50591" title="Perseus (constellation)" label="constellation of Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102059" start="50854" end="50860" title="Gorgon" label="Gorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="51044" end="51049" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173268" start="53018" end="53030" title="Peter Chrisp" label="Peter Chrisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427313" start="53070" end="53081" title="sacred bull" label="sacred bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970852" start="53162" end="53172" title="Energy (esotericism)" label="life force"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="53258" end="53267" title="syncretism" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="53278" end="53300" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q890208" start="53473" end="53491" title="Jupiter Dolichenus" label="Jupiter Dolichenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="53686" end="53700" title="Imperial cult (ancient Rome)" label="civic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944691" start="53831" end="53848" title="Rite (Christianity)" label="Christian rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="53994" end="54004" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q829540" start="54395" end="54401" title="chrism" label="chrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="54422" end="54435" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="54486" end="54495" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q157155" start="54755" end="54767" title="Ernest Renan" label="Ernest Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525144" start="55066" end="55079" title="Leonard Boyle" label="Leonard Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408799" start="56334" end="56350" title="London Mithraeum" label="London Mithraeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q193461" start="56353" end="56361" title="Maitreya" label="Maitreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="56364" end="56370" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q749563" start="56373" end="56381" title="Mehregan" label="Mehregan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339865" start="56384" end="56407" title="Roman–Iranian relations" label="Roman–Iranian relations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56410" end="56448" title="Santo Stefano al Monte Celio#Mithraeum" label="Santo Stefano al Monte Celio#Mithraeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791080" start="56451" end="56467" title="Tienen Mithraeum" label="Tienen Mithraeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q88692272" start="56470" end="56494" title="Mithraic Reliefs of Jort" label="Mithraic Reliefs of Jort"/>
<link wikidata="Q180909" start="56497" end="56518" title="Helmet of Coțofenești" label="Helmet of Coțofenești"/>
<link wikidata="Q508478" start="57456" end="57483" title="Jacques Duchesne-Guillemin" label="Duchesne-Guillemin, Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087695" start="57835" end="57849" title="Ronald Hutton" label="Hutton, Ronald"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20828" wikidata="Q223189" url="?curid=20828" title="Minivan">
<text>Minivan (sometimes called simply a van) is a car classification for vehicles designed to transport passengers in the rear seating row(s), with reconfigurable seats in two or three rows . The equivalent classification in Europe is MPV (multi-purpose vehicle), people carrier, or M-segment.

Compared with a full-size van, most minivans are based on a passenger car platform and have a lower body. Early models such as the Ford Aerostar and Chevrolet Astro utilized a compact pickup truck platform. Minivans often have a &#x27;one-box&#x27; or &#x27;two-box&#x27; body configuration, a higher roof, a flat floor, sliding doors for rear passengers, and high H-point seating. The largest size of minivans is also referred to as &#x27;Large MPV&#x27; and became popular following the introduction of the 1984 Dodge Caravan and Renault Espace. Typically, these have platforms derived from D-segment passenger cars or compact pickups. Since the 1990s, the smaller compact MPV and mini MPV sizes of minivans have also become popular.

Though predecessors to the minivan date back to the 1930s, the contemporary minivan body style was developed concurrently by several companies in the early 1980s, most notably by Chrysler (producer of the Chrysler minivans) and Renault (the Renault Espace), both first sold for model year 1984. Minivans cut into and eventually overshadowed the traditional market of the station wagon and grew in global popularity and diversity throughout the 1990s. Since the 2000s, their reception has varied in different parts of the world: in North America, for example, they have been largely eclipsed by crossovers and SUVs, while in Asia they are commonly marketed as luxury vehicles.

==Etymology==
The term &quot;minivan&quot; originated in North America and the United Kingdom in 1959. In the UK, the Minivan was a small van manufactured by Austin based on the newly introduced Mini car. In the US, the term was used to differentiate the smaller passenger vehicles from full-size vans (such as the Ford E-Series, Dodge Ram Van, and Chevrolet Van), which were then called &#x27;vans&#x27;.

The first known use of the term was in 1959, but not until the 1980s was it commonly used.

== Characteristics ==

=== Chassis ===
In contrast to larger vans, most modern minivans/MPVs use a front-engine, front-wheel drive layout, while some model lines offer all-wheel drive as an option (ie. Toyota Sienna, Toyota Previa, Chrysler Pacifica ). Alongside adopting the form factor introduced by Chrysler minivans, the configuration allows for less engine intrusion and a lower floor in the passenger compartment. In line with larger full-size vans, unibody construction has been commonly used (the spaceframe design of the Renault Espace and the General Motors APV minivans being exceptions).

Minivans/MPVs are produced on distinct chassis architecture or share platforms with other vehicles such as sedans and crossover SUVs. Minivans do not have as much ground clearance, towing capacity, or off-road capability compared to SUVs. Minivans provide more space for passengers and cargo than sedans and SUVs.

=== Body style ===
Minivans/MPVs use either a two-box or a one-box body design with A, B, C, and D pillars. The cabin may be fitted with two, three, or four rows of seats, with the most common configurations being 2+3+2 or 2+3+3. Compared to other types of passenger vehicles, the body shape of minivans is designed to maximize interior space for both passengers and cargo. It is achieved by lengthening the wheelbase, creating a flatter floor, taller roof, and more upright side profile, but not as prominent as commercial-oriented vans that are boxier in profile. Practicality and comfort for passengers are also enhanced with a larger rear cargo space opening and larger windows.

Some minivans/MPVs may use sliding doors, while others offer conventional forward-hinged doors. Initially, a feature of the 1982 Nissan Prairie, the 1996 Chrysler minivans introduced a driver-side sliding door; by 2002, all minivans were sold with doors on both sides of the body. Most minivans are configured with a rear liftgate; few minivans have used panel-style rear doors, for example, cargo versions of the Chevrolet Astro, Ford Aerostar, and the Mercedes-Benz V-Class.

=== Interior ===
Most minivans have a reconfigurable interior to carry passengers and their effects. The first examples were designed with removable rear seats unlatched from the floor for removal and storage (in line with larger vans); however, users gave poor reception to the design as many seats were heavy and hard to remove. In 1995, the Honda Odyssey was introduced with a third-row seat that folded flat into the floor, which was then adopted by many competitors, including Chrysler that introduced third-row and fold-flat second-row seats in 2005.

High-end minivans may include distinguished features such as captain seats or Ottoman seats, as opposed to bench seats for the second row.
== Predecessors ==
Before the adoption of the &quot;minivan&quot; term, there is a long history of one-box passenger vehicles roughly approximating the body style, with the 1936 Stout Scarab often cited as the first minivan. The passenger seats in the Scarab were moveable and could be configured for the passengers to sit around a table in the rear of the cabin. Passengers entered and exited the Scarab via a centrally-mounted door.

The DKW Schnellaster—manufactured from 1949 until 1962—featured front-wheel drive, a transverse engine, a flat floor, and multi-configurable seating, all of which would later become characteristics of minivans.

In 1950, the Volkswagen Type 2 adapted a bus-shaped body to the chassis of a small passenger car (the Volkswagen Beetle). When Volkswagen introduced a sliding side door to the Type 2 in 1968, it then had the prominent features that would later come to define a minivan: compact length, three rows of forward-facing seats, station wagon-style top-hinged tailgate/liftgate, sliding side door, passenger car base.

The 1956–1969 Fiat Multipla also had many features in common with modern minivans. The Multipla was based on the chassis of the Fiat 600 and had a rear engine and cab forward layout.

The early 1960s saw Ford and Chevrolet introduce &quot;compact&quot; vans for the North American market, the Econoline Club Wagon and Greenbrier respectively. The Ford version was marketed in the Falcon series, the Chevrolet in the Corvair 95 series. The Econoline grew larger in the 1970s, while the Greenbrier was joined by (and later replaced by) the Chevy Van.


== North America ==
Due to their larger footprint and engines, minivans developed for the North American market are distinct from most minivans/MPVs marketed in other regions, such as Europe and Asia. , average exterior length for minivans in North America ranged around , while many models use V6 engines with more than mainly to fulfill towing capacity requirements which North American customers demand.

In 2021, sales of the segment totalled 310,630 units in the U.S. (2.1% of the overall car market), and 33,544 in Canada (2.0% of the overall car market). , the passenger-oriented minivan segment consists of the Toyota Sienna, Chrysler Pacifica, Chrysler Voyager, Honda Odyssey, and Kia Carnival.

=== History ===

==== 1970s and 1980s ====
In the late 1970s, Chrysler began a development program to design &quot;a small affordable van that looked and handled more like a car.&quot; The result of this program was the first American minivans based on the S platform, the 1984 Plymouth Voyager and Dodge Caravan. The S minivans debuted the minivan design features of front-wheel drive, a flat floor and a sliding door for rear passengers.

The term minivan came into use largely compared to size to full-size vans; at six feet tall or lower, 1980s minivans were intended to fit inside a typical garage door opening. In 1984, &quot;The New York Times&quot; described minivans &quot;the hot cars coming out of Detroit,&quot; noting that &quot;analysts say the mini-van has created an entirely new market, one that may well overshadow the... station wagon.&quot;

In response to the popularity of the Voyager/Caravan, General Motors released the 1985 Chevrolet Astro and GMC Safari badge-engineered twins, and Ford released the 1986 Ford Aerostar. These vehicles used a traditional rear-wheel drive layout, unlike the Voyager/Caravan.

To match the launch of minivans by American manufacturers, Japanese manufacturers introduced the Toyota Van, Nissan Vanette, and Mitsubishi Delica to North America in 1984, 1986, and 1987, respectively. These vehicles were marketed with the generic &quot;Van&quot; and &quot;Wagon&quot; names (for cargo and passenger vans, respectively).

In 1989, the Mazda MPV was released as the first Japanese-brand minivan developed from the ground up specifically for the North American market. Its larger chassis allowed an optional V6 engine and four-wheel drive to fit. In contrast to the sliding doors of American minivans, a hinged passenger-side door was used. A driver-side entry was added for 1996, as Mazda gradually remarketed the model line as an early crossover SUV.

By the end of the 1980s, demand for minivans as family vehicles had largely superseded full-size station wagons in the United States.

==== 1990s ====
During the 1990s, the minivan segment underwent several significant changes. Many models switched to the front-wheel drive layout used by the Voyager/Caravan minivans. For example, Ford replaced the Aerostar with the front-wheel drive Mercury Villager for 1993 and the Ford Windstar for 1995. The models also increased in size due to the extended-wheelbase (&quot;Grand&quot;) versions of the Voyager and Caravan, launched in 1987. An increase in luxury features and interior equipment was seen in the Eddie Bauer version of the 1988 Ford Aerostar, the 1990 Chrysler Town &amp; Country, and the 1990 Oldsmobile Silhouette. The third-generation Plymouth Voyager, Dodge Caravan, and Chrysler Town &amp; Country – released for the 1996 model year – had an additional sliding door on the driver&#x27;s side.

Following the 1990 discontinuation of the Nissan Vanette in the United States, Nissan also ended the sale of the second-generation Nissan Axxess. Nissan reentered the segment by forming a joint venture with Ford to develop and assemble a minivan that became the Nissan Quest and its Mercury Villager counterpart.

Toyota also introduced the Toyota Previa in 1990 to replace the Van/Wagon in North America. It was designed solely as a passenger vehicle sized to compete with American-market minivans. For 1998, the Toyota Sienna became the first Japanese-brand minivan assembled in North America, replacing the Toyota Previa in that market. For 1999, Honda introduced a separate version of the Odyssey for North America, with North America receiving a larger vehicle with sliding doors.

==== 2000s and 2010s ====
The highest selling year for minivans was in 2000, when 1.4 million units were sold. However, in the following years, sales of minivans began to decrease. In 2013, the segment&#x27;s sales reached approximately 500,000, one-third of its 2000 peak. Market share of minivans in 2019 reached around 2% after a steady decline from 2004, when the segment recorded above 6% of share. It has been suggested that the falling popularity of minivans is due to the increasing popularity of SUVs and crossovers, and its increasingly undesirable image as a vehicle for older drivers or the soccer mom demographics.

From 2000 onward, several minivan manufacturers adopted boxier square-based exterior designs and began offering more advanced equipment, including power doors and liftgate; seating that folded flat into the cabin floor; DVD/VCR entertainment systems; in-dash navigation and rear-view camera (both only offered on higher-end trims); and parking sensors. However, the Quest and Sedona only echo these design changes in their third and second respective generations. At the same time, Chrysler introduced fold-flat seating in 2005 (under the trademark “Stow-n’-go”). 
Mazda&#x27;s MPV did not feature power doors and was discontinued in 2017.

Due to the market decline, North American sales of the Volkswagen Eurovan ceased in 2003. Ford exited the segment in 2006 when the Ford Freestar was canceled, Chrysler discontinued its short-wheelbase minivans in 2007, and General Motors left the market segment in 2009 with the cancellation of the Chevrolet Uplander. However, Volkswagen marketed the Volkswagen Routan (a rebadged Chrysler RT minivans) between 2009 and 2013. In 2010, Ford started importing the commercial-oriented Ford Transit Connect Wagon from Turkey. A similar vehicle, the Mercedes-Benz Metris, entered the North American market in 2016.

The Kia Sedona, which was introduced for the 2002 model year, is notable for being the first minivan from a South Korean manufacturer in the region. For 2007, Kia also introduced the three-row Kia Rondo compact MPV, where it was prominently marketed as a crossover due to its small size and the use of hinged rear doors.

Another compact MPV released to the market was the Mazda5 in 2004, a three-row vehicle with rear sliding doors. Mazda claimed the model &quot;does not fit into any traditional (North American) segmentation.&quot; The Ford C-Max was released for 2013 as a hybrid electric and battery electric compact MPV with sliding doors. However, it did not offer third-row seating in North America.

==Europe==

In Europe, the classification is commonly known as &quot;MPV&quot;, &quot;people carrier&quot;, or officially M-segment, and includes van-based vehicles and smaller vehicles with two-row seating.

=== History ===

==== 1980s ====
The 1984 Renault Espace was the first European-developed minivan developed primarily for passenger use (as the earlier DKW and Volkswagen used their commercial van platforms in a minibus variant). Beginning development in the 1970s under the European subsidiaries of Chrysler, the Espace was intended as a successor for the Matra Rancho, leading to its use of front-hinged doors. While slow-selling at the time of its release, the Espace would become the most successful European-brand minivan.

Initially intending to market the Espace in North America through American Motors Corporation (AMC), the 1987 sale of AMC to Chrysler canceled the plans for Renault to do so. In the late 1980s, Chrysler and Ford commenced sales of American-designed minivans in Europe (categorized as full-size in the region), selling the Chrysler Voyager and Ford Aerostar. General Motors imported the Oldsmobile Silhouette (branded as the Pontiac Trans Sport), later marketing the American-produced Opel/Vauxhall Sintra.

==== 1990s ====
In the 1990s, several joint ventures produced long-running minivan designs. In 1994, badge engineered series of Eurovans was introduced, produced by Sevel Nord and marketed by Citroën, Fiat, Lancia, and Peugeot. The Eurovans were built with two sliding doors; the gearshift was located on the dashboard to increase interior space, and a petal-type handbrake was adopted. In 1995, Ford of Europe and Volkswagen entered a joint venture, producing the Ford Galaxy, SEAT Alhambra, and Volkswagen Sharan minivans, featuring front-hinged rear side doors.

In 1996, Mercedes introduced the Mercedes-Benz V-Class as a standard panel van for cargo (called Vito) or with passenger accommodations substituted for part or all of the load area (called V-Class or Viano). In 1998, the Fiat Multipla was released. A two-row, six-seater MPV with a 3+3 seat configuration borrowing its name from an older minivan, it is notable for its highly controversial design.

Market reaction to these new full-size MPV models was mixed. Consumers perceived MPVs as large and truck-like despite boasting similar footprints as large sedans. Arguably, cultural reasons regarding vehicle size and high fuel prices were a factor. During 1996 and 1997, the Western European MPV market expanded from around 210,000 units to 350,000 units annually. However, the growth did not continue as expected, resulting in serious plant overcapacity.

Renault set a new &quot;compact MPV&quot; standard with the Renault Scénic in 1996, which became popular. Based on the C-segment Mégane platform, it offered the same multi-use and flexibility aspects as the larger MPVs but with a much smaller footprint.

==== 2000s ====
After the success of the Renault Scénic, other makers have developed similar European-focused products, such as the Opel Zafira that offered three-row seating, Citroën Xsara Picasso and others.

== Asia ==

=== Japan ===

In Japan, the classification is known as and defined by its three-row seating capacity.

Before the birth of minivans with modern form factors, tall wagon-type vehicles with large seating capacity in Japan were known as light vans. They commonly adopted mid-engine, cab over design, and rear-wheel drive layout with one-box form factor. Examples included the Toyota TownAce, Toyota HiAce, Nissan Vanette, Mitsubishi Delica and Mazda Bongo. These vehicles were based on commercial vehicles, which created a gap compared to sedans regarding ride quality and luxury.

The Nissan Prairie, released in 1982, is considered the first Japanese compact minivan. Derived closely from a compact sedan, the Prairie was marketed as a &quot;boxy sedan&quot;, configured with sliding doors, folding rear seats, and a lifting rear hatch. The Mitsubishi Chariot adopted nearly the same form factor, instead using wagon-style front-hinged doors.

In 1990, Toyota introduced the Toyota Estima in Japan, which carried over the mid-engine configuration of the TownAce. Along with its highly rounded exterior, the Estima was distinguished by its nearly panoramic window glass. The Estima was redesigned in 2000, adopting a front-wheel drive layout and offered with a hybrid powertrain since 2001. In 2002, Toyota introduced the Toyota Alphard which was developed as a luxury-oriented model.
In 2020, Lexus introduced their first luxury minivan, the Lexus LM, produced with varying degrees of relation with the Toyota Alphard/Vellfire. The LM designation stands for &quot;Luxury Mover&quot;.

Nissan introduced the Nissan Serena in 1991 and the Nissan Elgrand in 1997.

In 1995, Honda entered the minivan segment by introducing the Honda Odyssey. The Odyssey was designed with front-hinged doors and as derived from the Honda Accord. It came with advantages such as sedan-like driving dynamics and a lower floor to allow for easy access. In a design feature that would become widely adopted by other manufacturers, the Odyssey introduced a rear seat that folded flat into the floor (replacing a removable rear seat). The Odyssey evolved into a low-roof, estate-like minivan until 2013, when it adopted a high-roof body with rear sliding doors. Honda also produced the Honda Stepwgn mid-size MPV since 1996, which is designed with a higher cabin and narrow width, and the Honda Stream since 2000 to slot below the Odyssey.

In 2020, minivans made up 20.8% of total automobile sales in Japan, behind SUVs and compact hatchbacks, making it one of the largest minivan markets in the world.

=== South Korea ===
In South Korea, both the terms &quot;minivan&quot; and &quot;MPV&quot; are used. The Kia Carnival (also sold the Kia Sedona) was introduced in 1998 with dual sliding doors. Sharing its configuration with the Honda Odyssey, the Hyundai Trajet was sold from 1999 to 2008. Introduced in 2004, the SsangYong Rodius is the highest-capacity minivan, seating up to 11 passengers. It was discontinued in 2019.

Current minivans marketed in South Korea are the Kia Carnival and Hyundai Staria, along with imported options such as the Toyota Sienna (originally for North America) and later generations of Honda Odyssey.

=== China ===

In 1999, Shanghai GM commenced production of the Buick GL8 minivan, derived from a minivan platform designed by GM in the United States. After two generations of production, the GL8 is the final minivan produced by General Motors or its joint ventures today. It remained dominant in the high-end minivan segment of the market.

Sales of minivans in China increased rapidly in 2015 and 2016 when the Chinese government lifted the one-child policy in favor of the two-child policy, which pushed customer preference toward three-row vehicles in anticipation of a larger family. In 2016, 2,497,543 minivans were sold in China, a major increase from 2012, which recorded 936,232 sales. However, sales volume has shrunk ever since, with only 1,082,028 minivans sold in the domestic market in 2021 (4.1% of the total car market), around 720,000 of which were sold by domestic manufacturers.
In August 2022, Zeekr introduced the Zeekr 009 electric minivan, deliveries of the 009 began in the first quarter of 2023 in China.

=== Indonesia ===
The MPV segment is the most popular passenger car segment in Indonesia, with a market share of 40 percent in 2021.

=== India ===
The category is commonly known as multi utility vehicle (MUV) or MPV. In fiscal year 2020, the sales volume of the segment totaled 283,583 vehicles, or 10.3% of industry total.

== Luxury MPV ==
Manufacturers such as Mercedes-Benz, Toyota, Lexus, Buick, Hongqi, Zeekr and Volvo have marketed upscale MPVs as luxury vehicles, mainly marketed for several Asian markets.

Luxury MPVs generally have 3-rows of six or seven seats; however, range-topping flagship models may also offer a 2-rows option with four seats, which typically have more features than their cheaper counterparts. By the early 2020s, manufacturers have found additional strategies to improve technologies, such as new materials, new systems, and improving exteriors.

Examples of luxury MPV models include Mercedes-Benz V-Class, Lexus LM, Buick GL8, Hongqi HQ9, Toyota Alphard, Volvo EM90 and the Zeekr 009.

== Size categories ==
=== Mini MPV ===

Mini MPV – an abbreviation for Mini Multi-Purpose Vehicle – is a vehicle size class for the smallest size of minivans (MPVs). The Mini MPV size class sits below the compact MPV size class, and the vehicles are often built on the platforms of B-segment hatchback models.

Several minivans based on B-segment platforms have been marketed as &#x27;leisure activity vehicles&#x27; in Europe. These include the Fiat Fiorino and Ford Transit Courier.

Examples: 
=== Compact MPV ===

Compact MPV – an abbreviation for Compact Multi-Purpose Vehicle – is a vehicle size class for the middle size of MPVs/minivans. The Compact MPV size class sits between the mini MPV and minivan size classes.

Compact MPVs remain predominantly European, although they are also built and sold in many Latin American and Asian markets. As of 2016, the only compact MPV sold widely in the United States was the Ford C-Max.

Examples: 
== Related categories ==

=== Leisure activity vehicle ===

A leisure activity vehicle (abbreviated LAV), also known as van-based MPV and &quot;ludospace&quot; in French, is the passenger-oriented version of small commercial vans primarily marketed in Europe. One of the first LAVs was the 1977 Matra Rancho (among the first crossover SUVs and a precursor to the Renault Espace), with European manufacturers expanding the segment in the late 1990s, following the introduction of the Citroën Berlingo and Renault Kangoo.

Leisure activity vehicles are typically derived from supermini or subcompact car platforms, differing from mini MPVs in body design. To maximize interior space, LAVs feature a taller roof, more upright windshield, and longer hood/bonnet with either a liftgate or barn doors to access the boot. Marketed as an alternative to sedan-derived small family cars, LAVs have seating with a lower H-point than MPVs or minivans, offering two (or three) rows of seating.

Though sharing underpinnings with superminis, subcompacts, and mini MPVs, using an extended wheelbase can make leisure activity vehicles longer than those from which they are derived. For example, the Fiat Doblò is one of the longest LAVs with a total length of , versus the of the Opel Meriva (a mini MPV) and the of the Peugeot 206 SW (a supermini).

=== Asian utility vehicle ===

An Asian utility vehicle (abbreviated AUV) originates from the Philippines to describe basic and affordable vehicles with either large seating capacity or cargo designed to be sold in developing countries. These vehicles are usually available in minivan-like wagon body style with a seating capacity of 7 to 16 passengers. They are usually based on a compact pickup truck with body-on-frame chassis and rear-wheel drive to maximize its load capacity and durability while maintaining low manufacturing costs. Until the 2000s, AUVs were popular in Southeast Asia, particularly in Indonesia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and some African markets.

The first AUV is the Toyota Tamaraw/Kijang, introduced in the Philippines and Indonesia in 1975 as a pickup truck with an optional rear cabin. In the 1990s, other vehicles such as the Isuzu Panther/Hi-Lander/Crosswind and Mitsubishi Freeca/Adventure/Kuda emerged in the AUV segment. Modern equivalent of AUV is the Toyota Innova, an MPV that is the direct successor to the Kijang which in its first two generations were built with body-on-frame construction. The vehicle&#x27;s third generation switched to unibody construction.

=== Three-row SUV ===
With the decline of the minivan/MPV category in many regions, such as North America and Europe, in the mid-2010s, SUVs and crossovers with three rows of seating became popular alternatives. Compared to minivans, three-row SUVs lose sliding doors and generally offer less interior space due to the higher priorities on exterior styling and higher ground clearance.
==References==
== External links ==

Videos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="0" end="7" title="Minivan" label="Minivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="35" end="38" title="Minivan" label="van"/>
<link wikidata="Q836985" start="45" end="63" title="car classification" label="car classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="230" end="233" title="Minivan" label="MPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="235" end="256" title="Minivan" label="multi-purpose vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="259" end="273" title="Minivan" label="people carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="278" end="287" title="Minivan" label="M-segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q193468" start="306" end="319" title="full-size van" label="full-size van"/>
<link wikidata="Q632300" start="360" end="372" title="car platform" label="car platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389152" start="421" end="434" title="Ford Aerostar" label="Ford Aerostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071036" start="439" end="454" title="Chevrolet Astro" label="Chevrolet Astro"/>
<link wikidata="Q283193" start="562" end="580" title="Car body configurations" label="body configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627864" start="655" end="662" title="H-point" label="H-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095648" start="804" end="817" title="Dodge Caravan" label="Dodge Caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="822" end="836" title="Renault Espace" label="Renault Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780748" start="957" end="968" title="compact MPV" label="compact MPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762136" start="973" end="981" title="mini MPV" label="mini MPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="1206" end="1214" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114686" start="1232" end="1249" title="Chrysler minivans" label="Chrysler minivans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="1255" end="1262" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="1268" end="1282" title="Renault Espace" label="Renault Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850364" start="1305" end="1315" title="model year" label="model year"/>
<link wikidata="Q188886" start="1398" end="1411" title="station wagon" label="station wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q875600" start="1621" end="1630" title="Crossover (automobile)" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="1636" end="1639" title="SUV" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581707" start="1686" end="1700" title="luxury vehicle" label="luxury vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193468" start="1991" end="2004" title="full-size van" label="full-size van"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114686" start="2505" end="2522" title="Chrysler minivans" label="Chrysler minivans"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="2733" end="2747" title="Renault Espace" label="Renault Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071229" start="2756" end="2783" title="Chevrolet Lumina APV" label="General Motors APV minivans"/>
<link wikidata="Q875600" start="2922" end="2935" title="crossover SUV" label="crossover SUV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3165" end="3172" title="Car body configurations#Two-box design" label="two-box"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3178" end="3185" title="Car body configurations#One-box design" label="one-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930094" start="3203" end="3225" title="Pillar (car)" label="A, B, C, and D pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128004" start="3527" end="3536" title="wheelbase" label="wheelbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q669213" start="3932" end="3946" title="Nissan Prairie" label="Nissan Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599122" start="3957" end="3974" title="Chrysler minivans (NS)" label="Chrysler minivans"/>
<link wikidata="Q966459" start="4125" end="4133" title="liftgate" label="liftgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071036" start="4217" end="4232" title="Chevrolet Astro" label="Chevrolet Astro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389152" start="4234" end="4247" title="Ford Aerostar" label="Ford Aerostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q345168" start="4257" end="4278" title="Mercedes-Benz V-Class" label="Mercedes-Benz V-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195000" start="4625" end="4638" title="Honda Odyssey (North America)" label="Honda Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="4763" end="4771" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4802" end="4828" title="Chrysler Voyager#Stow&amp;#x27;n Go seating" label="fold-flat second-row seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545350" start="4917" end="4930" title="Ottoman (furniture)" label="Ottoman seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886933" start="4946" end="4956" title="bench seat" label="bench seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050217" start="5156" end="5168" title="Stout Scarab" label="Stout Scarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097034" start="5418" end="5434" title="DKW Schnellaster" label="DKW Schnellaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="5478" end="5495" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q611714" start="5499" end="5516" title="transverse engine" label="transverse engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="5639" end="5656" title="Volkswagen Type 2" label="Volkswagen Type 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6052" end="6065" title="Fiat 600#Multipla" label="Fiat Multipla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125433" start="6166" end="6174" title="Fiat 600" label="Fiat 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711283" start="6185" end="6196" title="Rear-engine, rear-wheel-drive layout" label="rear engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432780" start="6201" end="6212" title="cab forward" label="cab forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436723" start="6331" end="6351" title="Ford econoline" label="Econoline Club Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071183" start="6356" end="6366" title="Chevrolet Greenbrier" label="Greenbrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023856" start="6418" end="6424" title="Ford Falcon (North America)" label="Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071151" start="6454" end="6461" title="Chevrolet Corvair" label="Corvair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071318" start="6576" end="6585" title="Chevy Sportvan" label="Chevy Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="6884" end="6886" title="V6 engine" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139368" start="7208" end="7221" title="Toyota Sienna" label="Toyota Sienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114477" start="7223" end="7240" title="Chrysler Pacifica" label="Chrysler Pacifica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648917" start="7242" end="7258" title="Chrysler Voyager" label="Chrysler Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195000" start="7260" end="7273" title="Honda Odyssey (North America)" label="Honda Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q488173" start="7279" end="7291" title="Kia Carnival" label="Kia Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599109" start="7551" end="7561" title="Chrysler minivans (S)" label="S platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q838223" start="7572" end="7588" title="Plymouth Voyager" label="Plymouth Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095648" start="7593" end="7606" title="Dodge Caravan" label="Dodge Caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193468" start="7794" end="7807" title="full-size van" label="full-size van"/>
<link wikidata="Q188886" start="8134" end="8147" title="station wagon" label="station wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="8210" end="8224" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071036" start="8243" end="8258" title="Chevrolet Astro" label="Chevrolet Astro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071036" start="8263" end="8273" title="GMC Safari" label="GMC Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389152" start="8325" end="8338" title="Ford Aerostar" label="Ford Aerostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="8374" end="8390" title="rear-wheel drive" label="rear-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400823" start="8525" end="8535" title="Toyota Van" label="Toyota Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814517" start="8537" end="8551" title="Nissan Vanette" label="Nissan Vanette"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552308" start="8557" end="8574" title="Mitsubishi Delica" label="Mitsubishi Delica"/>
<link wikidata="Q660703" start="8781" end="8790" title="Mazda MPV" label="Mazda MPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806924" start="9584" end="9600" title="Mercury Villager" label="Mercury Villager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437048" start="9618" end="9631" title="Ford Windstar" label="Ford Windstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21152719" start="9907" end="9934" title="Chrysler Town &amp;amp; Country" label="Chrysler Town &amp;amp; Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q962634" start="9949" end="9970" title="Oldsmobile Silhouette" label="Oldsmobile Silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q669213" start="10285" end="10298" title="Nissan Axxess" label="Nissan Axxess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430887" start="10416" end="10428" title="Nissan Quest" label="Nissan Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428197" start="10495" end="10508" title="Toyota Previa" label="Toyota Previa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139368" start="10668" end="10681" title="Toyota Sienna" label="Toyota Sienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195000" start="10847" end="10872" title="Honda Odyssey (North America)" label="Odyssey for North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201144" start="11544" end="11554" title="soccer mom" label="soccer mom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222834" start="12266" end="12284" title="Volkswagen Eurovan" label="Volkswagen Eurovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437048" start="12342" end="12355" title="Ford Freestar" label="Ford Freestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071328" start="12510" end="12528" title="Chevrolet Uplander" label="Chevrolet Uplander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450822" start="12563" end="12580" title="Volkswagen Routan" label="Volkswagen Routan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599130" start="12593" end="12613" title="Chrysler minivans (RT)" label="Chrysler RT minivans"/>
<link wikidata="Q567341" start="12694" end="12714" title="Ford Transit Connect" label="Ford Transit Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q345168" start="12757" end="12777" title="Mercedes-Benz Metris" label="Mercedes-Benz Metris"/>
<link wikidata="Q488173" start="12827" end="12837" title="Kia Sedona" label="Kia Sedona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35349" start="12982" end="12985" title="Kia" label="Kia"/>
<link wikidata="Q488191" start="13016" end="13025" title="Kia Rondo" label="Kia Rondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541535" start="13196" end="13202" title="Mazda5" label="Mazda5"/>
<link wikidata="Q914079" start="13362" end="13372" title="Ford C-Max" label="Ford C-Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="13400" end="13415" title="Hybrid electric vehicle" label="hybrid electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="13420" end="13436" title="Battery electric vehicle" label="battery electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q193468" start="13678" end="13681" title="van" label="van"/>
<link wikidata="Q849485" start="13783" end="13797" title="Renault Espace" label="Renault Espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q777782" start="14098" end="14110" title="Matra Rancho" label="Matra Rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="14336" end="14363" title="American Motors Corporation" label="American Motors Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648917" start="14592" end="14608" title="Chrysler Voyager" label="Chrysler Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q955725" start="14754" end="14774" title="Opel Sintra" label="Opel/Vauxhall Sintra"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="14878" end="14894" title="Rebadging" label="badge engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q18374597" start="14905" end="14913" title="Eurovans" label="Eurovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480791" start="14942" end="14952" title="Sevel Nord" label="Sevel Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q846346" start="15242" end="15253" title="Ford Galaxy" label="Ford Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334020" start="15255" end="15268" title="SEAT Alhambra" label="SEAT Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q753040" start="15274" end="15291" title="Volkswagen Sharan" label="Volkswagen Sharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q345168" start="15376" end="15397" title="Mercedes-Benz V-Class" label="Mercedes-Benz V-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q223621" start="15564" end="15577" title="Fiat Multipla" label="Fiat Multipla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15672" end="15688" title="Fiat 600#Multipla" label="an older minivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597271" start="16184" end="16196" title="overcapacity" label="overcapacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q531589" start="16259" end="16273" title="Renault Scénic" label="Renault Scénic"/>
<link wikidata="Q222764" start="16328" end="16334" title="Renault Mégane" label="Mégane"/>
<link wikidata="Q671495" start="16586" end="16597" title="Opel Zafira" label="Opel Zafira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093728" start="16630" end="16651" title="Citroën Xsara Picasso" label="Citroën Xsara Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q762891" start="16946" end="16956" title="Mid-engine design" label="mid-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q370704" start="16958" end="16966" title="cab over" label="cab over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400823" start="17051" end="17065" title="Toyota TownAce" label="Toyota TownAce"/>
<link wikidata="Q981209" start="17067" end="17079" title="Toyota HiAce" label="Toyota HiAce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814517" start="17081" end="17095" title="Nissan Vanette" label="Nissan Vanette"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552308" start="17097" end="17114" title="Mitsubishi Delica" label="Mitsubishi Delica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622735" start="17119" end="17130" title="Mazda Bongo" label="Mazda Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q669213" start="17261" end="17275" title="Nissan Prairie" label="Nissan Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q482832" start="17518" end="17536" title="Mitsubishi Chariot" label="Mitsubishi Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428197" start="17652" end="17665" title="Toyota Estima" label="Toyota Estima"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="17937" end="17943" title="Hybrid electric vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582046" start="17998" end="18012" title="Toyota Alphard" label="Toyota Alphard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581707" start="18099" end="18105" title="luxury car" label="luxury"/>
<link wikidata="Q65147581" start="18119" end="18127" title="Lexus LM" label="Lexus LM"/>
<link wikidata="Q934829" start="18284" end="18297" title="Nissan Serena" label="Nissan Serena"/>
<link wikidata="Q956356" start="18314" end="18328" title="Nissan Elgrand" label="Nissan Elgrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892599" start="18401" end="18414" title="Honda Odyssey" label="Honda Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626691" start="18937" end="18950" title="Honda Stepwgn" label="Honda Stepwgn"/>
<link wikidata="Q547675" start="19040" end="19052" title="Honda Stream" label="Honda Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q488173" start="19361" end="19373" title="Kia Carnival" label="Kia Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q489044" start="19503" end="19517" title="Hyundai Trajet" label="Hyundai Trajet"/>
<link wikidata="Q734363" start="19570" end="19586" title="SsangYong Rodius" label="SsangYong Rodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488453" start="19911" end="19922" title="Shanghai GM" label="Shanghai GM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002754" start="19951" end="19960" title="Buick GL8" label="Buick GL8"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="20331" end="20347" title="one-child policy" label="one-child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858691" start="20364" end="20380" title="two-child policy" label="two-child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106621124" start="20802" end="20807" title="Zeekr" label="Zeekr"/>
<link wikidata="Q114608144" start="20823" end="20832" title="Zeekr 009" label="Zeekr 009"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="20833" end="20841" title="electric car" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21140" end="21151" title="Fiscal year#India" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="21284" end="21297" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="21299" end="21305" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q35919" start="21307" end="21312" title="Lexus" label="Lexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27415" start="21314" end="21319" title="Buick" label="Buick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611731" start="21321" end="21327" title="Hongqi (marque)" label="Hongqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106621124" start="21329" end="21334" title="Zeekr" label="Zeekr"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="21339" end="21344" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581707" start="21375" end="21390" title="luxury vehicles" label="luxury vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q345168" start="21840" end="21861" title="Mercedes-Benz V-Class" label="Mercedes-Benz V-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q65147581" start="21863" end="21871" title="Lexus LM" label="Lexus LM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002754" start="21873" end="21882" title="Buick GL8" label="Buick GL8"/>
<link wikidata="Q115682691" start="21884" end="21894" title="Hongqi HQ9" label="Hongqi HQ9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582046" start="21896" end="21910" title="Toyota Alphard" label="Toyota Alphard"/>
<link wikidata="Q121816468" start="21912" end="21922" title="Volvo EM90" label="Volvo EM90"/>
<link wikidata="Q114608144" start="21931" end="21940" title="Zeekr 009" label="Zeekr 009"/>
<link wikidata="Q912358" start="22389" end="22401" title="Fiat Fiorino" label="Fiat Fiorino"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569368" start="22406" end="22426" title="Ford Transit Courier" label="Ford Transit Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q777782" start="23186" end="23198" title="Matra Rancho" label="Matra Rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q756741" start="23374" end="23390" title="Citroën Berlingo" label="Citroën Berlingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="23395" end="23409" title="Renault Kangoo" label="Renault Kangoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767604" start="23465" end="23474" title="supermini car" label="supermini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704381" start="23478" end="23488" title="subcompact car" label="subcompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762136" start="23519" end="23527" title="mini MPV" label="mini MPV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23663" end="23671" title="Hatchback#Characteristics" label="liftgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266730" start="23750" end="23766" title="small family car" label="small family car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627864" start="23800" end="23807" title="H-point" label="H-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q934197" start="24074" end="24084" title="Fiat Doblò" label="Fiat Doblò"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130093" start="24155" end="24166" title="Opel Meriva" label="Opel Meriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q207976" start="24195" end="24206" title="Peugeot 206" label="Peugeot 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512247" start="24634" end="24647" title="body-on-frame" label="body-on-frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="24660" end="24676" title="rear-wheel drive" label="rear-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303949" start="24919" end="24940" title="Toyota Kijang" label="Toyota Tamaraw/Kijang"/>
<link wikidata="Q219029" start="25082" end="25115" title="Isuzu Panther" label="Isuzu Panther/Hi-Lander/Crosswind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939855" start="25120" end="25152" title="Mitsubishi Freeca" label="Mitsubishi Freeca/Adventure/Kuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402888" start="25213" end="25226" title="Toyota Innova" label="Toyota Innova"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="25405" end="25412" title="unibody" label="unibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q889522" start="25796" end="25812" title="ground clearance" label="ground clearance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20829" wikidata="Q2078987" url="?curid=20829" title="Moxie">
<text>Moxie is a brand of carbonated beverage that is among the first mass-produced soft drinks in the United States. It was created around 1876 by Augustin Thompson as a patent medicine called &quot;Moxie Nerve Food&quot; and was produced in Lowell, Massachusetts. The sweet soda is similar to root beer, but with a bitter aftertaste. It is flavored with gentian root extract, an extremely bitter substance commonly used in herbal medicine.

Moxie was designated the official soft drink of Maine on May 10, 2005. It continues to be regionally popular today, particularly in New England states. It was previously produced by the Moxie Beverage Company of Bedford, New Hampshire, until Moxie was purchased by The Coca-Cola Company in 2018.

The name has become the word &quot;&quot; in American English, a noun meaning energy, determination, and spunk.

==History==

Moxie originated around 1876 as a patent medicine called &quot;Moxie Nerve Food&quot;, by Augustin Thompson in Lowell, Massachusetts. Thompson claimed that it contained an extract from a rare, unnamed South American plant, which is now known to be gentian root. Moxie, he claimed, was especially effective against &quot;paralysis, softening of the brain, nervousness, and insomnia&quot;.

Thompson claimed that he named the beverage after a Lieutenant Moxie, a purported friend of his, who he claimed had discovered the plant and used it as a panacea, and the company he created continued to promulgate legendary stories about the word&#x27;s origin. It likely derives from an Abenaki word that means &quot;dark water&quot; and that is found in lake and river names in Maine, where Thompson was born and raised.

After a few years, Thompson added soda water to the formula and changed the product&#x27;s name to &quot;Beverage Moxie Nerve Food&quot;. By 1884 he was selling Moxie both in bottles and in bulk as a soda fountain syrup. In 1885, he received a trademark for the term. He marketed it as &quot;a delicious blend of bitter and sweet, a drink to satisfy everyone&#x27;s taste.&quot; Thompson died in 1903.

In 1907, the Moxie Nerve Food Company of New England filed a lawsuit in Boston against the Modox Company and others, alleging that they had copied the ingredients of Moxie and were using the name &quot;Modox&quot;, which closely resembles &quot;Moxie&quot;, and were infringing upon patents and trademarks. The suit was dismissed by the judge, who said the court could not protect the legitimate part of the plaintiff&#x27;s business in this case. In a later case in New York, the Moxie Nerve Food Company won a lawsuit against Modox, which subsequently went out of business.

President Calvin Coolidge was known to favor the drink, and Boston Red Sox slugger Ted Williams endorsed it on radio and in print. The company also marketed a beverage called &quot;Ted&#x27;s Root Beer&quot; in the early sixties. Author E. B. White once claimed that &quot;Moxie contains gentian root, which is the path to the good life.&quot;

The brand suffered a significant decline in sales during the 1930s.

The Catawissa Bottling Company in Catawissa, Pennsylvania is one of six bottlers in the United States that produce Moxie. Catawissa has produced it since 1945. Polar Beverages also bottles Moxie in Worcester, Massachusetts, as does Orca Beverage in Mukilteo, Washington.

===Since 1962===

Sugar-free Diet Moxie was introduced in 1962, three years after &quot;Mad&quot; magazine began placing the Moxie logo in the background of its articles to increase public awareness of it. The magazine also introduced a short-lived girlfriend for its mascot Alfred E. Neuman who was named &quot;Moxie.&quot; As a result of &quot;Mad&quot;″s efforts, sales of the soft drink increased 10% which led to the &quot;Mad About Moxie&quot; campaign.

The Moxie brand was purchased in 1966 by the Monarch Beverage Company of Atlanta. In 2007 Monarch sold it to its previous owner, Cornucopia Beverages of Bedford, New Hampshire, which is owned by the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England, a subsidiary of the Kirin Brewery Company, which is a subsidiary of Kirin Company, Limited, which is a subsidiary of Kirin Holdings Company, Limited, based in Tokyo, Japan (a member of the Mitsubishi &quot;keiretsu&quot;).

In its decision to step up efforts to distribute the product, Cornucopia cited increasing requests for Moxie from fans across the country. In 2007 it launched pilot sales in Florida and in 2010 granted distribution in Florida to Florida Micro Beverage Distributors.

In 2011, Cornucopia began doing business as the Moxie Beverage Company to market Moxie and Moxie-branded products. A website, DrinkMoxie.com, was created to promote Moxie. Drink recipes using Moxie were created.

Demand for Moxie has waned in recent years, although the brand persists in New England and Pennsylvania.

On August 28, 2018, the Coca-Cola Company announced its purchase of Moxie from Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England Inc. for an unspecified amount.

==Advertising==

Moxie advertising in the 19th and early 20th centuries emphasized Moxie as a health drink and &quot;nerve food&quot;.

In its advertising, Moxie used &quot;Make Mine Moxie!&quot; jingles, the slogan &quot;Just Make It Moxie for Mine&quot;, and a &quot;Moxie Man&quot; logo. The Moxie Man has appeared on labels in some form since 1906, and the image of a man pointing forward most associated with the brand was first introduced in 1911. The identity of the &quot;Moxie Man&quot;, or &quot;Moxie Boy&quot; as he was called in the 1920s, was apparently not known at that time, with a 1922 ad in the &quot;Boston Herald&quot; by F. M. Archer proclaiming &quot;in almost every town and city in the United States there is someone who believes they know the original of the Moxie Boy. In view of the many thousands of different opinions on this subject, we may offer a prize to the person who picks the actual boy, furnishing us photographic proofs, etc...the Moxie Boy, now a man (and some man at that), who posed for this picture many, many years ago, in fact before some of the readers of this article were born.&quot; For many years the urban legend was that Archer himself was Moxie&#x27;s mascot, but he would have been about 50 at its introduction in 1911, disproving this theory. In recent years a historical group, The Moxie Congress, was able to ascertain that the man was likely a model for the lithographers printing these advertisements, and with some confidence it is posited that the &quot;Moxie Boy&quot; was one John T. Chamberlain of Revere, Massachusetts. In 2010 the Moxie Man logo was removed from labels for a brief period because it was thought to be too old-fashioned. In 2011 the company&#x27;s head of marketing, Ryan Savage, made the executive decision to bring the logo back in response to complaints from long-standing customers.

A unique advertising tool was the Moxie Horsemobile, a modified automobile whose driver sits on a large model of a horse. The first Horsemobiles were deployed around 1918. A 1935 Rolls-Royce Moxie Horsemobile was sold for $55,000 at the May 20, 2011, Mecum Auction in Indianapolis, Indiana. Moxie at one time maintained about two dozen of them, and they appeared in parades and other public functions.

==Derivative products==
There is a Moxie Energy Drink and a variety of Olde New England Seltzers. The energy drink is citrus-based; it lacks Moxie&#x27;s gentian root tang, caramel color, and (as of 2008) its distinctive branding; similarly, the waters are simply carbonated waters with fruit flavors marketed under the Moxie brand.

Moxie ice cream is seasonally available in Maine in limited quantities and is mild in flavor as compared to the soft drink.

Moxie has been used as a cooking additive by chefs for its herbaceous, savory-sweet flavor profile. It is generally used in reductions as a glaze for meats such as lamb, as well as in baked beans.

==&quot;Moxie&quot; as a slang term==

Moxie was early advertised as &quot;nerve food&quot; which would &quot;strengthen the nervous system&quot; and was &quot;very healthful&quot; and a &quot;drink for athletes&quot; which &quot;strengthens and invigorates&quot;. The term &quot;moxie&quot;, which derives from the drink name, has the approximate meaning of &quot;energy, determination, spunk, daring courage, nerve, spirit, guts&quot;. This term was extant from about the 1930s and has continued in use, to some extent, into the early 21st century, as in &quot;This kid&#x27;s got moxie!&quot;

==See also==

* List of brand name soft drink products

==References==
Notes
Further reading
* Bowers, Q. David, &quot;The Moxie Encyclopedia&quot;, Vestal Press, 1985. 
* Grace, Roger M., &quot;Is Hires the Longest Marketed Soft Drink? Or Moxie? Or...?&quot;, &quot;Metropolitan News-Enterprise&quot; newspaper, Los Angeles, Thursday, November 17, 2005, p. 15
* Potter, Frank N., &quot;The Book Of Moxie&quot;, Paducah, KY : Collector Books, 1987. .

==External links==
* Official Website
* Moxie facts
* &quot;Make Mine a Moxie!&quot; – &quot;Maine Farmhouse Journal&quot;, July 6–10, 2000
* https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2018/08/28/coca-cola-acquires-beloved-maine-soda-moxie/8EWByZiHnZwIp1qT4ik45M/story.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2078987" start="0" end="5" title="Moxie" label="Moxie"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="20" end="39" title="carbonated beverage" label="carbonated beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="78" end="88" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821141" start="142" end="159" title="Augustin Thompson" label="Augustin Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480271" start="165" end="180" title="patent medicine" label="patent medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="237" end="258" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q36275" start="289" end="298" title="root beer" label="root beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q144682" start="350" end="370" title="gentiana" label="gentian root extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="419" end="434" title="Herbalism" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="485" end="490" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="569" end="580" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310735" start="649" end="671" title="Bedford, New Hampshire" label="Bedford, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="702" end="723" title="The Coca-Cola Company" label="The Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821141" start="950" end="967" title="Augustin Thompson" label="Augustin Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q144682" start="1108" end="1120" title="gentiana" label="gentian root"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="1180" end="1189" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q947813" start="1191" end="1213" title="softening of the brain" label="softening of the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="1215" end="1226" title="Anxiety (mood)" label="nervousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="1232" end="1240" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="1301" end="1311" title="Lieutenant" label="Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q910154" start="1403" end="1410" title="panacea (medicine)" label="panacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q197936" start="1537" end="1544" title="Abenaki language" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="1707" end="1717" title="soda water" label="soda water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419253" start="1873" end="1886" title="soda fountain" label="soda fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2543" end="2551" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="2663" end="2678" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="2713" end="2727" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="2736" end="2748" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="2890" end="2901" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q158572" start="2941" end="2953" title="Gentiana lutea" label="gentian root"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051608" start="3071" end="3097" title="Catawissa Bottling Company" label="Catawissa Bottling Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133135" start="3101" end="3124" title="Catawissa, Pennsylvania" label="Catawissa, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209020" start="3227" end="3242" title="Polar Beverages" label="Polar Beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="3265" end="3289" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507307" start="3316" end="3336" title="Mukilteo, Washington" label="Mukilteo, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="3427" end="3430" title="Mad Magazine" label="Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q552164" start="3614" end="3630" title="Alfred E. Neuman" label="Alfred E. Neuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897995" start="3845" end="3869" title="Monarch Beverage Company" label="Monarch Beverage Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="3873" end="3880" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310735" start="3953" end="3975" title="Bedford, New Hampshire" label="Bedford, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139063" start="3999" end="4049" title="Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England" label="Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403399" start="4071" end="4092" title="Kirin Brewery Company" label="Kirin Brewery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403399" start="4168" end="4199" title="Kirin Holdings Company, Limited" label="Kirin Holdings Company, Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="4210" end="4215" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="4240" end="4250" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q590428" start="4257" end="4265" title="keiretsu" label="keiretsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="4449" end="4456" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="4568" end="4585" title="doing business as" label="doing business as"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="4830" end="4841" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="4846" end="4858" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="4885" end="4902" title="Coca-Cola Company" label="Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q264922" start="5220" end="5226" title="jingle" label="jingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="5644" end="5657" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="6176" end="6188" title="urban legend" label="urban legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q54154" start="6587" end="6608" title="Revere, Massachusetts" label="Revere, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="7074" end="7085" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="7163" end="7184" title="Indianapolis, Indiana" label="Indianapolis, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971485" start="7881" end="7891" title="reduction (cooking)" label="reductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608137" start="8568" end="8606" title="List of brand name soft drink products" label="List of brand name soft drink products"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20832" wikidata="Q46337" url="?curid=20832" title="Manifesto">
<text>A manifesto is a written declaration of the intentions, motives, or views of the issuer, be it an individual, group, political party, or government. A manifesto can accept a previously published opinion or public consensus, but many prominent manifestos—such as &quot;The Communist Manifesto&quot; (1848) and those of various artistic movements—reject accepted knowledge in favor of a new idea. Manifestos relating to religious belief are generally referred to as &quot;creeds&quot; or &quot;confessions of faith&quot;.

==Etymology==
The Italian word , itself derived from the Latin , meaning &quot;clear&quot; or &quot;conspicuous&quot;. Its first recorded use in English is from 1620, in Nathaniel Brent&#x27;s translation of the Italian from Paolo Sarpi&#x27;s &quot;History of the Council of Trent&quot;: &quot;To this citation he made answer by a Manifesto&quot; (p. 102). Similarly, &quot;They were so farre surprised with his Manifesto, that they would never suffer it to be published&quot; (p. 103).

==Notable examples==
* &quot;The Declaration of Independence of the United States&quot; (1776) by the Committee of Five
* &quot;The Communist Manifesto&quot; (1848) by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
* &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; (1925) by Adolf Hitler
* &quot;Industrial Society and Its Future&quot; (1995) by Theodore John Kaczynski
* &quot;The Agile Manifesto&quot; (2001) by Martin Fowler and Jim Highsmith
* &quot;The Revolution: A Manifesto&quot; (2008) by Ron Paul

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46337" start="2" end="11" title="Manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501855" start="117" end="132" title="Party platform" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q188577" start="206" end="222" title="Consensus decision-making" label="public consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40591" start="268" end="291" title="The Communist Manifesto" label="The Communist Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797221" start="326" end="344" title="Art manifesto" label="artistic movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="418" end="434" title="religious belief" label="religious belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140925" start="470" end="475" title="creed" label="creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="578" end="583" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969524" start="691" end="706" title="Nathaniel Brent" label="Nathaniel Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349158" start="746" end="757" title="Paolo Sarpi" label="Paolo Sarpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="786" end="802" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="1039" end="1091" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="The Declaration of Independence of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344665" start="1112" end="1129" title="Committee of Five" label="Committee of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q40591" start="1138" end="1161" title="The Communist Manifesto" label="The Communist Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="1178" end="1187" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="1192" end="1208" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="1217" end="1227" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1244" end="1256" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896903" start="1265" end="1298" title="Industrial Society and Its Future" label="Industrial Society and Its Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q222134" start="1315" end="1338" title="Theodore John Kaczynski" label="Theodore John Kaczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q30232" start="1347" end="1366" title="Agile software development" label="The Agile Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q74894" start="1383" end="1396" title="Martin Fowler (software engineer)" label="Martin Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195636" start="1401" end="1414" title="Jim Highsmith" label="Jim Highsmith"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1423" end="1450" title="The Revolution: A Manifesto" label="The Revolution: A Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="1467" end="1475" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20833" wikidata="Q41342" url="?curid=20833" title="Mary Tyler Moore">
<text>Mary Tyler Moore (December 29, 1936 – January 25, 2017) was an American actress, producer, and social advocate. She is best known for her roles on &quot;The Dick Van Dyke Show&quot; (1961–1966) and especially &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; (1970–1977), which &quot;helped define a new vision of American womanhood&quot; and &quot;appealed to an audience facing the new trials of modern-day existence&quot;. Moore won seven Primetime Emmy Awards and three Golden Globe Awards. She was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in &quot;Ordinary People&quot;. Moore had major supporting roles in the musical film &quot;Thoroughly Modern Millie&quot; and the dark comedy film &quot;Flirting with Disaster&quot;. Moore also received praise for her performance in the television film &quot;Heartsounds&quot;. Moore was an advocate for animal rights, vegetarianism and diabetes awareness and research.

==Early life==
Moore was born in the Brooklyn Heights neighborhood in Brooklyn, New York City, in 1936 to Marjorie (née Hackett) and George Tyler Moore. Her father was a clerk. Her Irish-Catholic family lived in a rental apartment in Brooklyn&#x27;s Flatbush neighborhood, then the family later lived in a rented apartment at 144-16 35th Avenue in Flushing, Queens.

Moore was the oldest of three children, with a younger brother John and a younger sister Elizabeth. Moore&#x27;s paternal great-grandfather, Confederate Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Tilghman Moore, owned the house that is now the Stonewall Jackson&#x27;s Headquarters Museum in Winchester, Virginia.

When Moore was eight years old, the family relocated to Los Angeles, California in 1945, at the recommendation of her uncle, an employee of MCA. She was raised Catholic and attended St. Rose of Lima Parochial School in Brooklyn until the third grade. In Los Angeles, Moore attended Saint Ambrose School and Immaculate Heart High School in the Los Feliz neighborhood.

Moore&#x27;s sister Elizabeth died at age 21 &quot;from a combination of... painkillers and alcohol.&quot; Her brother died at the age of 47 from kidney cancer.

==Career==
===Television===
====Early appearances====

Moore&#x27;s television career began in 1955 with a job as &quot;Happy Hotpoint&quot;, a tiny elf dancing on Hotpoint home appliances in TV commercials that ran during breaks on &quot;The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet&quot;. After appearing in 39 Hotpoint commercials in five days, she received approximately $6,000 (). She became pregnant while still working as &quot;Happy&quot;, and Hotpoint ended her work when it became too difficult to conceal her pregnancy with the elf costume.

Moore was an uncredited&lt;ref name=&quot;Evanier/Mary-Record&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; photographic model for record album covers,&lt;ref name=&quot;tralfaz/coverart/MTM&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;gottahaverockandroll/38091&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; many for the Tops Records label,&lt;ref name=&quot;latimes/covers-20170126&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and auditioned for the role of the elder daughter of Danny Thomas for his long-running TV show, but was turned down. Much later, Thomas explained that &quot;she missed it by a nose... no daughter of mine could ever have a nose that small&quot;.
Moore&#x27;s first regular television role was as &#x27;Sam&#x27; a mysterious and glamorous telephone switchboard operator/receptionist in the series &quot;Richard Diamond, Private Detective&quot; with David Janssen. Sam&#x27;s sultry voice was heard talking to Richard Diamond from her switchboard; however, only her legs and occasionally her hands appeared on camera -- never her face, adding to the character&#x27;s mystique. After creating a minor sensation by appearing as Sam in 12 episodes of &quot;Richard Diamond&quot; as an uncredited player, Moore asked for a raise -- and was promptly fired by the show&#x27;s producers and replaced by Roxane Brooks in the role. However, Moore was able to parlay the publicity from &#x27;revealing&#x27; Sam&#x27;s identity to the press into several flattering articles and profiles, giving her career a boost.

About this time, she guest-starred in John Cassavetes&#x27; NBC detective series &quot;Johnny Staccato&quot;, and also in the series premiere of &quot;The Tab Hunter Show&quot; in September 1960 and the &quot;Bachelor Father&quot; episode &quot;Bentley and the Big Board&quot; in December 1960. In 1961, Moore appeared in several big parts in movies and on television, including &quot;Bourbon Street Beat&quot;; &quot;77 Sunset Strip&quot;; &quot;Surfside 6&quot;; &quot;Wanted: Dead or Alive&quot; with Steve McQueen; &quot;Steve Canyon&quot;; &quot;Hawaiian Eye&quot;; &quot;Thriller&quot; and &quot;Lock-Up&quot;. She also appeared in a February 1962 episode of &quot;Straightaway&quot;.

====&quot;The Dick Van Dyke Show&quot; (1961–1966)====

In 1961, Carl Reiner cast Moore in &quot;The Dick Van Dyke Show&quot;, a weekly series based on Reiner&#x27;s own life and career as a writer for Sid Caesar&#x27;s television variety show &quot;Your Show of Shows&quot;, telling the cast from the outset that it would run for no more than five years. The show was produced by Danny Thomas&#x27; company, and Thomas himself recommended her. He remembered Moore as &quot;the girl with three names&quot; whom he had turned down earlier.

Moore&#x27;s energetic comic performances as Van Dyke&#x27;s character&#x27;s wife, begun at age 24 (eleven years Van Dyke&#x27;s junior), made both the actress and her signature fitted capri pants extremely popular, and she became internationally known. When she won her first Emmy Award for her portrayal of Laura Petrie, she said, &quot;I know this will never happen again.&quot; As Laura Petrie, Moore often wore styles that recalled the fashion of Jackie Kennedy, such as capri pants, echoing an ideal of the Kennedy administration&#x27;s Camelot.

====&quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; (1970–1977)====
In 1970, after performing in the one-hour musical special &quot;Dick Van Dyke and the Other Woman&quot;, Moore and husband Grant Tinker successfully pitched a sitcom that centered on Moore to CBS. &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; was a half-hour newsroom sitcom featuring Ed Asner as her gruff boss Lou Grant. &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; bridged aspects of the Women&#x27;s Movement with mainstream culture by portraying an amiable, independent woman whose life focused on her professional career rather than marriage and family.

The show marked the first big hit for film and television producer James L. Brooks, who would also do more work for Moore and Tinker&#x27;s production company. Moore&#x27;s show proved so popular that three regular characters, Valerie Harper as Rhoda Morgenstern, Cloris Leachman as Phyllis Lindstrom, and Ed Asner as Lou Grant spun off into their own three separate series playing the same characters, albeit with &quot;Lou Grant&quot; being an hour-long drama instead of a half-hour sitcom.

The premise of the single working woman&#x27;s life, alternating during the program between work and home, became a television staple. After six years of ratings in the top 20, the show slipped to number 39 in season seven.

Producers asked that the series be canceled because of falling ratings, afraid that the show&#x27;s legacy might be damaged if it were renewed for another season. Despite the decline in ratings, the 1977 season won its third straight Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy. In seven seasons, the program won 29 Emmys and Moore won three awards for Best Lead Actress in a sitcom. The record was unbroken until 2002, when the NBC sitcom &quot;Frasier&quot; won its 30th Emmy.

====Later projects====
On January 22, 1976, while season six of &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; was in progress, Moore appeared in &quot;Mary&#x27;s Incredible Dream&quot;, an experimental musical/variety special for CBS, and which also featured Ben Vereen. She described it as &quot;a totally different concept from anything ever attempted on television... We go from song to dance to song and back again, telling a story of the eternal cycle of man. If viewers don&#x27;t want to follow the story, they can just enjoy the music and dancing.&quot; In 1978, she starred in a second CBS special, &quot;How to Survive the &#x27;70s and Maybe Even Bump Into Happiness&quot;, where she received significant support from a strong lineup of guest stars: Bill Bixby, John Ritter, Harvey Korman and Dick Van Dyke. In the 1978–79 season, Moore also starred in two unsuccessful CBS variety series. The first, &quot;Mary&quot;, featured David Letterman, Michael Keaton, Swoosie Kurtz and Dick Shawn in the supporting cast. After CBS canceled that series, it brought Moore back in March 1979 in a new, retooled show, &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Hour&quot;. Described as a &quot;sit-var&quot; (part situation comedy/part variety series), it had Moore portraying a TV star putting on a variety show. The program lasted just 11 episodes.

In the 1985–86 season, Moore returned to CBS in a sitcom titled &quot;Mary&quot;, which suffered from poor reviews, sagging ratings, and strife within the production crew. Moore said she asked network to pull the show because she was unhappy with the direction and production. Moore also starred in the short-lived &quot;Annie McGuire&quot; in 1988. In 1995, after another lengthy break from TV series work, Moore was cast as tough, unsympathetic newspaper owner Louise &quot;the Dragon&quot; Felcott on the CBS drama &quot;New York News&quot;, the third series in which her character was involved in the news media. Moore was disappointed with the writing of her character and was negotiating with producers to get out of her contract for the series when it was canceled.

In the mid-1990s, Moore appeared as herself on two episodes of &quot;Ellen&quot;. She guest-starred on Ellen DeGeneres&#x27;s &quot;The Ellen Show&quot;, in 2001. In 2004, Moore reunited with her &quot;Dick Van Dyke Show&quot; castmates for a reunion special, &quot;The Dick Van Dyke Show Revisited&quot;.

In 2006, Moore guest-starred as Christine St. George, the high-strung host of a fictional TV show, in three episodes of the Fox sitcom &quot;That &#x27;70s Show&quot;. Moore&#x27;s scenes were shot on the same sound stage where &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; was filmed in the 1970s. She made a guest appearance on the season two premiere of &quot;Hot in Cleveland&quot;, which starred her former co-star Betty White. It marked the first time that White and Moore had worked together since &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; ended in 1977. In the fall of 2013, Moore reprised her role on &quot;Hot in Cleveland&quot; in a season four episode that reunited Moore and White with former &quot;Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; cast members Cloris Leachman, Valerie Harper and Georgia Engel. The reunion coincided with Harper&#x27;s public announcement that she had been diagnosed with terminal brain cancer and was given only a few months to live.

===Theater===
Moore appeared in several Broadway plays. She was the star of a new musical version of &quot;Breakfast at Tiffany&#x27;s&quot; in December 1966, but the show, titled &quot;Holly Golightly&quot;, was a flop that closed in previews before opening on Broadway. In reviews of performances in Philadelphia and Boston, critics &quot;murdered&quot; the play in which Moore claimed to be singing with bronchial pneumonia.

She starred in &quot;Whose Life Is It Anyway?&quot; with James Naughton, which opened on Broadway at the Royale Theatre on February 24, 1980, and ran for 96 performances, and in &quot;Sweet Sue&quot;, which opened at the Music Box Theatre on January 8, 1987, later transferred to the Royale Theatre, and ran for 164 performances.

During the 1980s, Moore and her production company produced five plays: &quot;Noises Off&quot;, &quot;The Octette Bridge Club&quot;, &quot;Joe Egg&quot;, &quot;Benefactors&quot;, and &quot;Safe Sex&quot;.
Moore appeared in previews of the Neil Simon play &quot;Rose&#x27;s Dilemma&quot; at the off-Broadway Manhattan Theatre Club in December 2003 but quit the production after receiving a critical letter from Simon instructing her to &quot;learn your lines or get out of my play&quot;. Moore had been using an earpiece on stage to feed her lines to the repeatedly rewritten play.

===Films===
Moore made her film debut as a nurse in the Jack Lemmon comedy &quot;Operation Mad Ball&quot; (1957).&lt;ref name=&quot;plex.tv/operation-mad-ball&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;virtual-history/3509&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Her first speaking part came in &quot;X-15&quot; (1961). Following her success on &quot;The Dick Van Dyke Show&quot;, she appeared in a string of films in the late 1960s (after signing an exclusive contract with Universal Pictures), including &quot;Thoroughly Modern Millie&quot; (1967), as a would-be actress in 1920s New York who is taken under the wing of Julie Andrews&#x27; title character, and two films released in 1968, &quot;What&#x27;s So Bad About Feeling Good?&quot; with George Peppard, and &quot;Don&#x27;t Just Stand There!&quot; with Robert Wagner. She starred opposite Elvis Presley as a nun in &quot;Change of Habit&quot; (1969). Moore&#x27;s future television castmate Ed Asner appeared in the film as a police officer. 

Moore returned to the big screen in the coming-of-age drama &quot;Ordinary People&quot; (1980). She received an Oscar nomination for her portrayal of a grieving mother trying to cope with the drowning death of a son and the suicide attempt of another son (played by Timothy Hutton who won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance). Moore appeared in only two more films during the next fifteen years: &quot;Six Weeks&quot; (1982) and &quot;Just Between Friends&quot; (1986). She appeared in the independent hit &quot;Flirting with Disaster&quot; (1996).

Moore was in the television movie &quot;Run a Crooked Mile&quot; (1969) and starred in several television movies including &quot;First, You Cry&quot; (1978), which brought her an Emmy nomination for portraying NBC correspondent Betty Rollin&#x27;s struggle with breast cancer. Her later TV movies included the medical drama &quot;Heartsounds&quot; (1984) with James Garner, which brought her another Emmy nomination, &quot;Finnegan Begin Again&quot; (1985) with Robert Preston, which earned her a CableACE Award nomination, the 1988 mini-series &quot;Lincoln&quot;, which brought her another Emmy nomination for playing Mary Todd Lincoln, and &quot;Stolen Babies&quot;, for which she won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in 1993. Later she reunited with former co-stars in &quot;Mary and Rhoda&quot; (2000) with Valerie Harper, and &quot;The Gin Game&quot; (2003) (based on the Broadway play), with Dick Van Dyke. Moore starred in &quot;Like Mother, Like Son&quot; (2001), playing convicted murderer Sante Kimes.

===Memoirs===
Moore wrote two memoirs. In the first, &quot;After All&quot;, published in 1995, she acknowledged being a recovering alcoholic, while in &quot;Growing Up Again: Life, Loves, and Oh Yeah, Diabetes&quot; (2009), she focuses on living with type 1 diabetes.

===MTM Enterprises===

In 1969, Moore and her husband Grant Tinker founded MTM Enterprises, Inc., which produced &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; and other successful television shows and films. It also included a record label, MTM Records. MTM Enterprises produced American sitcoms and drama television series such as &quot;Rhoda&quot;, &quot;Lou Grant&quot; and &quot;Phyllis&quot; (all spin-offs from &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show)&quot;, &quot;The Bob Newhart Show&quot;, &quot;The Texas Wheelers&quot;, &quot;The Bob Crane Show&quot;, &quot;Three for the Road&quot;, &quot;The Tony Randall Show&quot;, &quot;WKRP in Cincinnati&quot;, &quot;The White Shadow&quot;, &quot;Friends and Lovers&quot;, &quot;St. Elsewhere&quot;, &quot;Newhart&quot;, and &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;, and was later sold to Television South, an ITV Franchise holder in 1988. The MTM logo resembles the Metro Goldwyn Mayer logo, but includes a cat named Mimsie instead of a lion. Currently, the shows of MTM Enterprises are distributed by 20th-Century Fox, which is owned by The Walt Disney Company.

==Personal life==
At age 18 in 1955, Moore married her next-door neighbor, 28-year-old cranberry juice salesman Richard Meeker, and within six weeks she was pregnant with her only child, Richard Carleton Meeker Jr., born on July 3, 1956. Meeker and Moore divorced in 1962. Later that year, Moore married Grant Tinker, a CBS executive and later chairman of NBC, and in 1969 they formed the television production company MTM Enterprises, which created and produced the company&#x27;s first television series, &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot;. After a 1973 breakup and patch-up, Moore and Tinker announced a permanent separation in 1979 and divorced two years later. In the early 1980s, Moore dated Steve Martin and Warren Beatty. Another relationship, with Michael Lindsay-Hogg, ended when she wanted to be exclusive and he did not.

On October 14, 1980, Moore&#x27;s son Richard died of an accidental gunshot to the head while handling a small .410 shotgun. He was 24 years old. The same model was later taken off the market because of its &quot;hair trigger&quot;. Three-and-a-half weeks earlier, &quot;Ordinary People&quot; had been released where she played a mother who was grieving over the accidental death of her son.

A 47-year-old Moore married 29-year-old cardiologist Robert Levine on November 23, 1983, at the Pierre Hotel in New York City. They met in 1982 when he treated Moore&#x27;s mother in New York City on a weekend house call, after Moore and her mother returned from a visit to the Vatican where they had a personal audience with Pope John Paul II. Moore and Levine remained married for 34 years until her death in 2017.

Moore was an alcoholic much of her life but quit drinking in 1984 when she admitted herself into the Betty Ford Center. One year after getting sober, she quit her three-pack-a-day cigarette habit.

==Health issues and death==

Moore was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes in 1969. In 2011, she had surgery to remove a meningioma, a benign brain tumor. In 2014, friends reported that Moore had heart and kidney problems and was nearly blind from complications related to diabetes.

Moore died at the age of 80 on January 25, 2017, at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Connecticut, from cardiopulmonary arrest complicated by pneumonia after having been placed on a ventilator the week before. She was interred in Oak Lawn Cemetery in Fairfield, Connecticut, in a private ceremony.

==Philanthropy==

In addition to her acting work, Moore was the International Chairperson of JDRF (the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation). In this role, she used her celebrity status to help raise funds and awareness of diabetes mellitus type 1.

In 2007, in honor of Moore&#x27;s dedication to the Foundation, JDRF created the &quot;Forever Moore&quot; research initiative which will support JDRF&#x27;s Academic Research and Development and JDRF&#x27;s Clinical Development Program. The program works on translating basic research advances into new treatments and technologies for those living with type 1 diabetes.

Moore advocated for animal rights for years and supported charities like the ASPCA and Farm Sanctuary. She helped raise awareness about factory farming methods and promoted more compassionate treatment of farm animals.

Moore appeared as herself in 1996 on an episode of the Ellen DeGeneres sitcom &quot;Ellen&quot;. The storyline of the episode includes Moore honoring Ellen for trying to save a 65-year-old lobster from being eaten at a seafood restaurant. She was also a co-founder of Broadway Barks, an annual animal adopt-a-thon held in New York City. Moore and friend Bernadette Peters worked to make it a no-kill city and to encourage adopting animals from shelters.

In honor of her father, George Tyler Moore, a lifelong American Civil War enthusiast, in 1995 Moore donated funds to acquire an historic structure in Shepherdstown, West Virginia, for Shepherd College (now Shepherd University) to be used as a center for Civil War studies. The center, named the George Tyler Moore Center for the Study of the Civil War, is housed in the historic Conrad Shindler House (c. 1795), which is named in honor of her great-great-great-grandfather, who owned the structure from 1815 to 1852.

Moore also contributed to the renovation of a historic house in Winchester, Virginia, that had been used as headquarters by Confederate Major General Thomas J. &quot;Stonewall&quot; Jackson during his Shenandoah Valley campaign in 1861–62. The house, now known as the Stonewall Jackson&#x27;s Headquarters Museum, had been owned by Moore&#x27;s great-grandfather, Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Tilghman Moore, commander of the 4th Virginia Infantry in Jackson&#x27;s Stonewall Brigade.

==Politics==
During the 1960s and 1970s, Moore had a reputation as a liberal or moderate, although she endorsed President Richard Nixon for re-election in 1972. She endorsed President Jimmy Carter for re-election in a 1980 campaign television ad. In 2011, her friend and former co-star Ed Asner said during an interview on &quot;The O&#x27;Reilly Factor&quot; that Moore &quot;has become much more conservative of late&quot;; Bill O&#x27;Reilly, host of that program, stated that Moore had been a viewer of his show and that her political views had leaned conservative in recent years. In a &quot;Parade&quot; magazine article from March 22, 2009, Moore identified herself as a libertarian centrist who watched Fox News. She stated: &quot;when one looks at what&#x27;s happened to television, there are so few shows that interest me. I do watch a lot of Fox News. I like Charles Krauthammer and Bill O&#x27;Reilly... If McCain had asked me to campaign for him, I would have.&quot;

In an interview for the 2013 PBS series &quot;Pioneers of Television&quot;, Moore said that she was recruited to join the feminist movement of the 1970s by Gloria Steinem, but did not agree with Steinem&#x27;s views. Moore said she believed that women have an important role in raising children and that she did not believe in Steinem&#x27;s view that women owe it to themselves to have a career.

==Acting credits and accolades==

In February 1981, Moore was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in the drama film &quot;Ordinary People&quot; but lost to Sissy Spacek for her role in &quot;Coal Miner&#x27;s Daughter&quot;. In 1981, she won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Drama for that role.

Moore received a total of seven Emmy Awards, including two for her portrayal of Laura Petrie on &quot;The Dick Van Dyke Show&quot; and four for portraying Mary Richards on &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot;. In 1993 she won an Emmy for her portrayal of Georgia Tann in the Lifetime made-for-TV film &quot;Stolen Babies&quot;.

On Broadway, Moore received a Special Tony Award for her performance in &quot;Whose Life Is It Anyway?&quot; in 1980, and was nominated for a Drama Desk Award as well. In addition, as a producer, she received nominations for Tony Awards and Drama Desk Awards for MTM&#x27;s productions of &quot;Noises Off&quot; in 1984 and &quot;Benefactors&quot; in 1986, and won a Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play or Musical in 1985 for &quot;Joe Egg&quot;.
In 1986, she was inducted into the Television Hall of Fame. In 1987, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award in Comedy from the American Comedy Awards.

Moore&#x27;s contributions to the television industry were recognized in 1992 with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The star is located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard.

On May 8, 2002, Moore was present when cable network TV Land and the City of Minneapolis dedicated a statue in downtown Minneapolis of Mary Richards, her character in &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot;. The statue, by artist Gwendolyn Gillen, was chosen from designs submitted by 21 sculptors. The bronze sculpture was located in front of the Dayton&#x27;s department store, later Macy&#x27;s, near the corner of 7th Street South and Nicollet Mall. It depicts the iconic moment in the show&#x27;s opening credits where Moore tosses her tam o&#x27; shanter in the air, in a freeze-frame at the end of the montage. While Dayton&#x27;s is clearly seen in the opening sequence, the store in the background of the hat toss is actually Donaldson&#x27;s, which was, like Dayton&#x27;s, a locally based department store with a long history at 7th and Nicollet. In late 2015, the statue was relocated to the city&#x27;s visitor center during renovations; it was reinstalled in its original location in 2017.

Moore was awarded the 2011 Screen Actors Guild&#x27;s lifetime achievement award. In New York City in 2012, Moore and Bernadette Peters were honored by the Ride of Fame and a double-decker bus was dedicated to them and their charity work on behalf of &quot;Broadway Barks&quot;, which the duo co-founded.

==References==
Notes
Bibliography
* 

==External links==
* 
* Mary Tyler Moore at britannica.com
* 
* 
* Mary Tyler Moore - Breakfast At Tiffany&#x27;s at Discogs
* Interviews:
** 
** Five interview clips, Archive of American Television (1997)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41342" start="0" end="16" title="Mary Tyler Moore" label="Mary Tyler Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q530706" start="153" end="175" title="The Dick Van Dyke Show" label="The Dick Van Dyke Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="215" end="240" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="430" end="451" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="462" end="481" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="509" end="539" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q503313" start="569" end="584" title="Ordinary People" label="Ordinary People"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574548" start="651" end="675" title="Thoroughly Modern Millie" label="Thoroughly Modern Millie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428990" start="713" end="735" title="Flirting with Disaster (film)" label="Flirting with Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="797" end="812" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693093" start="819" end="830" title="Heartsounds" label="Heartsounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="864" end="877" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="897" end="905" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q828553" start="968" end="984" title="Brooklyn Heights" label="Brooklyn Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1001" end="1009" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="1112" end="1126" title="Irish-Catholic" label="Irish-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840381" start="1181" end="1189" title="Flatbush, Brooklyn" label="Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058775" start="1279" end="1295" title="Flushing, Queens" label="Flushing, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619358" start="1524" end="1568" title="Stonewall Jackson&amp;#x27;s Headquarters Museum" label="Stonewall Jackson&amp;#x27;s Headquarters Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q492355" start="1572" end="1592" title="Winchester, Virginia" label="Winchester, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q304509" start="1735" end="1738" title="MCA Inc." label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="1755" end="1763" title="Catholic Church in the United States" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682455" start="1902" end="1930" title="Immaculate Heart High School (Los Angeles)" label="Immaculate Heart High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682727" start="1938" end="1947" title="Los Feliz, Los Angeles" label="Los Feliz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786975" start="2289" end="2297" title="Hotpoint" label="Hotpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q952841" start="2364" end="2399" title="The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet" label="The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977876" start="2938" end="2950" title="Tops Records" label="Tops Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q719588" start="3075" end="3087" title="Danny Thomas" label="Danny Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248905" start="3096" end="3116" title="The Danny Thomas Show" label="long-running TV show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578746" start="3424" end="3458" title="Richard Diamond, Private Detective" label="Richard Diamond, Private Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q498840" start="3470" end="3483" title="David Janssen" label="David Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="4164" end="4179" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4186" end="4189" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182974" start="4213" end="4228" title="Johnny Staccato" label="Johnny Staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854351" start="4277" end="4296" title="The Tab Hunter Show" label="The Tab Hunter Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q728473" start="4335" end="4350" title="Bachelor Father (American TV series)" label="Bachelor Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248164" start="4511" end="4530" title="Bourbon Street Beat" label="Bourbon Street Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q268543" start="4544" end="4559" title="77 Sunset Strip" label="77 Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q655283" start="4573" end="4583" title="Surfside 6" label="Surfside 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699780" start="4597" end="4618" title="Wanted Dead or Alive (TV series)" label="Wanted: Dead or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q159347" start="4630" end="4643" title="Steve McQueen" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471769" start="4651" end="4663" title="Steve Canyon" label="Steve Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248169" start="4677" end="4689" title="Hawaiian Eye" label="Hawaiian Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990884" start="4703" end="4711" title="Thriller (American TV series)" label="Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665194" start="4728" end="4735" title="Lock-Up (TV series)" label="Lock-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855793" start="4797" end="4809" title="Straightaway (TV series)" label="Straightaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q287793" start="4883" end="4894" title="Carl Reiner" label="Carl Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q530706" start="4915" end="4937" title="The Dick Van Dyke Show" label="The Dick Van Dyke Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q555226" start="5020" end="5030" title="Sid Caesar" label="Sid Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568001" start="5068" end="5086" title="Your Show of Shows" label="Your Show of Shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q719588" start="5199" end="5211" title="Danny Thomas" label="Danny Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034971" start="5544" end="5555" title="capri pants" label="capri pants"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="5636" end="5646" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="5811" end="5825" title="Jackie Kennedy" label="Jackie Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5902" end="5909" title="John F. Kennedy#&amp;quot;Camelot Era&amp;quot;" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596491" start="6093" end="6105" title="Grant Tinker" label="Grant Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="6162" end="6165" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="6173" end="6198" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q154421" start="6247" end="6255" title="Ed Asner" label="Ed Asner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685526" start="6274" end="6283" title="Lou Grant (fictional character)" label="Lou Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580856" start="6346" end="6367" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Movement" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q95125" start="6583" end="6598" title="James L. Brooks" label="James L. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q239293" start="6743" end="6757" title="Valerie Harper" label="Valerie Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247556" start="6761" end="6766" title="Rhoda" label="Rhoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q230131" start="6780" end="6795" title="Cloris Leachman" label="Cloris Leachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q510881" start="6799" end="6816" title="Phyllis (TV series)" label="Phyllis Lindstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q154421" start="6822" end="6830" title="Ed Asner" label="Ed Asner"/>
<link wikidata="Q421733" start="6834" end="6843" title="Lou Grant (TV series)" label="Lou Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="7469" end="7479" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="7654" end="7657" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="7671" end="7678" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q770841" start="7957" end="7967" title="Ben Vereen" label="Ben Vereen"/>
<link wikidata="Q498503" start="8459" end="8469" title="Bill Bixby" label="Bill Bixby"/>
<link wikidata="Q314812" start="8471" end="8482" title="John Ritter" label="John Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q717656" start="8484" end="8497" title="Harvey Korman" label="Harvey Korman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778747" start="8616" end="8620" title="Mary (1978 TV series)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q217298" start="8637" end="8652" title="David Letterman" label="David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="8654" end="8668" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q238052" start="8670" end="8683" title="Swoosie Kurtz" label="Swoosie Kurtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026633" start="8688" end="8698" title="Dick Shawn" label="Dick Shawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750494" start="8822" end="8847" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Hour" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778748" start="9104" end="9108" title="Mary (1985 TV series)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769384" start="9355" end="9368" title="Annie McGuire (TV series)" label="Annie McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013811" start="9558" end="9571" title="New York News" label="New York News"/>
<link wikidata="Q82226" start="9877" end="9882" title="Ellen (TV series)" label="Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483325" start="9911" end="9926" title="Ellen DeGeneres" label="Ellen DeGeneres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140270" start="9940" end="9954" title="The Ellen Show" label="The Ellen Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q530706" start="10074" end="10106" title="The Dick Van Dyke Show Revisited" label="The Dick Van Dyke Show Revisited"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="10239" end="10242" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q208072" start="10256" end="10275" title="That &amp;#x27;70s Show" label="That &amp;#x27;70s Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374755" start="10470" end="10486" title="Hot in Cleveland" label="Hot in Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q373895" start="10527" end="10538" title="Betty White" label="Betty White"/>
<link wikidata="Q230131" start="10856" end="10871" title="Cloris Leachman" label="Cloris Leachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q239293" start="10873" end="10887" title="Valerie Harper" label="Valerie Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q125237" start="10892" end="10905" title="Georgia Engel" label="Georgia Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="11105" end="11113" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959470" start="11172" end="11199" title="Breakfast at Tiffany&amp;#x27;s (musical)" label="Breakfast at Tiffany&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987091" start="11515" end="11539" title="Whose Life Is It Anyway? (play)" label="Whose Life Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q349668" start="11551" end="11565" title="James Naughton" label="James Naughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892910" start="11599" end="11613" title="Royale Theatre" label="Royale Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655519" start="11678" end="11687" title="Sweet Sue (play)" label="Sweet Sue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954899" start="11715" end="11732" title="Music Box Theatre" label="Music Box Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335348" start="11903" end="11913" title="Noises Off" label="Noises Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754675" start="11927" end="11950" title="The Octette Bridge Club" label="The Octette Bridge Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263717" start="11964" end="11971" title="A Day in the Death of Joe Egg" label="Joe Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887404" start="11985" end="11996" title="Benefactors (play)" label="Benefactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q315808" start="12064" end="12074" title="Neil Simon" label="Neil Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739329" start="12086" end="12105" title="Rose&amp;#x27;s Dilemma" label="Rose&amp;#x27;s Dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749316" start="12132" end="12154" title="Manhattan Theatre Club" label="Manhattan Theatre Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q94123" start="12463" end="12474" title="Jack Lemmon" label="Jack Lemmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q519192" start="12488" end="12506" title="Operation Mad Ball" label="Operation Mad Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082730" start="12687" end="12691" title="X-15 (film)" label="X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="12861" end="12879" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574548" start="12898" end="12922" title="Thoroughly Modern Millie" label="Thoroughly Modern Millie"/>
<link wikidata="Q161819" start="13008" end="13021" title="Julie Andrews" label="Julie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204274" start="13083" end="13121" title="What&amp;#x27;s So Bad About Feeling Good?" label="What&amp;#x27;s So Bad About Feeling Good?"/>
<link wikidata="Q36980" start="13133" end="13147" title="George Peppard" label="George Peppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q21869310" start="13159" end="13187" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Just Stand There!" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Just Stand There!"/>
<link wikidata="Q310493" start="13199" end="13212" title="Robert Wagner" label="Robert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="13235" end="13248" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q862691" start="13267" end="13282" title="Change of Habit" label="Change of Habit"/>
<link wikidata="Q154421" start="13337" end="13345" title="Ed Asner" label="Ed Asner"/>
<link wikidata="Q503313" start="13456" end="13471" title="Ordinary People" label="Ordinary People"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="13502" end="13507" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310324" start="13656" end="13670" title="Timothy Hutton" label="Timothy Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="13683" end="13722" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532915" start="13820" end="13829" title="Six Weeks" label="Six Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125305" start="13853" end="13873" title="Just Between Friends" label="Just Between Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428990" start="13930" end="13952" title="Flirting with Disaster (film)" label="Flirting with Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379541" start="14008" end="14026" title="Run a Crooked Mile" label="Run a Crooked Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890932" start="14097" end="14111" title="First, You Cry" label="First, You Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="14147" end="14151" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898959" start="14196" end="14208" title="Betty Rollin" label="Betty Rollin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693093" start="14298" end="14309" title="Heartsounds" label="Heartsounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q108510" start="14328" end="14340" title="James Garner" label="James Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450703" start="14391" end="14411" title="Finnegan Begin Again" label="Finnegan Begin Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q451811" start="14430" end="14444" title="Robert Preston (actor)" label="Robert Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024866" start="14465" end="14479" title="CableACE Award" label="CableACE Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550446" start="14519" end="14526" title="Lincoln (miniseries)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q215062" start="14588" end="14605" title="Mary Todd Lincoln" label="Mary Todd Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548737" start="14659" end="14704" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Movie" label="Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781015" start="14763" end="14777" title="Mary and Rhoda" label="Mary and Rhoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736455" start="14858" end="14875" title="The Gin Game" label="the Broadway play"/>
<link wikidata="Q16095691" start="14984" end="14995" title="Sante Kimes" label="Sante Kimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="15249" end="15264" title="diabetes mellitus type 1" label="type 1 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596491" start="15321" end="15333" title="Grant Tinker" label="Grant Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043490" start="15342" end="15357" title="MTM Enterprises" label="MTM Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718478" start="15500" end="15511" title="MTM Records" label="MTM Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247556" start="15597" end="15602" title="Rhoda" label="Rhoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q421733" start="15616" end="15625" title="Lou Grant (TV series)" label="Lou Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q510881" start="15642" end="15649" title="Phyllis (TV series)" label="Phyllis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248785" start="15722" end="15742" title="The Bob Newhart Show" label="The Bob Newhart Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768602" start="15756" end="15774" title="The Texas Wheelers" label="The Texas Wheelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718948" start="15788" end="15806" title="The Bob Crane Show" label="The Bob Crane Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797962" start="15820" end="15838" title="Three for the Road (TV series)" label="Three for the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819224" start="15852" end="15873" title="The Tony Randall Show" label="The Tony Randall Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056641" start="15887" end="15905" title="WKRP in Cincinnati" label="WKRP in Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991427" start="15919" end="15935" title="The White Shadow (TV series)" label="The White Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003652" start="15949" end="15967" title="Paul Sand in Friends and Lovers" label="Friends and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068952" start="15981" end="15994" title="St. Elsewhere" label="St. Elsewhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643961" start="16008" end="16015" title="Newhart" label="Newhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247241" start="16033" end="16050" title="Hill Street Blues" label="Hill Street Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696975" start="16080" end="16096" title="Television South" label="Television South"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="16101" end="16104" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="16158" end="16177" title="Metro Goldwyn Mayer" label="Metro Goldwyn Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814799" start="16294" end="16310" title="20th Television" label="20th-Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="16330" end="16353" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596491" start="16660" end="16672" title="Grant Tinker" label="Grant Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="16676" end="16679" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043490" start="16775" end="16790" title="MTM Enterprises" label="MTM Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="17057" end="17069" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="17074" end="17087" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308337" start="17116" end="17136" title="Michael Lindsay-Hogg" label="Michael Lindsay-Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q782168" start="17304" end="17308" title=".410 bore" label=".410"/>
<link wikidata="Q503313" start="17464" end="17479" title="Ordinary People" label="Ordinary People"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757079" start="17682" end="17694" title="Pierre Hotel" label="Pierre Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="17912" end="17929" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="18017" end="18026" title="alcohol addiction" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983596" start="18105" end="18122" title="Betty Ford Center" label="Betty Ford Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="18256" end="18271" title="diabetes mellitus type 1" label="type 1 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q369157" start="18318" end="18328" title="meningioma" label="meningioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059097" start="18533" end="18551" title="Greenwich Hospital (Connecticut)" label="Greenwich Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="18555" end="18577" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="18622" end="18631" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96182831" start="18710" end="18727" title="Oak Lawn Cemetery (Fairfield, Connecticut)" label="Oak Lawn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q754635" start="18731" end="18753" title="Fairfield, Connecticut" label="Fairfield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107958" start="18872" end="18876" title="JDRF" label="JDRF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="19003" end="19020" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416421" start="19479" end="19484" title="ASPCA" label="ASPCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435521" start="19489" end="19503" title="Farm Sanctuary" label="Farm Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q912362" start="19538" end="19553" title="factory farming" label="factory farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q483325" start="19677" end="19692" title="Ellen DeGeneres" label="Ellen DeGeneres"/>
<link wikidata="Q82226" start="19706" end="19711" title="Ellen (TV series)" label="Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972413" start="19890" end="19904" title="Broadway Barks" label="Broadway Barks"/>
<link wikidata="Q231391" start="19976" end="19993" title="Bernadette Peters" label="Bernadette Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042785" start="20014" end="20021" title="No-kill shelter" label="no-kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="20132" end="20150" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807266" start="20227" end="20255" title="Shepherdstown, West Virginia" label="Shepherdstown, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494490" start="20283" end="20302" title="Shepherd University" label="Shepherd University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545386" start="20372" end="20428" title="George Tyler Moore Center for the Study of the Civil War" label="George Tyler Moore Center for the Study of the Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162604" start="20456" end="20477" title="Conrad Shindler House" label="Conrad Shindler House"/>
<link wikidata="Q492355" start="20659" end="20679" title="Winchester, Virginia" label="Winchester, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="20719" end="20730" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="20731" end="20744" title="Major General (CSA)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="20745" end="20784" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Thomas J. &amp;quot;Stonewall&amp;quot; Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153610" start="20792" end="20822" title="Jackson&amp;#x27;s Valley campaign" label="his Shenandoah Valley campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619358" start="20863" end="20907" title="Stonewall Jackson&amp;#x27;s Headquarters Museum" label="Stonewall Jackson&amp;#x27;s Headquarters Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639488" start="21017" end="21038" title="4th Virginia Infantry" label="4th Virginia Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082696" start="21057" end="21074" title="Stonewall Brigade" label="Stonewall Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="21146" end="21153" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="21199" end="21212" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="21232" end="21236" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="21261" end="21273" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="21295" end="21308" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q154421" start="21363" end="21371" title="Ed Asner" label="Ed Asner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977646" start="21406" end="21430" title="The O&amp;#x27;Reilly Factor" label="The O&amp;#x27;Reilly Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="21475" end="21487" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q310953" start="21503" end="21521" title="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly (political commentator)" label="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="21788" end="21796" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065216" start="21948" end="21967" title="Charles Krauthammer" label="Charles Krauthammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="21997" end="22003" title="John McCain" label="McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="22088" end="22091" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="22215" end="22229" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="22555" end="22567" title="Best Actress in a Leading Role" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q503313" start="22605" end="22620" title="Ordinary People" label="Ordinary People"/>
<link wikidata="Q190994" start="22639" end="22651" title="Sissy Spacek" label="Sissy Spacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285467" start="22674" end="22700" title="Coal Miner&amp;#x27;s Daughter (film)" label="Coal Miner&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="22729" end="22747" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="22752" end="22775" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama" label="Best Actress in a Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="23068" end="23076" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="23125" end="23133" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308234" start="23152" end="23170" title="Special Tony Award" label="Special Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987091" start="23200" end="23224" title="Whose Life Is It Anyway? (play)" label="Whose Life Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="23264" end="23280" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335348" start="23417" end="23427" title="Noises Off" label="Noises Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887404" start="23452" end="23463" title="Benefactors (play)" label="Benefactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263717" start="23556" end="23563" title="Joe Egg" label="Joe Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696954" start="23606" end="23629" title="Television Hall of Fame" label="Television Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q463757" start="23701" end="23723" title="American Comedy Awards" label="American Comedy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="23823" end="23845" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="23875" end="23894" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109582" start="23950" end="23957" title="TV Land" label="TV Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="24017" end="24028" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="24070" end="24095" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23153846" start="24125" end="24141" title="Gwendolyn Gillen" label="Gwendolyn Gillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243467" start="24243" end="24256" title="Dayton&amp;#x27;s" label="Dayton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="24281" end="24292" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030309" start="24334" end="24347" title="Nicollet Mall" label="Nicollet Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038222" start="24436" end="24455" title="Tam o&amp;#x27; shanter (cap)" label="tam o&amp;#x27; shanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295350" start="24630" end="24646" title="Donaldson&amp;#x27;s" label="Donaldson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141037" start="24927" end="24946" title="Screen Actors Guild" label="Screen Actors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q231391" start="25018" end="25035" title="Bernadette Peters" label="Bernadette Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332524" start="25056" end="25068" title="Ride of Fame" label="Ride of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="25288" end="25302" title="britannica.com" label="britannica.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="25361" end="25368" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787268" start="25412" end="25442" title="Archive of American Television" label="Archive of American Television"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20834" wikidata="Q6817061" url="?curid=20834" title="Menilite">
<text>Menilite is a greyish-brown form of the mineraloid opal. It is also known as &quot;liver opal&quot; or &quot;leberopal&quot; (German), due to its color. It is called menilite because it was first described from Ménilmontant (Paris), France, where it occurs as concretions within bituminous Early Oligocene Menilite Shales.

==See also==
* Geyserite
* Hyalite

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6817061" start="0" end="8" title="Menilite" label="Menilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091637" start="40" end="50" title="mineraloid" label="mineraloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q171058" start="51" end="55" title="opal" label="opal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701404" start="211" end="223" title="Ménilmontant" label="Ménilmontant"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="225" end="230" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="233" end="239" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093379" start="260" end="270" title="concretion" label="concretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="279" end="289" title="bituminous" label="bituminous"/>
<link wikidata="Q508633" start="290" end="305" title="Early Oligocene" label="Early Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="306" end="320" title="Menilite Shale" label="Menilite Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976078" start="339" end="348" title="Geyserite" label="Geyserite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353032" start="351" end="358" title="Hyalite" label="Hyalite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20835" wikidata="Q1645628" url="?curid=20835" title="Mason Remey">
<text>Charles Mason Remey (15 May 1874 – 4 February 1974) was a prominent member of the early American Baháʼí community, and served in several important administrative capacities. He is well-known for an attempted schism of 1960, in which he claimed leadership and was rejected by the overwhelming majority of Baháʼís, who regard him as a Covenant-breaker.

Remey came from a distinguished naval family of Washington, D.C., and was among the first Baháʼís of the United States. He was a contemporary of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, one of the faith&#x27;s three central figures, and traveled around the world as a teacher of the faith. As an architect, he designed the Houses of Worship in Kampala and Sydney, both dedicated in 1961, as well as the International Archives building in Haifa.

In 1951 he was appointed by Shoghi Effendi as the president of the International Baháʼí Council, and later as a Hand of the Cause. When Shoghi Effendi died in 1957, Remey and the other Hands signed a declaration that he died without leaving a designated successor as Guardian. Remey was elected to serve as one of the nine custodial Hands, a body that became the interim leadership until the election of the Universal House of Justice in 1963. 

In 1960, Remey declared himself to be the second Guardian and expected the allegiance of the world&#x27;s Baháʼís. His claim was rejected by all the other Hands of the Cause due to his lack of scriptural authority, and he was excommunicated along with about 100 supporters, mostly from the United States. Before his death, Remey&#x27;s followers split into several rival factions, all of which declined over time.

==Background==
Born in Burlington, Iowa, on 15 May 1874, Remey was the eldest of six children from Rear Admiral George Collier Remey and Mary Josephine Mason Remey. The Navy destroyer USS Remey (1943–1974) was named after his father. His maternal grandfather, Charles Mason, was the first Chief Justice of Iowa and candidate for governor in 1867. 

Remey&#x27;s parents raised him in the Episcopal Church. He studied comparative religion in college, including a course on Buddhism, which made him receptive to other religions. 

Remey studied architecture at Cornell University (1893–1896) without completing a degree, and the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris (1896–1903). From 1904 to 1908, he became an instructor of architecture at George Washington University.

While studying in Paris Remey learned of the Baháʼí Faith from May (Bolles) Maxwell, the first Baháʼí in Paris, and he accepted it on 31 December 1899, becoming the third Baháʼí in the city. A few months later, the Persian Baháʼí teacher `Abdu’l-Karím-i-ihrání came to Paris and taught the new Baháʼís more about the faith. From Paris, Remey went on pilgrimage and met ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá first in February 1901, then in spring/summer that year Mírzá Abu&#x27;l-Faḍl visited Paris and taught the Baháʼís there. 

===Baháʼí service, 1903–1950===

After embracing the Baháʼí Faith in Paris, Remey returned to Washington, D.C., and became a prominent author, public speaker, and organizer. Remey proposed the idea to the Baha&#x27;is in Washington to organize the first local Spiritual Assembly in the city, which he was elected to on 14 March 1907. He made a second pilgrimage to see ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá in 1907, and returned in 1908, 1909, 1914, and 1921. He traveled extensively to lecture in the interests of the faith, visiting Iran, Russia, and Central asia in 1908, and in 1910 became the first Baháʼí to circle the globe on teaching trips, along with his companion Howard Struven. Robert Stockman wrote of his journeys:
According to William Garlington, Washington D.C. became the third most influential group of American Baháʼís in the first decade of the 20th century (after Chicago and New York), because of &quot;its talented membership, which included leaders such as Laura Barney, Mason Remey, and Pauline Hannen.&quot;

At the first national convention of American Baháʼís in March 1909, Remey was the delegate representing Washington, and was elected to the executive committee of the &quot;Bahai Temple Unity&quot;, a precursor to the National Spiritual Assembly. In 1917–1918 Remey chaired a committee investigating the Chicago Reading Room, a study group that combined the teachings of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh with those of an Bostonian occultist, ultimately expelling its members as &quot;violators&quot;. Remey&#x27;s loyalty brought him praise from ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá and later Shoghi Effendi mentioned him as one of the most eminent Baháʼís in America.

Remey was also a prolific writer, and published several volumes on Baháʼí history and teachings. His first pamphlet was published in 1905 and was among the first material on the religion available to American Baháʼís. In part due to his fear of global cataclysm, Remey compiled much of his records and in 1940 he provided copies to several public libraries, requesting them not to be opened until 1995.

===Marriage===
According to Juliet Thompson&#x27;s diary, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá suggested that she marry Remey, and in 1909 asked her how she felt about it. They were engaged for a time but did not marry. Thompson anguished over her decision, which she felt would cause ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Baha disappointment.

During the 1930s, Remey lived in Washington, D.C. where he enjoyed an active social life. He was briefly married to heiress Gertrude Heim Klemm from 17 July 1931 until her suicide on 5 August 1932 (Klemm&#x27;s gravestone gives the Paris wedding as 11 July). They had no children.

==Architectural projects==

Having studied architecture, Remey made significant achievements in the design of several Baháʼí buildings. Under the guidance of Shoghi Effendi, his designs were used in the temples in Kampala and Sydney (pictured), both dedicated in 1961. 

Before 1944 a site was selected and purchased for a House of Worship in Tehran, Iran. Upon the request of Shoghi Effendi, Remey provided a design for this temple, which he approved. The drawing of it was published in The Bahá&#x27;í World XIV: 1963–1968, p. 495. The construction of this temple has been delayed indefinitely, however, due to the hostile political situation in Iran.

A site has been selected for a House of Worship in the vicinity of the Baháʼí World Centre on Mount Carmel in Haifa, Israel. Since 1971, an obelisk has marked the location where it will be constructed. The design by Mason Remey was approved by Shoghi Effendi. A photo of that model can be found in &quot;Baha&#x27;i World&quot; vol. XII, p. 548. It now stands in the upper hall of the Mansion of Bahjí.

Remey also designed the International Archives Building, completed in 1957. His design was based on the Parthenon.

He provided many design proposals for the Baháʼí temples in Wilmette and Frankfurt, but Louis Bourgeois and Teuto Rocholl, respectively, were selected instead. He also made suggestions for the design of the Shrine of the Báb.

===The Remeum===
Remey had a large personal fortune from his family and his late wife. He spent much of it on two projects: his mansion on Embassy Row in Washington, built around 1930, and the &quot;Remeum&quot;.

Remey contracted with Pohick Church in 1937 to build a huge family mausoleum on its grounds in Virginia, to be located on five acres of land about one half-mile south of the church building. Construction began in 1939. According to an article in the Washington &quot;Evening Star and Daily News&quot;, the mausoleum was planned as a &quot;magnificent complex of walled courtyards, underground chambers with soaring vaulted ceilings, marble reliefs and statues, carved pillars, chapels and burial vaults&quot;. It was to be four times the size of Pohick Church, using over two million bricks, and costing over a million dollars ($18.9 million in 2021 dollars). It had relief panels depicting historical events in the life of Remey&#x27;s family, such as the landing of the Mayflower and the sinking of the USS Yorktown; a pair of massive lions guarding the entrance; life-size statues; depictions of Christian saints; and a huge ornate sarcophagus of Portuguese marble was prepared for himself. Remey transported the bodies of fifteen relatives to the Remeum.

The grounds were landscaped. The complex had electric chandeliers, ventilation and plumbing. A trust account was established with the church for maintenance. Remey planned to crown it with a three-story structure that would have dwarfed the church. The Remeum was never finished.
Problems soon developed in the 1950s, and the mausoleum site became the target of vandals. As a preventative measure, the entrance was bricked up to prevent access, but the wall was breached in 1956 by high school boys with axes, as reported by the &quot;Morning Star&quot;:
By 1958 the church vestry became concerned, and in 1962 refused to grant permission for any more work to be done on the site. Soon negotiations began to break the original contract; in 1968 the property reverted to the church, and Remey was given five years to remove anything of value from the site. Most of the dead were taken by relatives to another family cemetery in New York; Remey&#x27;s wife Gertrude was reinterred in the main church cemetery. After the last of the bodies was removed, the Remeum was demolished beginning in 1973 on the orders of the Episcopal church, and the last of the aboveground ruins was finally bulldozed ten years later. Little remains on the site to mark the former presence of the complex save an obelisk dedicated to Remey&#x27;s parents and a pair of structures which served as chimneys or vents. 

Robert Stockman wrote:
==Service in Haifa, 1950–1959==
In November 1950, Shoghi Effendi announced to a small group, including Remey, his intention of appointing them to an International Baháʼí Council. Remey moved his residence from Washington to Haifa, and the public announcement of the Council was made on 9 January 1951. The Council was the first international Baháʼí body, intended to be a forerunner to the Universal House of Justice while forging links with authorities in the newly emerged Israel, assisting with the completion of the Shrine of the Báb, and negotiating for status as a religious court in Israel. 

Remey was appointed president of the council in March 1951, with Amelia Collins as vice-president. A further announcement in March 1952 appointed several more officers to the Council and Rúhíyyih Khánum as the liaison between the Council and the Guardian.

Remey was included in Shoghi Effendi&#x27;s first contingent of 12 appointments to the rank of Hand of the Cause on 24 December 1951. Remey attended all four international teaching conferences in 1953, in Kampala, Chicago, Stockholm, and New Delhi.

During this time he continued several Baháʼí architectural projects.

===Death of Shoghi Effendi===
The Baháʼí world entered a leadership crisis upon the death of Shoghi Effendi, who died without children or an appointed successor. All male descendants of Baha&#x27;u&#x27;llah were either dead or excommunicated, and the hereditary institution of the Guardian was defunct.

When Shoghi Effendi died on 4 November 1957, his personal room and safe were sealed and constantly guarded. 26 of the 27 living Hands arrived by 17 November, and on 19 November, Mason Remey along with 8 others found all seals intact and searched the room for a will, which was not found.

===First Conclave===
Later the Hands of the Cause met in a private conclave at Bahjí on 20 November. They decided that the situation of the Guardian having died without being able to appoint a successor was a situation not dealt with in the texts that define the Baháʼí administration, and that the matter would need to be reviewed and adjudicated by the Universal House of Justice, an institution envisaged by Baha&#x27;u&#x27;llah that had not yet been elected. Their unanimous proclamation made 25 November stated,
Remey signed the declaration that Shoghi Effendi died &quot;without having appointed his successor&quot; and was also appointed as one of the Custodians to stay in Haifa. Several other proclamations were made that day specifying the authority and procedural functioning of the Hands and the Custodians. Among them were,
*&quot;That the entire body of the Hands of the Cause, meeting annually or whenever convened by the nine Hands, shall determine when and how the International Baháʼí Council shall pass through the successive stages outlined by Shoghi Effendi culminating in the election of the Universal House of Justice;&quot;
*&quot;That the authority to expel violators from the Faith shall be vested in the body of nine Hands...&quot;

A longer proclamation, also signed by all the Hands, was sent to the Baháʼís of the world on 25 November, which mentioned several points about the continuation of authority of the Baháʼí Faith:
Following these events &quot;Time&quot; magazine reported that there were debates about two possible candidates for Guardian. Though the Hands dedicated to not disclose any details of the conclaves, Remey later revealed memoirs with details of the events. He wrote that his status as president of the International Baha&#x27;i Council was never mentioned in any of the conclaves, and that the idea of not having another Guardian was introduced by Rahmatu&#x27;lláh Muhájir. 

The idea of no single person as the supreme head of the religion was disturbing to some Baháʼí of the time. In 1958 two American Hands, Paul Haney and Corinne True, and the NSA began circulating a document expressing their belief that the &quot;door to the appointment of a second Guardian... is closed&quot;, but it was blocked by an urgent cablegram from the custodial Hands in Haifa, indicating that they were &quot;greatly disturbed&quot; and to delete all references to it.

==Claim to Guardianship, 1960–1974==
As early as January 1959, Remey believed that he was the second Guardian and successor to Shoghi Effendi. According to Remey, this idea developed gradually since the first conclave of the Hands, and at the second conclave (November 1958) he warned the others that they were violating the Covenant by not allowing the continuation of the Guardianship. At the third conclave (November 1959), Remey refused to sign the joint statement of the Hands, which was converting the International Council from an appointed to an elected body, an act that would end his position as president. He then abandoned his position, moved to Washington, and began to circulate the claim that he should be recognized as the second Guardian. 

===Proclamation===
In April 1960, Remey wrote an announcement that he was the successor to Shoghi Effendi, and requested that it be read at the upcoming national convention. In his cover letter to Charles Wolcott, secretary of the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States, he wrote,
Remey believed his appointment as president of the international council represented an appointment by Shoghi Effendi as Guardian, because the appointed council was a precursor to the elected Universal House of Justice. In his intended announcement at the convention, he wrote,
Remey wrote that his delay in announcing his status was to give others &quot;ample time to discover for themselves&quot;, but &quot;until now no one, other than I have discovered that such authority was vested in me&quot;. He claimed in the proclamation that he made the declaration as Guardian to the Hands previously (which they claimed was false), and that he had &quot;definitely known for the past twelve years more or less&quot;. He said that, 
===Expulsion===

His letter to the convention was refused. After a brief attempt at reconciliation and some hesitation among the Hands, he was declared a Covenant-breaker by all 26 remaining Hands of the Cause on 26 July 1960, along with anyone actively supporting his claims. Almost the whole Baháʼí world rejected his claim, which did not even address the requirements that Guardians be descendants of Baha&#x27;u&#x27;llah — making him ineligible — and that appointments must be clearly confirmed by the nine resident Hands of the Cause in Haifa. 

Remey gained very little support around the world, and himself noted that &quot;almost the entire Baha&#x27;i world&quot; rejected his claim. He sent his proclamation to other National Spiritual Assemblies, and a majority of the one in France accepted him. The 11 other extant National Assemblies rejected him. He gained supporters mostly from the United States, but also in parts of Europe, Pakistan (mostly in Faisalabad and Sialkot), and in Lucknow, India. Estimates of Remey&#x27;s initial following range from 15, to 100, to 150, to several hundred individuals.

The Hands sent Abu&#x27;l-Qásim Faizi to France as their representative, with specific instructions to dissolve the National Assembly and call for a new election.

Although initially disturbed, the mainstream Baháʼís paid little attention to his movement within a few years. The Universal House of Justice was elected in 1963, and the Custodians officially passed their authority as the head of the Faith to the Universal House of Justice, which soon announced that it did not have the power to appoint or legislate to make possible the appointment of a second Guardian to succeed Shoghi Effendi.

===Consolidation===

Remey wrote three letters to his supporters soon after his excommunication, sharing his belief that &quot;the only true and legitimate Baha&#x27;is are those now serving under the Second Guardian of the Faith.&quot; He initially called his sect the Orthodox Baha&#x27;is Under the Hereditary Guardianship.

Remey settled in Florence, Italy, until the end of his life. From there he appointed three local spiritual assemblies in Santa Fe, New Mexico, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, and Lucknow, India, then organized the election of two National Assemblies in 1963 – in the United States and Pakistan. 

In 1964 the Santa Fe assembly filed a lawsuit against the National Spiritual Assembly (NSA) of the Baháʼís of the United States to receive the legal title to the Baháʼí House of Worship in Illinois, and all other property owned by the NSA. The NSA counter-sued and won. The Santa Fe assembly lost the right to use the term &quot;Baháʼí&quot; in printed material. Remey then changed the name of his sect from &quot;Baháʼís Under the Hereditary Guardianship&quot; to &quot;Abha World Faith&quot; and also referred to it as the &quot;Orthodox Faith of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh&quot; or &quot;Orthodox Abha World Faith&quot;, and himself as the &quot;Guardian of the Orthodox Baha&#x27;is&quot;. In 1966, Remey asked the Santa Fe assembly to dissolve, as well as the second International Baháʼí Council that he had appointed with Joel Marangella, residing in France, as president.

===Fracturing===

Beginning in 1966–67, Remey was abandoned by almost all of his followers, and his movement began to weaken and decline rapidly. Besides dissolving the institutions that he had organized, Remey began focusing on impending global catastrophe and criticizing Shoghi Effendi. 

In the late 1940s, he expressed his belief that nuclear war would destroy much of the world, and by the 1960s he stated publicly that the Earth&#x27;s axis would tilt and produce global floods. He encouraged his followers to move to high ground in the Rocky Mountains to avoid the imminent floods. These beliefs were the foundation of why he deposited copies of his memoirs in several prominent libraries in 1940, to ensure that a set would survive.

In 1966 he became very critical of Shoghi Effendi. In a letter that year he reasoned that Shoghi Effendi had been practicing the religion of the Báb, and that, 

In a further letter the following year, Remey again repeated that, &quot;the First Guardian Shoghi Effendi built his Administration about the Babi Faith and not about the Baha&#x27;i Faith. Shoghi Effendi was a very confused soul. He was an ego maniac. He flaunted and disobeyed the laws of the Aqdas and created all this confusion himself.&quot;

These ideas came as a surprise to Remey&#x27;s small band of followers, and nearly all of them abandoned him. They were not organized until several of them began forming their own groups based on different understandings of succession, even before his death in 1974. The majority of them claimed that Remey was showing signs of senility. The number of people who recognized his claim had greatly diminished by the time of his death.

===Burial===
From 1962, Remey resided in Florence, Italy, and died there on 4 February 1974, at the age of 99. Having been abandoned by all of his followers, he was buried by his non-Baháʼí secretary without religious ceremony in Florence. His obituary in the &quot;Washington Star&quot; accidentally gave his name as George Mason Remey.

==Resultant groups==

Remey&#x27;s claim to Guardianship resulted in the largest schism in the history of the religion, and several small groups continue the belief that Remey was the Guardian and successor to Shoghi Effendi. They are now largely confined to the United States, with few members and no communal religious life. Accurate estimates on size are scarce and dated.

===Joel Marangella===

In 1961 Joel Marangella (1918–2013) received a letter from Remey, and a note that, &quot;...in or after 1963. You will know when to break the seal.&quot; In 1964 Remey appointed members to a second International Baháʼí Council with Marangella as president, significant due to Remey&#x27;s claim to Guardianship being based on the same appointment. In 1965 Remey activated the council, and in 1966 wrote letters passing the &quot;affairs of the Faith&quot; to the council, then later dissolving it. In 1969 Marangella made an announcement that the letter of 1961 was Remey&#x27;s appointment of him as the third Guardian, and that he had been the Guardian since 1964, invalidating Remey&#x27;s pronouncements from that point forward. 

Marangella gained the support of most of Remey&#x27;s followers, who came to be known as Orthodox Baháʼís. One source estimated them at no more than 100 members in 1988, with the largest concentration being 11 in Roswell, New Mexico. In a 2007 court case, the group claimed a United States membership of about 40 people.

===Donald Harvey===
Donald Harvey was appointed by Remey as &quot;Third Guardian&quot; in 1967, and the first of five &quot;elders&quot;, but he later dissolved the body of elders. Donald Harvey never gained much of a following. When Harvey died in 1991, leadership went to Jacques Soghomonian, and when he died in 2013 it passed to E.S. Yazdani.

===Leland Jensen===

Leland Jensen was initially a supporter of Remey and then left the group. After a stint in prison for sexually molesting a minor, he made several religious claims of his own and established himself as the head of an apocalyptic cult. He believed that Remey was the adopted son of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, and that Remey&#x27;s adopted son Joseph Pepe was the third Guardian, something that Pepe refused to entertain. Jensen made headlines for predicting a nuclear holocaust in 1980, and his followers became the subject of academic studies in cognitive dissonance. Membership peaked in 1980 with 150–200, but declined after the failed prophecy of 1980. By 1990 there were fewer than 100 adherents, and defection continued in the 1990s and beyond. They were concentrated in Montana.

===Rex King===
Rex King was elected to Remey&#x27;s NSA of the United States with the most votes, and soon came into conflict with Remey. In 1969 he traveled to Italy with the hope of having Remey pass affairs over to him, but instead was labeled with the &quot;station of satan&quot;. King supported Marangella&#x27;s claim, but soon took issue with the way Marangella was interpreting scripture. King rejected all claimants to the Guardianship after Shoghi Effendi including Remey. He claimed that he, Rex King, was a &quot;regent&quot; pending the emergence of the second Guardian who was in &quot;occultation&quot;. Hardly any of Remey&#x27;s supporters followed King. He called the group the &quot;Orthodox Baháʼí Faith under the Regency&quot; and held at least three annual conferences in the 1970s. King died in 1977 and left a will appointing his three sons and a daughter-in-law as a council of regents, who changed their name to &quot;Tarbiyat Baha&#x27;i Community&quot;. They were concentrated in New Mexico.

==Works==

Remey wrote several pamphlets that were among the first available to Americans:
*&quot;Unity: The Revelation of Baha &#x27;Ullah&quot; (February 1905).
*&quot;The Revelation of Baha &#x27;Ullah&quot; (June 1906).
*&quot;The Bahai Movement-A Teaching of Peace (May 1911).
*&quot;The Covenant&quot; (November 1912).
*&quot;Some Vital Bahai Principles&quot; (1917?).

He also published two books about his travels:
*

Remey was a prolific writer. The following are a few examples of other material he produced.













==Notes==
==Citations==
==References==
===Primary sources===


*; published in 


===Other sources===
























===Court documents===



==External links==

* Charles Mason Remey papers (MS 413). Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library. 

*Charles Mason Remey at Find a Grave</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1645628" start="0" end="19" title="Mason Remey" label="Charles Mason Remey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47002394" start="88" end="113" title="Baháʼí Faith in the United States" label="American Baháʼí community"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843068" start="195" end="214" title="Baháʼí divisions" label="an attempted schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178966" start="333" end="349" title="Covenant-breaker" label="Covenant-breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q216954" start="497" end="514" title="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568313" start="653" end="670" title="Baháʼí House of Worship" label="Houses of Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="804" end="818" title="Shoghi Effendi" label="Shoghi Effendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687365" start="843" end="871" title="International Baháʼí Council" label="International Baháʼí Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q964630" start="888" end="905" title="Hands of the Cause" label="Hand of the Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163783" start="1184" end="1210" title="Universal House of Justice" label="Universal House of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1271" end="1279" title="Shoghi Effendi#Guardianship" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q580182" start="1660" end="1676" title="Burlington, Iowa" label="Burlington, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537577" start="1749" end="1769" title="George C. Remey" label="George Collier Remey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873387" start="1821" end="1830" title="USS Remey" label="USS Remey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080712" start="1897" end="1910" title="Charles Mason (Iowa judge)" label="Charles Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="2196" end="2214" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056289" start="2264" end="2284" title="École des Beaux-Arts" label="École des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="2369" end="2397" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796550" start="2463" end="2483" title="May Maxwell" label="May (Bolles) Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q377018" start="2843" end="2864" title="Mírzá Abu&amp;#x27;l-Faḍl" label="Mírzá Abu&amp;#x27;l-Faḍl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499061" start="3171" end="3189" title="Spiritual Assembly" label="Spiritual Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086271" start="3582" end="3597" title="Robert Stockman" label="Robert Stockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308918" start="4993" end="5008" title="Juliet Thompson" label="Juliet Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5762" end="5769" title="Baháʼí Faith in Uganda#House of Worship" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751094" start="5774" end="5780" title="Sydney Baháʼí Temple" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q494706" start="6274" end="6293" title="Baháʼí World Centre" label="Baháʼí World Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="6297" end="6309" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6343" end="6350" title="Baháʼí House of Worship#Haifa, Israel" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187499" start="6588" end="6604" title="Mansion of Bahjí" label="Mansion of Bahjí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149036" start="6631" end="6662" title="Baháʼí World Centre buildings" label="International Archives Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="6711" end="6720" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462314" start="6930" end="6947" title="Shrine of the Báb" label="Shrine of the Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572308" start="7089" end="7100" title="Embassy Row" label="Embassy Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207768" start="7186" end="7199" title="Pohick Church" label="Pohick Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875716" start="7969" end="7981" title="USS Yorktown (1839)" label="USS Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="9512" end="9519" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086271" start="9616" end="9631" title="Robert Stockman" label="Robert Stockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687365" start="9788" end="9816" title="International Baháʼí Council" label="International Baháʼí Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163783" start="10029" end="10055" title="Universal House of Justice" label="Universal House of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10210" end="10235" title="Judiciary of Israel#Religious courts" label="religious court in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742235" start="10304" end="10318" title="Amelia Collins" label="Amelia Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443839" start="10426" end="10441" title="Rúhíyyih Khánum" label="Rúhíyyih Khánum"/>
<link wikidata="Q964630" start="10591" end="10608" title="Hand of the Cause" label="Hand of the Cause"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10784" end="10813" title="#Architectural projects" label="Baháʼí architectural projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="11550" end="11558" title="Guardian (Baháʼí Faith)" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163783" start="11765" end="11791" title="Universal House of Justice" label="Universal House of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308725" start="13312" end="13337" title="Rahmatu&amp;#x27;lláh Muhájir" label="Rahmatu&amp;#x27;lláh Muhájir"/>
<link wikidata="Q116244695" start="13477" end="13487" title="Paul Haney" label="Paul Haney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13492" end="13504" title="Corinne True" label="Corinne True"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178966" start="15753" end="15769" title="Covenant-breaker" label="Covenant-breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q173985" start="16563" end="16573" title="Faisalabad" label="Faisalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q643883" start="16578" end="16585" title="Sialkot" label="Sialkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="16595" end="16602" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13452215" start="16734" end="16756" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Qásim Faizi" label="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Qásim Faizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="17766" end="17786" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q93230" start="17788" end="17808" title="Rawalpindi" label="Rawalpindi, Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="17814" end="17828" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="19346" end="19361" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="23191" end="23211" title="cognitive dissonance" label="cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q63056" start="25272" end="25284" title="Find a Grave" label="Find a Grave"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20836" wikidata="Q173436" url="?curid=20836" title="Minimalism">
<text>In visual arts, music and other media, minimalism is an art movement that began in the post-war era in Western art. The movement is often interpreted as a reaction to abstract expressionism and modernism; it anticipated contemporary post-minimal art practices, which extend or reflect on minimalism&#x27;s original objectives. Minimalism&#x27;s key objectives were to strip away conventional characterizations of art through bringing the importance of the object or the experience a viewer has for the object with minimal mediation from the artist. Prominent artists associated with minimalism include Donald Judd, Agnes Martin, Dan Flavin, Carl Andre, Robert Morris, Anne Truitt and Frank Stella.

Minimalism in music often features repetition and gradual variation, such as the works of La Monte Young, Terry Riley, Steve Reich, Philip Glass, Julius Eastman and John Adams. The term has also been used to describe the plays and novels of Samuel Beckett, the films of Robert Bresson, the stories of Raymond Carver, and the automobile designs of Colin Chapman.

In recent years, minimalism has come to refer to anything or anyone that is spare or stripped to its essentials. 

== Visual arts ==
Minimalism in visual art, sometimes called &quot;minimal art&quot;, &quot;literalist art&quot; and &quot;ABC Art&quot;, refers to a specific movement of artists that emerged in New York in the early 1960s in response to abstract expressionism. Examples of artists working in painting that are associated with Minimalism include Nassos Daphnis, Frank Stella, Kenneth Noland, Al Held, Ellsworth Kelly, Robert Ryman and others; those working in sculpture include Donald Judd, Dan Flavin, David Smith, Anthony Caro and more. Minimalism in painting can be characterized by the use of the hard edge, linear lines, simple forms, and an emphasis on two dimensions.American minimalist artists were heavily influenced by earlier European abstract movements. During that time, New York was hosting exhibitions of the German Bauhaus artists, Russian Constructivists, and Dutch De Stijl artists. Radical abstraction was invented by each of these groups, and they encouraged artists such as Robert Morris, Dan Flavin, and Donald Judd to pursue new artistic trajectories. In order to provide the audience an instantaneous, purely visual reaction, these artists sought to produce art that had no references to anything other than itself. In order to expose the objective, visual components of art, the subjective, gestural components were removed. Minimalism in sculpture can be characterized by very simple geometric shapes often made of industrial materials like plastic, metal, aluminum, concrete, and fiberglass; these materials are usually left raw or painted a solid colour.

Minimalism was in part a reaction against the painterly subjectivity of Abstract Expressionism that had been dominant in the New York School during the 1940s and 1950s. Dissatisfied with the intuitive and spontaneous qualities of Action Painting, and Abstract Expressionism more broadly, Minimalism as an art movement asserted that a work of art should not refer to anything other than itself and should omit any extra-visual association.

Donald Judd&#x27;s work was showcased in 1964 at Green Gallery in Manhattan, as were Flavin&#x27;s first fluorescent light works, while other leading Manhattan galleries like Leo Castelli Gallery and Pace Gallery also began to showcase artists focused on minimalist ideas.

=== Minimalism in visual art broadly ===
In a more general sense, minimalism as a visual strategy can be found in the geometric abstractions of painters associated with the Bauhaus movement, in the works of Kazimir Malevich, Piet Mondrian and other artists associated with the De Stijl movement, the Russian Constructivist movement, and in the work of the Romanian sculptor Constantin Brâncuși.

Minimalism as a formal strategy has been deployed in the paintings of Barnett Newman, Ad Reinhardt, Josef Albers, and the works of artists as diverse as Pablo Picasso, Yayoi Kusama, Giorgio Morandi, and others. Yves Klein had painted monochromes as early as 1949, and held the first private exhibition of this work in 1950—but his first public showing was the publication of the Artist&#x27;s book &quot;&quot; in November 1954.

=== Literalism ===

Michael Fried called the minimalist artists &quot;literalists&quot;, and used literalism as a pejorative due to his position that the art should deliver transcendental experience with metaphors, symbolism, and stylization. Per Fried&#x27;s (controversial) view, the literalist art needs a spectator to validate it as art: an &quot;object in a situation&quot; only becomes art in the eyes of an observer. For example, for a regular sculpture its physical location is irrelevant, and its status as a work of art remains even when unseen. The Donald Judd&#x27;s pieces (see the photo on the right), on the other hand, are just objects sitting in the desert sun waiting for a visitor to discover them and accept them as art.

== Design, architecture, and spaces ==

The term minimalism is also used to describe a trend in design and architecture, wherein the subject is reduced to its necessary elements. Minimalist architectural designers focus on effectively using vacant space, neutral colors and eliminating decoration. Emphasizing materiality, tactility, texture, weight and density. Minimalist architecture became popular in the late 1980s in London and New York, whereby architects and fashion designers worked together in the boutiques to achieve simplicity, using white elements, cold lighting, and large spaces with minimal furniture and few decorative elements.

The works of De Stijl artists are a major reference: De Stijl expanded the ideas of expression by meticulously organizing basic elements such as lines and planes. In 1924, The Rietveld Schroder House was commissioned by Truss Schroder-Schrader, a precursor to minimalism. The house emphasizes its slabs, beams and posts reflecting De Stijls philosophy on the relationship between form and function. With regard to home design, more attractive &quot;minimalistic&quot; designs are not truly minimalistic because they are larger, and use more expensive building materials and finishes.
Minimalistic design has been highly influenced by Japanese traditional design and architecture. There are observers who describe the emergence of minimalism as a response to the brashness and chaos of urban life. For example, minimalist architecture began to gain traction in 1980s Japan as a result of the country&#x27;s rising population and rapid expansion of cities. The design was considered an antidote to the &quot;overpowering presence of traffic, advertising, jumbled building scales, and imposing roadways.&quot; The chaotic environment was not only driven by urbanization, industrialization, and technology but also the Japanese experience of constantly having to demolish structures on account of the destruction wrought by World War II and the earthquakes, including the calamities it entails such as fire. The minimalist design philosophy did not arrive in Japan by way of another country, as it was already part of the Japanese culture rooted on the Zen philosophy. There are those who specifically attribute the design movement to Japan&#x27;s spirituality and view of nature.

Architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886–1969) adopted the motto &quot;Less is more&quot; to describe his aesthetic. His tactic was one of arranging the necessary components of a building to create an impression of extreme simplicity—he enlisted every element and detail to serve multiple visual and functional purposes; for example, designing a floor to also serve as the radiator, or a massive fireplace to also house the bathroom. Designer Buckminster Fuller (1895–1983) adopted the engineer&#x27;s goal of &quot;Doing more with less&quot;, but his concerns were oriented toward technology and engineering rather than aesthetics.

=== Concepts and design elements ===
The concept of minimalist architecture is to strip everything down to its essential quality and achieve simplicity. The idea is not completely without ornamentation, but that all parts, details, and joinery are considered as reduced to a stage where no one can remove anything further to improve the design.

The considerations for &#x27;essences&#x27; are light, form, detail of material, space, place, and human condition. Minimalist architects not only consider the physical qualities of the building. They consider the spiritual dimension and the invisible, by listening to the figure and paying attention to details, people, space, nature, and materials, believing this reveals the abstract quality of something that is invisible and aids the search for the essence of those invisible qualities—such as natural light, sky, earth, and air. In addition, they &quot;open a dialogue&quot; with the surrounding environment to decide the most essential materials for the construction and create relationships between buildings and sites.

In minimalist architecture, design elements strive to convey the message of simplicity. The basic geometric forms, elements without decoration, simple materials and the repetitions of structures represent a sense of order and essential quality. The movement of natural light in buildings reveals simple and clean spaces. In the late 19th century as the arts and crafts movement became popular in Britain, people valued the attitude of &#x27;truth to materials&#x27; with respect to the profound and innate characteristics of materials. Minimalist architects humbly &#x27;listen to figure,&#x27; seeking essence and simplicity by rediscovering the valuable qualities in simple and common materials.

=== Influences from Japanese tradition ===

The idea of simplicity appears in many cultures, especially the Japanese traditional culture of Zen Buddhist philosophy. Japanese manipulate the Zen culture into aesthetic and design elements for their buildings. This idea of architecture has influenced Western society, especially in America since the mid 18th century. Moreover, it inspired the minimalist architecture in the 19th century.

Zen concepts of simplicity transmit the ideas of freedom and essence of living. Simplicity is not only aesthetic value, it has a moral perception that looks into the nature of truth and reveals the inner qualities and essence of materials and objects. For example, the sand garden in  temple demonstrates the concepts of simplicity and the essentiality from the considered setting of a few stones and a huge empty space.

The Japanese aesthetic principle of  refers to empty or open space. It removes all the unnecessary internal walls and opens up the space. The emptiness of spatial arrangement reduces everything down to the most essential quality.

The Japanese aesthetic of  values the quality of simple and plain objects. It appreciates the absence of unnecessary features, treasures a life in quietness and aims to reveal the innate character of materials. For example, the Japanese floral art of  has the central principle of letting the flower express itself. People cut off the branches, leaves and blossoms from the plants and only retain the essential part of the plant. This conveys the idea of essential quality and innate character in nature.

=== Minimalist architects and their works ===
The Japanese minimalist architect Tadao Ando conveys the Japanese traditional spirit and his own perception of nature in his works. His design concepts are materials, pure geometry and nature. He normally uses concrete or natural wood and basic structural form to achieve austerity and rays of light in space. He also sets up dialogue between the site and nature to create relationship and order with the buildings. Ando&#x27;s works and the translation of Japanese aesthetic principles are highly influential on Japanese architecture.

Another Japanese minimalist architect, Kazuyo Sejima, works on her own and in conjunction with Ryue Nishizawa, as SANAA, producing iconic Japanese Minimalist buildings. Credited with creating and influencing a particular genre of Japanese Minimalism, Sejimas delicate, intelligent designs may use white color, thin construction sections and transparent elements to create the phenomenal building type often associated with minimalism. Works include New Museum (2010) New York City, Small House (2000) Tokyo, House surrounded By Plum Trees (2003) Tokyo.

In Vitra Conference Pavilion, Weil am Rhein, 1993, the concepts are to bring together the relationships between building, human movement, site and nature. Which as one main point of minimalism ideology that establish dialogue between the building and site. The building uses the simple forms of circle and rectangle to contrast the filled and void space of the interior and nature. In the foyer, there is a large landscape window that looks out to the exterior. This achieves the simple and silence of architecture and enhances the light, wind, time and nature in space.

John Pawson is a British minimalist architect; his design concepts are soul, light, and order. He believes that though reduced clutter and simplification of the interior to a point that gets beyond the idea of essential quality, there is a sense of clarity and richness of simplicity instead of emptiness. The materials in his design reveal the perception toward space, surface, and volume. Moreover, he likes to use natural materials because of their aliveness, sense of depth and quality of an individual. He is also attracted by the important influences from Japanese Zen Philosophy.

Calvin Klein Madison Avenue, New York, 1995–96, is a boutique that conveys Calvin Klein&#x27;s ideas of fashion. John Pawson&#x27;s interior design concepts for this project are to create simple, peaceful and orderly spatial arrangements. He used stone floors and white walls to achieve simplicity and harmony for space. He also emphasises reduction and eliminates the visual distortions, such as the air conditioning and lamps, to achieve a sense of purity for the interior.

Alberto Campo Baeza is a Spanish architect and describes his work as essential architecture. He values the concepts of light, idea and space. Light is essential and achieves the relationship between inhabitants and the building. Ideas are to meet the function and context of space, forms, and construction. Space is shaped by the minimal geometric forms to avoid decoration that is not essential.
While both minimalist and contemporary minimalism stress simplicity, there are some significant differences. Minimalism emphasizes only the essentials and employs simple, large-sized components in less amounts. Modern minimalism, on the other hand, uses more decorative pieces. While modern minimalism includes eye-catching forms, minimalist designs tend to emphasize geometric shapes and straight lines. Another difference is space; modern minimalism permits trendy items, while minimalist environments are open and empty. While modern minimalism incorporates colorful, seductive elements that accentuate the modern aesthetic while keeping a neutral color scheme, minimalist furniture is necessary and practical. Although simplicity is emphasized in both forms, modern minimalism adds trends and gives places a more lively vibe. It is easier to differentiate between the two types when one is aware of these distinctions.

== Literature ==
Literary minimalism is characterized by an economy with words and a focus on surface description. Minimalist writers eschew adverbs and prefer allowing context to dictate meaning. Readers are expected to take an active role in creating the story, to &quot;choose sides&quot; based on oblique hints and innuendo, rather than react to directions from the writer.

Austrian architect and theorist Adolf Loos published early writings about minimalism in &quot;Ornament and Crime&quot;.

The precursors to literary minimalism are famous novelists Stephen Crane and Ernest Hemingway.

Some 1940s-era crime fiction of writers such as James M. Cain and Jim Thompson adopted a stripped-down, matter-of-fact prose style to considerable effect; some classify this prose style as minimalism.

Another strand of literary minimalism arose in response to the metafiction trend of the 1960s and early 1970s (John Barth, Robert Coover, and William H. Gass). These writers were also sparse with prose and kept a psychological distance from their subject matter.

Minimalist writers, or those who are identified with minimalism during certain periods of their writing careers, include the following: Raymond Carver, Ann Beattie, Bret Easton Ellis, Charles Bukowski, K. J. Stevens, Amy Hempel, Bobbie Ann Mason, Tobias Wolff, Grace Paley, Sandra Cisneros, Mary Robison, Frederick Barthelme, Richard Ford, Patrick Holland, Cormac McCarthy, David Leavitt and Alicia Erian.

American poets such as William Carlos Williams, early Ezra Pound, Robert Creeley, Robert Grenier, Aram Saroyan, bpNichol, and Geof Huth are sometimes identified with their &quot;minimalist&quot; style. Aram Saroyan, specifically, is famous for his one-word poem &quot;lighght&quot;, which was selected for the &quot;The American Literary Anthology&quot; and received a $750 cash award from the National Endowment for the Arts, which drew outrage from certain conservative American politicians, such as Jesse Helmes. bpNichol, a Canadian poet, is famous for such minimalist poems as &quot;st*r&quot;, &quot;em ty&quot;, and &quot;groww&quot;. These minimalist poems were collected into an anthology of bpNichol&#x27;s works, entitled &quot;The Alphabet Game&quot;, edited by Darren Werschler-Henry and Lori Emerson. Geof Huth also creates minimalist poetry, and he may be best known for his concept of the pwoermd, the term he uses to describe a poem made up of only a single word. Depending on the characteristics of the poem, some minimalist poetry may overlap with what others call visual poetry, especially if the concept behind the poem is enhanced by its visual elements. The term &quot;minimalism&quot; is also sometimes associated with the briefest of poetic genres, haiku, which originated in Japan, but has been domesticated in English literature by poets such as Nick Virgilio, Raymond Roseliep, and George Swede.

The Irish writer Samuel Beckett is well known for his minimalist plays and prose, as is the Norwegian writer Jon Fosse.

Dimitris Lyacos&#x27;s &quot;With the People from the Bridge&quot;, combining elliptical monologues with a pared-down prose narrative, is a contemporary example of minimalist playwrighting.

In his novel &quot;The Easy Chain&quot;, Evan Dara includes a 60-page section written in the style of musical minimalism, in particular inspired by composer Steve Reich. Intending to represent the psychological state (agitation) of the novel&#x27;s main character, the section&#x27;s successive lines of text are built on repetitive and developing phrases.

== Music ==

The term &quot;minimal music&quot; was derived around 1970 by Michael Nyman from the concept of minimalism, which was earlier applied to the visual arts. More precisely, it was in a 1968 review in &quot;The Spectator&quot; that Nyman first used the term, to describe a ten-minute piano composition by the Danish composer Henning Christiansen, along with several other unnamed pieces played by Charlotte Moorman and Nam June Paik at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London.

However, the roots of minimal music are older. In France, Yves Klein allegedly conceived his &quot;Monotone Symphony&quot; (formally &quot;The Monotone-Silence Symphony&quot;) between 1947 or 1949 (but premiered only in 1960), a work that consisted of a single 20-minute sustained chord followed by a 20-minute silence.

== Film and cinema ==
In film, minimalism usually is associated with filmmakers such as Robert Bresson, Chantal Akerman, Carl Theodor Dreyer, and Yasujirō Ozu. Their films typically tell a simple story with straightforward camera usage and minimal use of score. Paul Schrader named their kind of cinema: &quot;transcendental cinema&quot;. In the present, a commitment to minimalist film making can be seen in film movements such as Dogme 95, mumblecore, and the Romanian New Wave. Abbas Kiarostami, Elia Suleiman, and Kelly Reichardt are also considered minimalist filmmakers.

The Minimalists – Joshua Fields Millburn, Ryan Nicodemus, and Matt D&#x27;Avella – directed and produced the film &quot;Minimalism: A Documentary&quot;, which showcased the idea of minimal living in the modern world.

== In other fields ==

=== Cooking ===
Breaking from the complex, hearty dishes established as orthodox &quot;haute cuisine&quot;, &quot;nouvelle cuisine&quot; was a culinary movement that consciously drew from minimalism and conceptualism. It emphasized more basic flavors, careful presentation, and a less involved preparation process. The movement was mainly in vogue during the 1960s and 1970s, after which it once again gave way to more traditional &quot;haute cuisine&quot;, retroactively titled &quot;cuisine classique&quot;. However, the influence of &quot;nouvelle cuisine&quot; can still be felt through the techniques it introduced.

=== Fashion ===

The capsule wardrobe is an example of minimalism in fashion. Constructed of only a few staple pieces that do not go out of style, and generally dominated by only one or two colors, capsule wardrobes are meant to be light, flexible and adaptable, and can be paired with seasonal pieces when the situation calls for them. The modern idea of a capsule wardrobe dates back to the 1970s, and is credited to London boutique owner Susie Faux. The concept was further popularized in the next decade by American fashion designer Donna Karan, who designed a seminal collection of capsule workwear pieces in 1985.

=== Science communication ===

To portray global warming to non-scientists, British climate scientist Ed Hawkins developed warming stripes graphics in 2018 that are deliberately devoid of scientific or technical indicia, for ease of understanding by non-scientists. Hawkins explained that &quot;our visual system will do the interpretation of the stripes without us even thinking about it&quot;.

Warming stripe graphics resemble color field paintings, stripping out all distractions and using only color to convey meaning. Color field pioneer artist Barnett Newman said he was &quot;creating images whose reality is self-evident&quot;, an ethos that Hawkins is said to have applied to the problem of climate change and leading one commentator to remark that the graphics are &quot;fit for the Museum of Modern Art or the Getty.&quot;

A tempestry—a portmanteau of &quot;temperature&quot; and &quot;tapestry&quot;—is a tapestry using stripes of specific colors of yarn to represent respective temperature ranges. The tapestries visually represent global warming occurring at given locations.

=== Minimalist lifestyle ===
In a lifestyle adopting minimalism, there is an effort to use materials which are most essential and in quantities that do not exceed certain limits imposed by the user themselves. There have been many terms evolved from the concept, like minimalist decors, minimalist skincare, minimalist style, minimalist accessories, etc. All such terms signify the usage of only essential products in that niche into one&#x27;s life. This can help one to focus on things that are important in one&#x27;s life. It can reduce waste. It can also save the time of acquiring the excess materials that may be found unnecessary.

A minimalist lifestyle helps to enjoy life with simple things that are available without undue efforts to acquire things that may be bought at great expenses. Minimalism can also lead to less clutter in living spaces.

==See also==
== Notes and references ==
=== Notes ===
=== References ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Keenan, David, and Michael Nyman (4 February 2001). &quot;Claim to Frame&quot;. &quot;Sunday Herald&quot;

== External links ==
* Agence Photographique de la Réunion des musées nationaux et du Grand Palais des Champs-Elysées 
* &quot;A Short History of Minimalism—Donald Judd, Richard Wollheim, and the origins of what we now describe as minimalist&quot; By Kyle Chayka January 14, 2020 The Nation </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="3" end="14" title="visual arts" label="visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q572901" start="16" end="21" title="Minimal music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="39" end="49" title="Minimalism" label="minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="56" end="68" title="art movement" label="art movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201472" start="87" end="99" title="post-war era" label="post-war era"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="167" end="189" title="abstract expressionism" label="abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="194" end="203" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394116" start="233" end="245" title="Postminimalism" label="post-minimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q250293" start="602" end="613" title="Donald Judd" label="Donald Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q275610" start="615" end="627" title="Agnes Martin" label="Agnes Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504395" start="629" end="639" title="Dan Flavin" label="Dan Flavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315348" start="641" end="651" title="Carl Andre" label="Carl Andre"/>
<link wikidata="Q465168" start="653" end="666" title="Robert Morris (artist)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q565848" start="668" end="679" title="Anne Truitt" label="Anne Truitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q375268" start="684" end="696" title="Frank Stella" label="Frank Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q572901" start="699" end="718" title="Minimal music" label="Minimalism in music"/>
<link wikidata="Q432822" start="789" end="803" title="La Monte Young" label="La Monte Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q365243" start="805" end="816" title="Terry Riley" label="Terry Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q262791" start="818" end="829" title="Steve Reich" label="Steve Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q189729" start="831" end="843" title="Philip Glass" label="Philip Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309766" start="845" end="859" title="Julius Eastman" label="Julius Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q84114" start="864" end="874" title="John Adams (composer)" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="920" end="925" title="Play (theatre)" label="plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="930" end="935" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="940" end="954" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="960" end="965" title="Film" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391" start="969" end="983" title="Robert Bresson" label="Robert Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219862" start="1000" end="1014" title="Raymond Carver" label="Raymond Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q173007" start="1046" end="1059" title="Colin Chapman" label="Colin Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="1415" end="1437" title="abstract expressionism" label="abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="1470" end="1478" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967681" start="1523" end="1537" title="Nassos Daphnis" label="Nassos Daphnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q375268" start="1539" end="1551" title="Frank Stella" label="Frank Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q527001" start="1553" end="1567" title="Kenneth Noland" label="Kenneth Noland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301849" start="1569" end="1576" title="Al Held" label="Al Held"/>
<link wikidata="Q544899" start="1578" end="1593" title="Ellsworth Kelly" label="Ellsworth Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q640936" start="1595" end="1607" title="Robert Ryman" label="Robert Ryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="1637" end="1646" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q250293" start="1655" end="1666" title="Donald Judd" label="Donald Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q504395" start="1668" end="1678" title="Dan Flavin" label="Dan Flavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q726169" start="1680" end="1691" title="David Smith (artist)" label="David Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q529591" start="1693" end="1705" title="Anthony Caro" label="Anthony Caro"/>
<link wikidata="Q369418" start="1778" end="1787" title="Hard-edge painting" label="hard edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="2833" end="2855" title="Abstract expressionism" label="Abstract Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972942" start="2886" end="2901" title="New York School (art)" label="New York School"/>
<link wikidata="Q217213" start="2991" end="3006" title="Action painting" label="Action Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602572" start="3250" end="3263" title="Green Gallery" label="Green Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q553617" start="3376" end="3396" title="Leo Castelli" label="Leo Castelli Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121900" start="3401" end="3413" title="Pace Gallery" label="Pace Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316866" start="3593" end="3614" title="geometric abstraction" label="geometric abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="3648" end="3655" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130777" start="3682" end="3698" title="Kazimir Malevich" label="Kazimir Malevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q151803" start="3700" end="3713" title="Piet Mondrian" label="Piet Mondrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207445" start="3752" end="3760" title="De Stijl" label="De Stijl"/>
<link wikidata="Q207103" start="3775" end="3797" title="Constructivism (art)" label="Russian Constructivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153048" start="3849" end="3868" title="Constantin Brâncuși" label="Constantin Brâncuși"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277572" start="3887" end="3893" title="Elements of art" label="formal"/>
<link wikidata="Q374504" start="3941" end="3955" title="Barnett Newman" label="Barnett Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q345569" start="3957" end="3969" title="Ad Reinhardt" label="Ad Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170071" start="3971" end="3983" title="Josef Albers" label="Josef Albers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="4024" end="4037" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q231121" start="4039" end="4051" title="Yayoi Kusama" label="Yayoi Kusama"/>
<link wikidata="Q309618" start="4053" end="4068" title="Giorgio Morandi" label="Giorgio Morandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154335" start="4082" end="4092" title="Yves Klein" label="Yves Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q846561" start="4105" end="4116" title="Monochrome painting" label="monochromes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062404" start="4250" end="4268" title="Artist&amp;#x27;s book" label="Artist&amp;#x27;s book"/>
<link wikidata="Q733720" start="4321" end="4334" title="Michael Fried" label="Michael Fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="4415" end="4425" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q193359" start="4474" end="4488" title="Transcendence (philosophy)" label="transcendental"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="4505" end="4513" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="4516" end="4525" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792644" start="4531" end="4542" title="stylization" label="stylization"/>
<link wikidata="Q250293" start="4861" end="4872" title="Donald Judd" label="Donald Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="5139" end="5145" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="5150" end="5162" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207445" start="5704" end="5712" title="De Stijl" label="De Stijl"/>
<link wikidata="Q914231" start="5867" end="5890" title="Rietveld Schröder House" label="Rietveld Schroder House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848367" start="5911" end="5934" title="Truus Schröder-Schräder" label="Truss Schroder-Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422874" start="6325" end="6369" title="Japanese architecture" label="Japanese traditional design and architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="7379" end="7403" title="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe" label="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q102289" start="7812" end="7830" title="Buckminster Fuller" label="Buckminster Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="9917" end="9929" title="Zen Buddhist" label="Zen Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q244226" start="10483" end="10494" title="sand garden" label="sand garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q587371" start="10498" end="10498" title="Ryōan-ji" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3273419" start="10672" end="10672" title="Ma (negative space)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1142664" start="10893" end="10893" title="wabi-sabi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q178459" start="11118" end="11118" title="Ikebana" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q208220" start="11453" end="11463" title="Tadao Ando" label="Tadao Ando"/>
<link wikidata="Q253350" start="11995" end="12008" title="Kazuyo Sejima" label="Kazuyo Sejima"/>
<link wikidata="Q369645" start="12051" end="12065" title="Ryue Nishizawa" label="Ryue Nishizawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q737536" start="12070" end="12075" title="SANAA" label="SANAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156823" start="12405" end="12415" title="New Museum" label="New Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="12657" end="12663" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036920" start="13082" end="13093" title="John Pawson" label="John Pawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13699" end="13707" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247482" start="14147" end="14166" title="Alberto Campo Baeza" label="Alberto Campo Baeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q206534" start="16027" end="16040" title="Stephen Crane" label="Stephen Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="16045" end="16061" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q81071" start="16112" end="16125" title="James M. Cain" label="James M. Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q433800" start="16130" end="16142" title="Jim Thompson (writer)" label="Jim Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q531067" start="16329" end="16340" title="metafiction" label="metafiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q315683" start="16377" end="16387" title="John Barth" label="John Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282338" start="16389" end="16402" title="Robert Coover" label="Robert Coover"/>
<link wikidata="Q304874" start="16408" end="16423" title="William H. Gass" label="William H. Gass"/>
<link wikidata="Q219862" start="16666" end="16680" title="Raymond Carver" label="Raymond Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q452145" start="16682" end="16693" title="Ann Beattie" label="Ann Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q241583" start="16695" end="16712" title="Bret Easton Ellis" label="Bret Easton Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76409" start="16714" end="16730" title="Charles Bukowski" label="Charles Bukowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323413" start="16732" end="16745" title="K. J. Stevens" label="K. J. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q481871" start="16747" end="16757" title="Amy Hempel" label="Amy Hempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934621" start="16759" end="16775" title="Bobbie Ann Mason" label="Bobbie Ann Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q495754" start="16777" end="16789" title="Tobias Wolff" label="Tobias Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q443966" start="16791" end="16802" title="Grace Paley" label="Grace Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q434164" start="16804" end="16819" title="Sandra Cisneros" label="Sandra Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780621" start="16821" end="16833" title="Mary Robison" label="Mary Robison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452794" start="16835" end="16854" title="Frederick Barthelme" label="Frederick Barthelme"/>
<link wikidata="Q547794" start="16856" end="16868" title="Richard Ford" label="Richard Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146747" start="16870" end="16885" title="Patrick Holland (author)" label="Patrick Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q272610" start="16887" end="16902" title="Cormac McCarthy" label="Cormac McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175150" start="16904" end="16917" title="David Leavitt" label="David Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726256" start="16922" end="16934" title="Alicia Erian" label="Alicia Erian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="16960" end="16983" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="16991" end="17001" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q918620" start="17003" end="17017" title="Robert Creeley" label="Robert Creeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344953" start="17019" end="17033" title="Robert Grenier (poet)" label="Robert Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783946" start="17035" end="17047" title="Aram Saroyan" label="Aram Saroyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953105" start="17049" end="17057" title="bpNichol" label="bpNichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="17331" end="17362" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="17439" end="17451" title="Jesse Helms" label="Jesse Helmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225230" start="17711" end="17733" title="Darren Wershler" label="Darren Werschler-Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654512" start="17738" end="17750" title="Lori Emerson" label="Lori Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37707" start="18211" end="18216" title="haiku" label="haiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028084" start="18310" end="18323" title="Nick Virgilio" label="Nick Virgilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299118" start="18325" end="18341" title="Raymond Roseliep" label="Raymond Roseliep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445640" start="18347" end="18359" title="George Swede" label="George Swede"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="18379" end="18393" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q443868" start="18471" end="18480" title="Jon Fosse" label="Jon Fosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q712771" start="18483" end="18498" title="Dimitris Lyacos" label="Dimitris Lyacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q20800672" start="18512" end="18543" title="With the People from the Bridge" label="With the People from the Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639065" start="18693" end="18707" title="The Easy Chain" label="The Easy Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415356" start="18715" end="18724" title="Evan Dara" label="Evan Dara"/>
<link wikidata="Q262791" start="18831" end="18842" title="Steve Reich" label="Steve Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q313639" start="19107" end="19120" title="Michael Nyman" label="Michael Nyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="19186" end="19197" title="visual arts" label="visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="19248" end="19261" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q206647" start="19366" end="19386" title="Henning Christiansen" label="Henning Christiansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q451188" start="19438" end="19455" title="Charlotte Moorman" label="Charlotte Moorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="19460" end="19473" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665153" start="19481" end="19511" title="Institute of Contemporary Arts" label="Institute of Contemporary Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q154335" start="19582" end="19592" title="Yves Klein" label="Yves Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391" start="19933" end="19947" title="Robert Bresson" label="Robert Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q239823" start="19949" end="19964" title="Chantal Akerman" label="Chantal Akerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51127" start="19966" end="19985" title="Carl Theodor Dreyer" label="Carl Theodor Dreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55402" start="19991" end="20003" title="Yasujirō Ozu" label="Yasujirō Ozu"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="20107" end="20120" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q211481" start="20277" end="20285" title="Dogme 95" label="Dogme 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108032" start="20287" end="20297" title="mumblecore" label="mumblecore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362564" start="20307" end="20324" title="Romanian New Wave" label="Romanian New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q55210" start="20326" end="20342" title="Abbas Kiarostami" label="Abbas Kiarostami"/>
<link wikidata="Q577569" start="20344" end="20357" title="Elia Suleiman" label="Elia Suleiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q436861" start="20363" end="20378" title="Kelly Reichardt" label="Kelly Reichardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732645" start="20423" end="20438" title="The Minimalists" label="The Minimalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q249277" start="20751" end="20764" title="haute cuisine" label="haute cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q664910" start="20778" end="20794" title="nouvelle cuisine" label="nouvelle cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q848969" start="20867" end="20880" title="conceptualism" label="conceptualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480053" start="20924" end="20936" title="Food presentation" label="presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q249277" start="21149" end="21166" title="cuisine classique" label="cuisine classique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036400" start="21307" end="21323" title="capsule wardrobe" label="capsule wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="21355" end="21362" title="fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q464497" start="21823" end="21834" title="Donna Karan" label="Donna Karan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="21949" end="21963" title="Climate change" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q50946243" start="22009" end="22019" title="Ed Hawkins (climatologist)" label="Ed Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051884" start="22030" end="22045" title="warming stripes" label="warming stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164982" start="22337" end="22348" title="color field" label="color field"/>
<link wikidata="Q374504" start="22458" end="22472" title="Barnett Newman" label="Barnett Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="22701" end="22721" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q731126" start="22729" end="22734" title="J. Paul Getty Museum" label="Getty"/>
<link wikidata="Q63975598" start="22745" end="22754" title="The Tempestry Project" label="tempestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="22757" end="22768" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235895" start="23990" end="24003" title="Keenan, David" label="Keenan, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q313639" start="24009" end="24022" title="Michael Nyman" label="Michael Nyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639411" start="24076" end="24089" title="Sunday Herald" label="Sunday Herald"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20837" wikidata="Q3773501" url="?curid=20837" title="Ignition magneto">
<text>An ignition magneto (also called a high-tension magneto) is an older type of ignition system used in spark-ignition engines (such as petrol engines). It uses a magneto and a transformer to make pulses of high voltage for the spark plugs. The older term &quot;high-tension&quot; means &quot;high-voltage&quot;.

== Design ==
A simple magneto (an electrical generator using permanent magnets) is able to produce relatively low voltage electricity, however it is unable to produce the high voltages required by a spark plug as used in most modern engines (aside from diesel engines). An &quot;ignition magneto&quot; also includes an electrical transformer, which converts the electricity to a higher voltage (with the trade-off being a corresponding reduction in the output current).

As the points begin to open, point spacing is initially such that the voltage across the primary coil would arc across the points. A capacitor is placed across the points which absorbs the energy stored in the leakage inductance of the primary coil, and slows the rise time of the primary winding voltage to allow the points to open fully.

A second coil, with many more turns than the primary, is wound on the same iron core to form an electrical transformer. The ratio of turns in the secondary winding to the number of turns in the primary winding, is called the &quot;turns ratio&quot;. Voltage across the primary coil results in a proportional voltage being induced across the secondary winding of the coil. The turns ratio between the primary and secondary coil is selected so that the voltage across the secondary reaches a very high value, enough to arc across the gap of the spark plug. As the voltage of the primary winding rises to several hundred volts, the voltage on the secondary winding rises to several tens of thousands of volts, since the secondary winding typically has 100 times as many turns as the primary winding.

===Impulse coupling, induction vibrator, and booster coil===

Because the magneto has low voltage output at low speed, starting an engine is more difficult. Therefore, some magnetos have an impulse coupling, a spring-like mechanical linkage between the engine and magneto drive shaft which &quot;winds up&quot; and &quot;lets go&quot; at the proper moment for spinning the magneto shaft. The impulse coupling uses a spring, a hub cam with flyweights, and a shell. The hub of the magneto rotates while the drive shaft is held stationary, and the spring tension builds up. When the magneto is supposed to fire, the flyweights are released by the action of the body contacting the trigger ramp. This allows the spring to unwind giving the rotating magnet a rapid rotation and letting the magneto spin at such a speed to produce a spark.

== History ==
In the late 1890s, English engineer Frederick Richard Simms collaborated with the German engineer Robert Bosch, and his staff of Arnold Zähringer, Young Rall, and Gottlob Honold, in developing the first practical high-tension magneto. In 1900, the Bosch magneto ignition was used in the Gottlieb Daimler engines on the Zeppelin.

The first car to use magneto ignition was the 1901 German Mercedes 35 hp racing car, followed by various cars produced by Benz, Mors, Turcat-Mery, and Nesseldorf. Ignition magnetos were soon used on most cars, for both low voltage systems (which used secondary coils to fire the spark plugs) and high voltage magnetos (which fired the spark plug directly, similar to induction coil ignition). Ignition magnetos were largely replaced by ignition coils once batteries became common in cars, since a battery-operated coil can provide a high-voltage spark even at low speeds, making starting easier.
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3773501" start="3" end="19" title="Ignition magneto" label="ignition magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773501" start="35" end="55" title="Ignition magneto" label="high-tension magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q248382" start="77" end="92" title="ignition system" label="ignition system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651473" start="101" end="122" title="spark-ignition engine" label="spark-ignition engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307177" start="160" end="167" title="magneto" label="magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="174" end="185" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193340" start="225" end="235" title="spark plug" label="spark plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="295" end="302" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307177" start="333" end="340" title="magneto" label="magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="425" end="432" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193340" start="510" end="520" title="spark plug" label="spark plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="564" end="577" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="641" end="652" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="771" end="778" title="electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="915" end="924" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515253" start="992" end="1010" title="leakage inductance" label="leakage inductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="1230" end="1241" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q563607" start="2806" end="2829" title="Frederick Richard Simms" label="Frederick Richard Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q71032" start="2868" end="2880" title="Robert Bosch" label="Robert Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57098" start="3057" end="3073" title="Gottlieb Daimler" label="Gottlieb Daimler"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="3089" end="3097" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q730425" start="3158" end="3172" title="Mercedes 35 hp" label="Mercedes 35 hp"/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="3222" end="3226" title="Benz &amp;amp; Cie." label="Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q651443" start="3228" end="3232" title="Mors (automobile)" label="Mors"/>
<link wikidata="Q539285" start="3234" end="3245" title="Turcat-Mery" label="Turcat-Mery"/>
<link wikidata="Q849439" start="3251" end="3261" title="Nesseldorf" label="Nesseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417360" start="3467" end="3481" title="induction coil" label="induction coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q248339" start="3536" end="3549" title="ignition coil" label="ignition coil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20840" wikidata="Q1894972" url="?curid=20840" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000">
<text>Mystery Science Theater 3000 (abbreviated as MST3K) is an American science fiction comedy television series created by Joel Hodgson. The show premiered on KTMA-TV (now WUCW) in Minneapolis, Minnesota, on November 24, 1988. It then moved to nationwide broadcast, first on The Comedy Channel for two seasons, then Comedy Central for five seasons until its cancellation in 1996. Thereafter, it was picked up by The Sci-Fi Channel and aired for three more seasons until another cancellation in August 1999. A 60-episode syndication package titled &quot;The Mystery Science Theater Hour&quot; was produced in 1993 and broadcast on Comedy Central and syndicated to TV stations in 1995. In 2015, Hodgson led a crowdfunded revival of the series with 14 episodes in its eleventh season, first released on Netflix on April 14, 2017, with another six-episode season following on November 22, 2018. A second successful crowdfunding effort in 2021 produced 13 additional episodes shown on the Gizmoplex, an online platform that Hodgson developed which launched in March 2022. , 230 episodes and a feature film had been produced as well as three live tours.

The show initially starred Hodgson as Joel Robinson, a janitor trapped by two mad scientists (&quot;The Mads&quot;) on the Earth-orbiting &quot;Satellite of Love&quot; and forced to watch a series of B movies to monitor his reaction to them. To keep his sanity, Joel crafts sentient robot companions, including Tom Servo, Crow T. Robot, Cambot and Gypsy, to keep him company and help him humorously comment on each movie as it plays, a process known as riffing. Each two-hour episode would feature a single movie (often edited for time constraints), sometimes preceded by various old shorts and educational films, with Joel, Tom, and Crow watching in silhouette from a row of theater seats at the bottom of the screen. These &quot;theater segments&quot; were framed with interstitial sketches called &quot;host segments&quot;. The show&#x27;s cast changed over its duration; most notably, the character of Joel was replaced by Mike Nelson (played by Michael J. Nelson) halfway through the show&#x27;s fifth season. Other cast members, most of whom were also writers for the show, include Trace Beaulieu, Josh Weinstein, Jim Mallon, Kevin Murphy, Frank Conniff, Mary Jo Pehl, Bill Corbett, Paul Chaplin, and Bridget Jones Nelson. The 2017 revival features a primarily new cast, including Jonah Ray who plays the new human test subject Jonah Heston, along with Felicia Day and Patton Oswalt as &quot;The Mads&quot; and Baron Vaughn, Hampton Yount, and Rebecca Hanson voicing Tom Servo, Crow T. Robot, and Gypsy, respectively. Season 13 brought back this cast while integrating Emily Connor, played by Emily Marsh, and others from the live tours in this era.

Initially MST3K did not garner high viewership numbers, but the show&#x27;s popularity spread through online word-of-mouth by its fans known as &quot;MSTies&quot; or &quot;Mysties&quot; (who would remind others to &quot;Keep circulating the tapes&quot;), frequent repeats, syndication, and home media offerings produced by Rhino Entertainment. Currently, this popularity continues through Shout! Studios, who along with Hodgson, now own the rights to the show and supported the revived series. &quot;MST3K&quot; was listed as one of &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME&quot; in 2007, and &quot;TV Guide&quot; has noted &quot;MST3K&quot; as one of the top cult television shows. The show won a Peabody Award in 1993, was also nominated for two Emmy Awards in 1994 and 1995, and for the CableACE Award from 1992 to 1997. The show was considered highly influential, contributing towards the practice of social television, and former cast members launched projects similarly on riffing on films, including The Film Crew, RiffTrax, and Cinematic Titanic. &quot;MST3K&quot; also brought to light several older movies that had fallen into obscurity or had received little or no public attention when originally released. Many of these films were subsequently identified as among the worst movies ever made, most notably &quot;&quot;.

==Premise==

While the cast of &quot;MST3K&quot; changed throughout its history, the basic premise of the show remains consistent: a human test subject—first Joel Robinson (Joel Hodgson), then Mike Nelson (Michael J. Nelson), and most recently Jonah Heston (Jonah Ray) and Emily Connor (Emily Marsh)—has been imprisoned aboard the spacecraft &quot;Satellite of Love&quot; by mad scientists (collectively called &quot;The Mads&quot;) and is forced to watch a series of bad movies in order to find one that will drive the test subject insane.

In an attempt to keep his sanity, Joel built sentient robots (&quot;the bots&quot;) from parts aboard the &quot;Satellite of Love&quot;, and they subsequently remained aboard with Joel&#x27;s successors as test subjects. The Bots include Tom Servo, Crow T. Robot, GPC (formerly Gypsy) who is in charge of satellite operations, and Cambot, the silent recorder of the experiments. Crow and Servo join the human test subject in watching the film in the satellite&#x27;s theater. To keep from going mad, the trio frequently comment and wisecrack during the movie, a process known as &quot;riffing&quot;. At regular intervals throughout the movie, the hosts leave the theater and return to the bridge of the satellite to perform sketches (commonly called &quot;host segments&quot;) that often satirize the film being watched.

==Format==
The general format of an &quot;MST3K&quot; episode has remained the same throughout the series&#x27; run. Episodes are approximately 90 minutes in running time (excluding commercial breaks) and begin with a short introductory segment in which the human host and the &#x27;bots interact with the Mads before being sent the movie. During Joel Hodgson and Jonah Ray&#x27;s tenures as hosts (and for a brief period at the start of the Mike Nelson era), the hosts and the Mads engage in an &quot;invention exchange&quot; in which they each show off their latest inventions. Sirens and flashing lights (&quot;Movie Sign&quot;) then signal the characters to enter the theater.

In the theater, the human host and &#x27;bots Tom and Crow sit in a row of theater seats, shown in silhouette along the bottom of the screen, an approach Hodgson called &quot;Shadowramma&quot;. The three then riff on the film (which is sometimes accompanied by one or more shorts) as it plays for both them and the audience. Occasionally, the silhouette format is used as a source of humor, or as a means of creating unobtrusive censor bars for scenes containing nudity. The show transitions into and out of the theater via a &quot;door sequence&quot;, a series of six doors that open or close as the camera (presumably Cambot) passes through them.

At regular intervals throughout the episode, the characters leave the theater and perform sketches, usually inspired by the events of the film or short being shown, frequently making use of original songs and prop comedy. Some sketches bring in new or recurring characters or other devices; the host would consult an external camera, &quot;Rocket Number Nine&quot;, to show events happening outside the &quot;Satellite&quot;, and the &quot;Hexfield Viewscreen&quot; would be used to communicate with other characters from the ship&#x27;s bridge. At the end of each sketch, &quot;Movie Sign&quot; (a reference to the concept of wormsign from Frank Herbert&#x27;s classic sci-fi novel &quot;Dune&quot;) is triggered again, and the characters must re-enter the theater.

During Hodgson&#x27;s period on the show, the final sketch aboard the &quot;Satellite&quot; often included reading of fan mail from the &quot;MST3K Info Club&quot;. Fan mail readings decreased during Mike Nelson&#x27;s tenure as host and were dropped entirely once the show moved onto the Sci-Fi Channel. The final sketch of an episode typically ends with the Mads, with the lead Mad asking their lackey to &quot;push the button&quot; to end the transmission and transitioning to the credit sequence. After the credits, a humorous short clip from the featured film (or the accompanying short on occasion) is replayed as a &quot;stinger&quot; to end the episode.

In November 1993, a limited selection of episodes were repackaged into an hour-long show titled &quot;Mystery Science Theater Hour&quot;, meant to be better suited for off-network syndication. In these, the original episode was split into two parts, each about 45 minutes long, excluding commercials. New skits opening and ending each episode included Mike Nelson portraying television host Jack Perkins.

==Production history==
===Concept===
Hodgson is credited for devising the show&#x27;s concept. Prior to the show, Hodgson was an up-and-coming comedian from Minneapolis having moved to Los Angeles and made appearances on &quot;Late Night with David Letterman&quot; and &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. He had been invited by Brandon Tartikoff to be on an NBC sitcom co-starring Michael J. Fox, but Hodgson felt the material was not funny and declined (the proposed sitcom went unrealized). He further became dissatisfied with the Hollywood attitudes when they tried to double their offer, acquiring what he called a &quot;healthy disrespect&quot; for the industry. He moved back to Minneapolis-St. Paul, taking a job in a T-shirt printing factory that allowed him to conceive of new comedy ideas while he was bored. One such idea was the basis of &quot;MST3K&quot;, a show to comment humorously on movies and that would also allow him to showcase his own prop comedy-style humor. Hodgson referred to these jokes as &quot;riffs&quot;, based both on the idea of musical riffs as well as the idea of comedy riffs, a term he attributes to &quot;The Simpsons&quot;″s writer Dana Gould. In terms of movie selection, Hodgson had recalled that his college roommate had a copy of &quot;The Golden Turkey Awards&quot;, and he had previously wondered why no one had made any program about these &quot;adorable, weird movies&quot; listed within it.
Hodgson said that part of the idea for &quot;MST3K&quot; came from the illustration for the song &quot;I&#x27;ve Seen That Movie Too&quot; (drawn by Mike Ross) in the liner notes from Elton John&#x27;s &quot;Goodbye Yellow Brick Road&quot; album, showing silhouettes of a couple sitting in a theater watching &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot;. Hodgson also likened the show&#x27;s setting to the idea of a pirate radio station broadcasting from space. Hodgson credits &quot;Silent Running&quot;, a 1972 science-fiction film directed by Douglas Trumbull, as being perhaps the biggest direct influence on the show&#x27;s concept. The film is set in the future and centers on a human, Freeman Lowell (Bruce Dern), who is the last crew member of a spaceship containing Earth&#x27;s last surviving forests. His remaining companions consist only of three robot drones. &quot;MST3K&quot; and the Joel Robinson character occasionally reflected Lowell&#x27;s hippie-like nature. Hodgson wanted the feel of the show to appear homemade, and cited the example of a crude mountain prop used during the &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; sketch &quot;Night on Freak Mountain&quot; that received a humorous reaction from the studio audience as the type of aesthetic he wanted for the show. Hodgson had made dozens of such robots from random parts before as art that he sold to friends and others, and knew he could incorporate that into the show.

Both old movies and music inspired several of the show&#x27;s character names as developed by Hodgson. The show&#x27;s name came from the promotional phrase &quot;Mystery Scientist&quot; used by magician Harlan Tarbell and a play on the name of Sun Ra&#x27;s band, the Myth Science Arkestra. The &quot;3000&quot; was added to spoof the common practice of adding &quot;2000&quot; to show and product names in light of then-upcoming 21st century, and Hodgson thought it would set his show apart to make it &quot;3000&quot;. Dr. Forrester was named after the main character of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;. The &quot;Satellite of Love&quot; was named after the song of the same name by Lou Reed. Crow T. Robot was inspired by the song &quot;Crow&quot; from Jim Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Catholic Boy&quot;, while Rocket Number 9&#x27;s name was inspired by the original name of Sun Ra&#x27;s album &quot;Interstellar Low Ways&quot;.

The theater shots, the primary component of an episode, are taped in &quot;Shadowrama&quot;. The &quot;seats&quot; were a black-painted foam core board sitting behind the seat (towards the camera) for the host, and stages for the Crow and Tom puppets. The human host wore black clothing while the robot puppets were painted black; the screen they watched was a white luma key screen so as to create the appearance of silhouettes. The actors would follow the movie and the script through television monitors located in front of them, as to create the overall theater illusion.

The &quot;door sequence&quot; was created to transition from host segments to the theater segments, which Hodgson took inspiration from the &quot;Mickey Mouse Club&quot;, noting that the commonality to the title credits of &quot;Get Smart&quot; was coincidental. In devising this sequence, this also led to Beaulieu creating the dogbone-like shape of the &quot;Satellite of Love&quot; with additional inspiration taken from the bone-to-ship transition in the film &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;. Hodgson had wanted to use a &quot;motivated camera&quot; for taping, a concept related to motivated lighting; in this mode, all the shots would appear to have been taken from an actual camera that was part of the scene to make the scene appear more realistic. This led to the creation of Cambot as a robot that the host would speak to during host segments or recording them while in the theater, and Rocket Number Nine to show footage outside of the Satellite of Love.

The show&#x27;s theme song, the &quot;Love Theme from Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot;, was written by Hodgson and Weinstein, which helped to cement some of the broader narrative elements of the show, such as the Mads and Joel being part of an experiment. The song was composed by Charlie Erickson with help from Hodgson in the style of Devo, The Replacements, and The Rivieras (particularly their cover of the song &quot;California Sun&quot;) and sung by Hodgson. Initial shows used foam letters to make the show&#x27;s title, but they later created the spinning-moon logo out of a 2-foot (0.6m) diameter fiberglass ball, covered with foam insulation and the lettering cut from additional foam pieces. Hodgson felt they needed a logo with the rotating effect as opposed to a flat 2D image, and though they had envisioned a more detailed prop, with the letters being the tops of buildings on this moon, they had no time or budget for a project of that complexity and went with what they had. Musical numbers would also be used as part of the host segments, which Hodgson said came out naturally from the riffing process; they would find themselves at times singing along with the movie instead of just riffing at it, and took that to extend songs into the host segments.

===KTMA era (1988–1989)===

Hodgson approached Jim Mallon, at the time the production manager of KTMA, a low-budget local Minneapolis-area independent television station, with his idea of a show based on riffing on movies, using robots that were created out of common objects. Mallon agreed to help produce a pilot episode, and Hodgson hired local area comedians J. Elvis Weinstein (initially going by Josh Weinstein but later changed to J. Elvis as to distinguish himself from Josh Weinstein, a well-known writer for &quot;The Simpsons&quot;) and Trace Beaulieu to develop the pilot show. By September 1988, Hodgson, Mallon, Weinstein, and Beaulieu shot a 30-minute pilot episode, using segments from the 1968 science-fiction film &quot;The Green Slime&quot;. The robots and the set were built by Hodgson in an all-nighter. Joel watched the movie by himself, and was aided during the host segments by his robots, Crow (Beaulieu), Beeper, and Gypsy (Weinstein). Hodgson used the narrative that his character named &quot;Joel Hodgson&quot; (not yet using his character name of Robinson) had built the &quot;Satellite of Love&quot; and launched himself into space. Camera work was by Kevin Murphy, who was employed by KTMA. Murphy also created the first doorway sequence and theater seat design. These initial episodes were recorded at the long since-defunct Paragon Cable studios and customer service center in Hopkins, Minnesota. On review, Hodgson found that of the robots, Beeper&#x27;s design was not working well, and tried a quick modification by replacing its head with a toy gumball machine top, creating the basis of Tom Servo.

Mallon met with KTMA station manager Donald O&#x27;Conner the next month and managed to get signed up for thirteen episodes. Show production was generally done on a 24-hour cycle, starting with Mallon offering a few films from KTMA&#x27;s library for the writers to select from. Riffing in these episodes was ad-libbed during taping using notes made during preliminary viewings of the selected film. Episodes from this era are noted for their low number of riffs - in some instances 15 minutes of the movie could be shown before the cast made any comments. The show had some slight alterations from the pilot — the set was lit differently, the robots (now Crow, Servo and Gypsy) joined Joel in the theater, and a new doorway countdown sequence between the host and theater segments was shot. The puppeteers worked personalities into their robots: Crow (Beaulieu) was considered a robotic Groucho Marx, Tom Servo (Weinstein) as a &quot;smarmy AM radio DJ&quot;, and Gypsy (Mallon) modeled after Mallon&#x27;s mother who had a &quot;heart of gold&quot; but would become disoriented when confronted with a difficult task. The development of the show&#x27;s theme song would lead to establishing elements for the show&#x27;s ongoing premise, with Hodgson now portraying himself as the character Joel Robinson.

&quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; premiered on KTMA at 6:00 p.m. on Thanksgiving Day, November 24, 1988, with its first episode, &quot;Invaders from the Deep&quot;, followed by a second episode, &quot;Revenge of the Mysterons from Mars&quot; at 8:00 p.m. The choice of running the premiere on Thanksgiving was by happenstance, as the station felt the show was ready to go at that point, according to Hodgson. Initially, the show&#x27;s response was unknown, until Mallon set up a phone line for viewers to call in. Response was so great that the initial run of 13 episodes was extended to 21, with the show running to May 1989. Hodgson and Mallon negotiated to secure the rights for the show for themselves, creating Best Brains, Inc., agreeing to split ownership of the idea equally. During this time a fan club was set up and the show held its first live show at Scott Hansen&#x27;s Comedy Gallery in Minneapolis, to a crowd of over 600.

Despite the show&#x27;s success, the station&#x27;s overall declining fortunes forced it to file for bankruptcy reorganization in July 1989. At the same time, HBO was looking to build a stable of shows for their upcoming Comedy Channel cable network. HBO approached Best Brains and requested a sample of their material. Hodgson and Mallon provided a seven-minute demo reel, which led to the network greenlighting &quot;MST3K&quot; as one of the first two shows picked up by the new network. According to Art Bell, one of the creators of the Comedy Channel, &quot;MST3K&quot;″s arrival helped the network to fill space that they had originally planned to use short clips of films and television shows that they could not license in time for launch.

===Comedy Channel (1989-1991) and Comedy Central (1991-1996) eras===
The Comedy Channel offered Best Brains $35,000 per episode but allowed Best Brains to retain the show&#x27;s rights. Best Brains was also able to keep production local to Minnesota instead of the network&#x27;s desire to film in New York City or Los Angeles, as it would have cost four times more per episode, according to Hodgson. Best Brains established an office and warehouse space in Eden Prairie for filming. With an expanded but still limited budget, they were able to hire more writers, including Mike Nelson, Mary Jo Pehl, and Frank Conniff, and build more expansive sets and robot puppets. They retained the characters of Dr. Forrester (Beaulieu) and Dr. Erhardt (Weinstein) from the KTMA era and crafted the larger narrative of each episode being an &quot;experiment&quot; they test on Joel. The show began its national run shortly after The Comedy Channel went on the air in November 1989.

&quot;MST3K&quot; was considered The Comedy Channel&#x27;s signature program, generating positive press about the show despite the limited availability of the cable channel nationwide. After the second season, The Comedy Channel and rival comedy cable network HA! merged to become CTV: The Comedy Network (later changed to Comedy Central). During this period, &quot;MST3K&quot; became the newly merged cable channel&#x27;s signature series, expanding from 13 to 24 episodes a year. To take advantage of the show&#x27;s status, Comedy Central ran &quot;Turkey Day&quot;, a 30-hour marathon of &quot;MST3K&quot; episodes during Thanksgiving 1991. The name of the event was not only inspired by the traditional turkey meal served on Thanksgiving, but also by use of &quot;Turkey&quot; from &quot;The Golden Turkey Awards&quot; to represent bad movies. This tradition would be continued through the rest of the Comedy Central era. Though the show did not draw large audience numbers compared to other programming on Comedy Central, such as reruns of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, the dedicated fans and attention kept the show on the network.

&quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie&quot; was produced during the later half of the Comedy Central era and had a very limited theatrical release in 1996 through Universal Pictures and Gramercy Pictures. It featured Mike and the bots subjected to the film &quot;This Island Earth&quot; by Dr. Forrester. Though well received by critics and fans, the film was a financial disappointment due to its limited distribution.

====Writing and taping====
The cable network was able to provide a wider library of films for Best Brains to riff from. To ensure that they would be able to produce a funny episode, at least one member of the staff would watch the suggested films completely, generally assuring that the movie would be prime for jokes throughout. Conniff stated that he often would have to watch around twenty films in their entirety before selecting one to use for the show. In one specific case, the second-season episode with the 1969 film &quot;The Sidehackers&quot;, they had only skimmed the first part of the movie before making the decision to use it, and only later discovered that it contained a scene where a female character is brutally raped and murdered. They decided to stay committed to the film, but cut out the offending scene and had to explain the sudden absence of the affected character to the audience. After this, they carefully scrutinized entire films for other such offensive content, and once one was selected and assured the rights, committed to completing the episode with that film. Obtaining the rights was handled by the cable networks. Some licensing required buying film rights in packages, with the selected bad movies included in a catalog of otherwise good films, making the negotiations odd since the network was only interested in the bad film. Other times, the rights to the film were poorly documented, and the network would follow the chain of custody to locate the copyright owner so as to secure broadcast rights.

In contrast to the ad-libbing of riffs from KTMA, the riffs were scripted ahead of time by the writers. An average episode (approximately 90 minutes running time) would contain more than 600 such riffs, and some with upwards of 800 riffs. Riffs were developed with the entire writing staff watching the film together several times through, giving off-the-cuff quips and jokes as the film went along, or identifying where additional material would be helpful for the comedy. The best jokes were polished into the script for the show. Riffs were developed to keep in line with the characterization of Joel, Mike, and the &#x27;bots. Further, the writers tried to maintain respect for the films and avoided making negative riffs about them, taking into consideration that Joel, Mike, and the &#x27;bots were companions to the audience while watching the movie, and they did not want to come off sounding like jerks even if the negative riff would be funny. Hodgson stated that their goal in writing riffs is not to ridicule films as some have often mistaken, but to rather instead consider what they are doing as &quot;a variety show built on the back of a movie&quot;.
Production of an average episode of &quot;MST3K&quot; during the Comedy Central period took about five to nine days once the movie was selected and its rights secured. The first few days were generally used for watching the movie and scripting out the riffs and live action segments. The subsequent days were then generally used to start construction of any props or sets that would be needed for the live action segments while the writers honed the script. A full dress rehearsal would then be held, making sure the segments and props worked and fine tuning the script. The host segments would then be taped on one day, and the theater segments on the next. A final day was used to review the completed work and correct any major flaws they caught before considering the episode complete. Live scenes used only practical special effects, and there was minimal post-editing once taping was completed.

====Cast changes====
Weinstein left the show after the first Comedy Channel season, reportedly in disagreement with Hodgson about moving toward using scripted rather than ad-libbed jokes. Murphy replaced him as the voice of Tom Servo, portraying the &#x27;bot as a cultured individual, while Dr. Erhardt was replaced with TV&#x27;s Frank (Conniff).

Hodgson decided to leave the series halfway through Season Five due to his dislike of being on camera and his disagreements with producer Mallon over creative control of the program. Hodgson also stated that Mallon&#x27;s insistence on producing a feature film version of the show led to his departure, giving up his rights on the &quot;MST3K&quot; property to Mallon. Hodgson later told an interviewer: &quot;If I had the presence of mind to try and work it out, I would rather have stayed. &#x27;Cause I didn&#x27;t want to go, it just seemed like I needed to.&quot; Though they held casting calls for a replacement for Hodgson on camera, the crew found that none of the potential actors really fit the role; instead, having reviewed a test run that Nelson had done with the &#x27;bots, the crew agreed that having Nelson (who had already appeared in several guest roles on the show) replace Hodgson would be the least jarring approach. The replacement of Joel by Mike would lead to an oft-jokingly &quot;Joel vs. Mike flame war&quot; among fans, similar to the &quot;Kirk vs. Picard&quot; discussions in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; fandom.

Conniff left the show after Season Six, looking to get into writing TV sitcoms in Hollywood. TV&#x27;s Frank was soon replaced on the show by Dr. Forrester&#x27;s mother, Pearl (Pehl).

====Cancellation====
By 1996, Comedy Central had started creating an identity for its network under the new leadership of Doug Herzog, which would lead to successful shows like &quot;The Daily Show&quot;, &quot;Win Ben Stein&#x27;s Money&quot;, &quot;South Park&quot; and &quot;Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist.&quot; This left &quot;MST3K&quot; as an oddity on the network taking up limited program space. Herzog, though stating that &quot;MST3K&quot; &quot;helped put the network on the map&quot; and that its fans were &quot;passionate&quot;, believed it was necessary to change things around due to the show&#x27;s declining and lackluster ratings. The network cancelled &quot;MST3K&quot; after a six-episode seventh season.

===Sci-Fi Channel era (1997–1999)===

The show staff continued to operate for as long as they still had finances to work with. &quot;MST3K&quot;″s fan base staged a write-in campaign to keep the show alive. This effort led the Sci-Fi Channel, a subsidiary of USA Networks, to pick up the series. Rod Perth, then-president of programming for USA Networks, helped to bring the show to the Sci-Fi Channel, stating himself to be a huge fan of the show and believing that &quot;the sci-fi genre took itself too seriously and that this show was a great way of lightening up our own presentation&quot;.

Writing and production of the show remained relatively unchanged from the Comedy Central period. Before Season Eight commenced filming, Beaulieu opted to leave the show, feeling that anything creative that would be produced by Best Brains would belong to Mallon, and wanted to have more creative ownership himself. To replace Dr. Forrester, two new sidekicks to Pearl were introduced: Professor Bobo (Murphy) and the Observer, a.k.a. &quot;Brain Guy&quot; (Corbett). In addition, Corbett took over Crow&#x27;s voice and puppetry and Best Brains staffer Patrick Brantseg took over Gypsy in the middle of Season Eight. With this replacement, the series&#x27; entire original cast had been turned over.

&quot;MST3K&quot; ran for three more seasons on the Sci-Fi Channel. During the Sci-Fi era, Best Brains found themselves more limited by the network: the pool of available films was smaller and they were required to use science fiction films (as per the network&#x27;s name and programming focus), and the USA Network executives managing the show wanted to see a story arc and had more demands on how the show should be produced. Conflict between Best Brains and the network executives would eventually lead to the show&#x27;s second cancellation. Peter Keepnews, writing for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, noted that the frequent cast changes, as well as the poorer selection of films that he felt were more boring than bizarre in their execution, had caused the show to lose its original appeal. Another campaign to save the show was mounted, including several &quot;MST3K&quot; fans taking contributions for a full-page ad in the trade publication &quot;Daily Variety&quot; magazine, but unlike the first effort, this campaign was unsuccessful.

The season 10 finale, &quot;&quot;, premiered on August 8, 1999, during which, in the show&#x27;s narrative, Pearl Forrester accidentally sent the &quot;Satellite of Love&quot; out of orbit, with Mike and the &#x27;bots escaping and taking up residence in an apartment near Milwaukee, where they continue to riff movies. A &quot;lost&quot; episode produced earlier in the season but delayed due to rights issues, &quot;Merlin&#x27;s Shop of Mystical Wonders&quot;, was the final season 10 episode of &quot;MST3K&quot; (and the last of the original run), broadcast on September 12, 1999. Reruns continued to air on the Sci Fi Channel for several years, ending with &quot;The Screaming Skull&quot; on January 31, 2004. The shows later moved to off-network syndication.

===Netflix era revival (2017–2018)===
====Kickstarter funding====
Starting in 2010, Hodgson had been trying to bring back &quot;MST3K&quot;, spurred on by fan appreciation of the cast and crew 25 years since the show&#x27;s premiere and the success of his &quot;Cinematic Titanic&quot; project. Hodgson also considered the timing to be ideal, with non-traditional outlets like Netflix picking up original series, and the success of crowdfunding for entertainment projects. However, Hodgson needed to reacquire the rights to the series, at that point still held by Mallon and Best Brains. By 2013, Hodgson was working closely with Shout! Factory, the distribution company handling the home media releases of &quot;MST3K&quot;, and completed negotiations with Mallon to buy the rights for &quot;MST3K&quot; for a seven-figure sum by August 2015, enabling a Kickstarter campaign to fund the revival to move forward. Hodgson felt the Kickstarter approach was necessary so that the show&#x27;s style and approach would be determined by fans rather than through a network if he had sought traditional broadcast funding, as well as to demonstrate the demand for the show through a successful campaign.

The Kickstarter was launched in November 2015, seeking $2 million for the production of three episodes, with stretch goals with additional funding for 12 total episodes. The Kickstarter effort was led by Ivan Askwith, a consultant who also had worked on the &quot;Veronica Mars&quot; and &quot;Reading Rainbow&quot; Kickstarter campaigns. Hodgson estimated each episode would take $250,000 to make, in addition to five-figure movie licensing rights, in contrast to $100,000 per episode needed for the original series. The campaign reached its base funding within a week of its launch. On the final day of the campaign, Hodgson and Shout! ran a streaming telethon which included appearances from the newly selected cast and crew, and various celebrities that supported the revival to help exceed the target funding levels for twelve episodes. The campaign ended on December 11, 2015, with total funding of $5,764,229 from 48,270 backers, with an additional $600,000 in backer add-ons, which allowed Hodgson to plan two more additional episodes, including a Christmas episode, to bring the total season to fourteen episodes. The Kickstarter became the largest one for Film &amp; Video, surpassing the $5.70 million raised for the &quot;Veronica Mars&quot; film, but was ultimately surpassed in March 2019 for an animated series based on the web series &quot;Critical Role&quot;.

====Casting====

Hodgson believed that the revival would need a whole new cast, pointing out that the cast had completely turned over in the original series. Comedian Jonah Ray plays Jonah Heston, the new host aboard the Satellite of Love, watching and riffing on the films. Hodgson had met Ray while recording an episode of &quot;The Nerdist Podcast&quot;, and felt he would be a good fit. The voices of Crow and Tom Servo are provided by comedians Hampton Yount and Baron Vaughn, respectively, both of whom Ray recommended to Hodgson. Hodgson felt it was important for Ray to have his say on who would play these parts, since it would help Ray be comfortable in the role. Felicia Day plays Kinga Forrester, Clayton Forrester&#x27;s daughter and one of the new Mads in charge of the experiments, now operating out of a moon base known as &quot;Moon 13&quot;. Day had been one of the last to be cast, as Hodgson had scripted out the concept for Forrester&#x27;s daughter while casting Ray and the others. Hodgson had met Day at the 2015 Salt Lake Comic Con, where she stated her love of &quot;MST3K&quot; to him. Hodgson had seen Day&#x27;s performance in shows like &quot;The Guild&quot; and &quot;Dr. Horrible&#x27;s Sing-Along Blog&quot;, and felt she matched his idea for the character he had envisioned. Patton Oswalt plays Kinga&#x27;s henchman, Max, or as his character prefers to be known, &quot;TV&#x27;s Son of TV&#x27;s Frank&quot;; Hodgson had already planned to invite Oswalt, a longtime friend and self-professed MST3K fan, as a special guest writer for an episode of the revived series, but decided during the Kickstarter that he would also be a good fit on-camera. Rebecca Hanson, an alum of The Second City, took the role of Gypsy as well as Synthia, a clone of Pearl Forrester who assists Kinga. Har Mar Superstar leads the &quot;Skeleton Crew&quot;, a house band in Kinga&#x27;s lair.

Pehl, Corbett, and Murphy cameo on the revival, reprising their roles as Pearl, Brain Guy, and Professor Bobo, respectively. Hodgson opened up to the show any of the other cast members to make cameo appearances or aid in the creative process. However, Nelson and Beaulieu stated that they would not be involved with the MST3K revival; Nelson said, &quot;The brand does not belong to me, and I make and have made (almost) zero dollars off it since it stopped production in 1999.&quot; Conniff noted on his Twitter that Shout! Factory would be &quot;cutting [the former cast members] in, financially at least&quot; on the profits from the series. In addition, other cameos on the new episodes include Neil Patrick Harris, Jerry Seinfeld, and Mark Hamill as P. T. Mindslap. Weinstein initially stated that he had no interest in returning to the show, but eventually reprised his role as Dr. Laurence Erhardt in the second season of the Netflix revival.

====Writing and recording====
Hodgson aimed to follow in the pattern of what made for fan-favorite episodes from the original series, borrowing equally from the Joel and Mike eras; he noted there were about 30 episodes that he and fans universally agreed were the show&#x27;s best, and expected to use these as templates as the basis of the new show. The new episodes include the Invention Exchange that had been part of the Joel era (and some of the Mike era) of the show. Additionally, while not required by the streaming format of Netflix, the new episodes include bumpers that would have wrapped around commercial breaks if shown on network television; Hodgson considered these breaks necessary as a &quot;palate cleanser&quot; as well as to support the narrative for Kinga attempting to commercialize on the &quot;MST3K&quot; brand.

Behind the scenes, the lead writer was Elliott Kalan, former head writer for &quot;The Daily Show with Jon Stewart&quot; and host of &quot;The Flop House&quot;, a podcast about bad movies. Dan Harmon and Joel McHale also wrote for the show, along with the on-screen cast members. Hodgson also brought in guest writers for certain episodes that included Justin Roiland, Rob Schrab, Nell Scovell, Ernie Cline, Pat Rothfuss, Dana Gould, and Tammy Golden. Additionally, Paul &amp; Storm and Robert Lopez composed original songs for the new episodes.

The revival retains the live, handcrafted look from the original, a decision that Hodgson had to set down against others involved in production. Set and prop designers included Wayne White, Aaron Somers, Pen Ward, Rebecca Sugar and her younger brother Steven, Justin Jacobs, and Guy Davis, while live and practical special effects were planned by Adam Savage. Justin was tasked with creating full sized versions of new robots M. Waverly and Growler. Other returning staff included: Charlie Erickson, who composed the original show&#x27;s theme song and composed the new show&#x27;s theme and other musical arrangements; Beth &quot;Beez&quot; McKeever, who worked on the original show&#x27;s props and designed costumes and props for the new show; Crist Ballas created hair and makeup design; and Paul Chaplin, one of the show&#x27;s original writers to help write the new shows, along with contributions from Pehl and Corbett. Hodgson himself remained primarily off-camera as the executive producer for the remake, though does appear briefly as Ardy, one of Kinga&#x27;s henchmen who send Jonah the episode&#x27;s movie. Hodgson was assisted by Kalan, Richard Foos, Bob Emmer, Garson Foos, Jonathan Stern, and Harold Buchholz. The revival was produced by the companies Satellite of Love, LLC, Alternaversal Productions, and Abominable Pictures.

Production for the new season began on January 4, 2016, with movie selection and script writing. The film selection was narrowed down to about twenty movies as of February 2016, with the rights obtained for about half of them, while Shout! Factory was working to secure worldwide distribution rights for the others. Hodgson noted that the films were more recent than those used on the original series, with &quot;maybe one&quot; from the 1950s/1960s, but did not want to reveal what these films were until the episodes were broadcast as to have the biggest comedic effect on the audience.

Recording and most of the production was completed over September and October 2016 in Los Angeles on a very condensed schedule. In the revival, Ray, Yount, and Vaughn recorded the riffs for all fourteen episodes in a sound studio over a period of a week, allowing them to better synchronize the riffs with the film. This also helped to simplify the process of recording the theater segments, since they then only needed to act out their parts. The &#x27;bots were controlled by multiple puppeteers both in the theater and in skits; Yount and Vaughn used radio-controlled equipment to move the &#x27;bots&#x27; mouths, while members from The Jim Henson Company helped with manipulating the bodies, allowing them to achieve effects they could not do in the series&#x27; original run such as having Crow appear to walk on his own. All skits for the episodes were completed within a single day, which did not allow them for doing multiple takes unless necessary.

Campaign backers at higher tiers were able to see the first episode at limited &quot;Red Carpet Kickstarter Screening&quot; events shown in a few theaters during February and March 2017. The fourteen episodes were released on Netflix on April 14, 2017, though Kickstarter backers had the opportunity to see the episodes in the days preceding this.

During the 2017 &quot;Turkey Day&quot; Marathon, Hodgson announced that Netflix had greenlit a twelfth season of &quot;MST3K&quot;. Shooting of the twelfth season started on June 4, 2018, and would have six episodes, written to encourage bingewatching and make the series more amenable to non-fans. Further, they created a stronger narrative in the host segments, so that casual viewers would recognize the series having a definitive start, middle, and end. Other changes included Rob Schrab coming on as co-director, and actress Deanna Rooney, Ray&#x27;s wife, playing Dr. Donna St. Phibes, a &quot;B-movie monster conservationist&quot; who works with the Mads. Former cast member Weinstein returned to reprise his role as Dr. Erhardt. Hodgson had been trying to also bring back both Beaulieu and Conniff for this season, but could not work out the logistics in time.

The 12th season was broadcast on Netflix on Thanksgiving aka &quot;Turkey Day&quot;, November 22, 2018, which coincided with the show&#x27;s 30th anniversary. To avoid conflicting with the new season&#x27;s release, the annual Turkey Day Marathon was pushed forward to November 18, 2018.

In November 2019, Hodgson confirmed to Kickstarter backers that the show would not return for a third season on Netflix, but that he would be looking into alternative outlets to carry the show. The two seasons made for Netflix will remain on the service. Ray stated in an April 2020 interview that &quot;Joel&#x27;s got some ideas in the pipeline, and it&#x27;s pretty exciting, what he&#x27;s working on&quot;, and expected further news later in the year. Hodgson had praised Netflix for helping to bring new fans to &quot;MST3K&quot; and said that his production company Alternaversal Productions was still looking for ways to bring the show back through other means, though he did criticize Netflix for forcing an embargo that kept him from providing updates to his fans on the progress on the show until they were ready to announce details.

===Gizmoplex era (2022) ===
On April 7, 2021, Hodgson launched a second Kickstarter campaign to continue production of more &quot;MST3K&quot; episodes. Given the difficulties with Netflix, Hodgson envisioned a sustainable production approach based on the support of fans and backers who wanted more episodes but without having to worry about the financial support of a broadcast or cable network. In this project, Hodgson set out to produce more episodes and the creation of &quot;The Gizmoplex&quot;, an online platform designed to showcase these new episodes as well as reruns of past episodes and live events, presented as another experiment by the Mads. Hodgson said that while the Netflix support was helpful for the prior two seasons, the streamer had required the production team to produce all their episodes at once, which did not work well and resulted in creative burn-out. By using the Gizmoplex approach, the production team would be able to produce new content at their own pace. Further, by establishing the continuation of the show in the Gizmoplex format, &quot;MST3K&quot; could continue even without Hodgson&#x27;s involvement, so long as the demand from fans of the show remained.

During the Kickstarter, Hodgson confirmed that due to the name being seen by some as an ethnic slur against Romani and other itinerant peoples, Gypsy was renamed to GPC around 2019.

The Kickstarter surpassed its minimum funding goal of within 25 hours of launch, and ended with over raised, assuring that thirteen regular episodes would be produced, including the series&#x27; first 3D episode as well as special Halloween and Christmas episodes. Most of the Netflix series castincluding Ray, Vaughn, Yount, Hanson, Day, and Oswaltreturn to their roles. A new hosting cast features Emily Marsh, who had participated in the live tours during the Netflix years, portraying Emily Connor as the test subject, along with other live show performers Conor McGiffin, Kelsey Ann Brady, and Yvonne Freese voicing Tom, Crow, and GPC 2, respectively; Freese would also play Mega Synthia. The last name Connor was in reference to Sarah Connor from the &quot;Terminator&quot; franchise. Hodgson reprised his Joel Robinson character for three episodes. Pehl and Weinstein reprised their roles as Pearl Forrester and Dr. Laurence Erhardt, respectively, within this block of episodes. Further, Nelson, Murphy, and Corbett of RiffTrax will offer some of their material to be included among the Gizmoplex&#x27; archives.

During the annual 2021 Turkey Day Marathon, the thirteen movies to be riffed as part of the 13th season were announced. These include: &quot;Santo in The Treasure of Dracula&quot;, &quot;Robot Wars&quot;, &quot;Beyond Atlantis&quot;, &quot;Munchie&quot;, &quot;Doctor Mordrid&quot;, &quot;Demon Squad&quot;, &quot;Gamera vs. Jiger&quot;, &quot;The Batwoman&quot;, &quot;The Million Eyes of Sumuru&quot;, &quot;H. G. Wells&#x27; The Shape of Things to Come&quot;, &quot;The Mask&quot;, &quot;The Bubble&quot;, and &quot;The Christmas Dragon&quot;. The first three were presented to backers as pre-release versions starting on March 4, 2022, as a means of testing the Gizmoplex. The public launch of the platform and the thirteenth season was released on May 6, 2022. The second and third episodes premiered in succeeding days, and with remaining episodes and shorts premiering every two weeks afterwards. A year after the season was first shown on the Gizmoplex service, episodes were made available through the &quot;MST3K&quot; channel on PlutoTV.

Crowdfunding for the fourteenth season began in October 2023, with a minimum target of $4.8 million to bring six full movies and six shorts, while reaching $7.4 million would give twelve of each. This goal was later adjusted to $4 million for six full movies and shorts in an attempt to complete the base goal due to slowdowns in donations. The crowdfunding failed to reach its lowered goal, with only 68% raised.

==Cast==


==Episodes==

The series broadcast between 1988 and 1999 spanned 197 episodes across ten seasons. The 2017 Netflix revival of fourteen episodes (&quot;The Return&quot;) was followed by six additional episodes (&quot;The Gauntlet&quot;) the next year. An additional season on the Gizmoplex platform consisted of thirteen episodes and was released in 2022.

While the pilot episode of &quot;The Green Slime&quot; was used to sell the concept to KTMA, it never aired. The initial run of 21 episodes for KTMA were neither rerun nationally nor released onto home video, primarily due to rights issues - apparently KTMA never obtained the rights to show the movies that were riffed. For many years, the first three KTMA episodes were considered to be &quot;missing episodes&quot;, as no fan copies are known to exist, though master copies of all these episodes reportedly exist according to Mallon. In November 2016, Hodgson reported that master copies of two of the episodes, &quot;Invaders from the Deep&quot; and &quot;Revenge of the Mysterons from Mars&quot;, had been found. The episodes were made available to Kickstarter backers of the new series on November 25, 2016.

The credits in the first four seasons on Comedy Central included the phrase &quot;Keep circulating the tapes&quot; to encourage fans to share VHS tapings they made with others (as Comedy Central was not widely distributed then), despite the questionable copyright practice. Though the phrase was removed from the credits for legal reasons, the concept of &quot;keep circulating the tapes&quot; was held by the show&#x27;s fans to continue to help introduce others to the show following its broadcast run.

===Turkey Day marathons===
An annual event in the Comedy Central era was the Turkey Day marathon that ran on or near the Thanksgiving holiday. The marathon would show between six and twelve rebroadcasts of episodes, often with new material between the episodes from the cast and crew. While the show was on Sci-Fi, one Thanksgiving Day marathon of &quot;MST3K&quot; was held during its first season, but lacked any new interstitial material.

Following its acquisition of the series rights in 2013, Shout! Factory has streamed Turkey Day marathons on Thanksgiving, broadcasting multiple &quot;MST3K&quot; episodes and wrapped with introductions from Hodgson alongside other cast members at times. The event was intended to be a one-off, but the fans&#x27; reaction to it led Hodgson and Shout! to continue the tradition in subsequent years, continuing to be shown through 2024.

The 2015 Turkey Day coincided with the Kickstarter for the show&#x27;s revival, while the 2016 Turkey Day includes the revival&#x27;s new host Ray co-hosting alongside Hodgson. The 2017 Turkey Day was hosted by Hodgson, Ray and Felicia Day, and concluded with a surprise announcement that the show had been renewed on Netflix for another season.

===Home media===

Home video releases of &quot;MST3K&quot; episodes are complicated by the licensing rights of the featured film and any shorts, and as such many of the nationally televised episodes have not yet been released onto home video. Through the current distributor, Shout! Factory, over 100 of the films have been cleared for home media distribution. With Shout&#x27;s release of the 39th volume of &quot;MST3K&quot; episodes in 2017, the company anticipated that only about a dozen episodes out of 197 from the original series&#x27; run will never make it to home video due to licensing rights issues of the movies featured.

Original home media releases were issued by Rhino Entertainment, initially starting with single disc releases before switching to semi-regular four-episode volume sets. According to Hodgson, the people at Rhino who were involved in the distribution of &quot;MST3K&quot; eventually left Rhino and joined Shout!, helping to convince that publisher to acquire the rights from Rhino. Since 2008, all releases of &quot;MST3K&quot; have been through Shout! (including some reprints of the first Rhino volume set) and have typically been multi-episode volumes or themed packs.

In 2014, 80 episodes of the show were made available for purchase or rental on the video streaming site Vimeo. Shout! has uploaded some episodes to YouTube with annotations, as documented by &quot;The Annotated MST&quot; fansite, to explain some of the sources of the jokes in the riffs. In February 2015, Shout! launched its own streaming service, Shout! Factory TV, of which selected episodes of &quot;MST3K&quot; were included on the service. Selected episodes were also made available on demand through RiffTrax starting in November 2015. Twenty episodes from previous &quot;MST3K&quot; seasons were released by Netflix in all regions in anticipation of the revival series.

All episodes of Season 11 were released on a DVD/Blu-Ray box set on April 17, 2018, which includes a documentary behind the making of the first revival season.

==Adaptations==
===Syndication===
In 1993, the show&#x27;s staff selected 30 episodes to split into 60 one-hour segments for &quot;The Mystery Science Theater Hour&quot;. The repackaged series&#x27; first-run airings of these half-shows ran from November 1993 to July 1994. Reruns continued through December 1994, and it was syndicated to local stations from September 1995 to September 1996, allowing stations to run the series in a one-hour slot, or the original two hour version. &quot;MST3K&quot; returned to television for the first time in ten years in July 2014, when RetroTV began broadcasting the series on Saturday nights, with an encore on Sunday evenings. The following year, they started showing on PBS member stations. In the summer of 2016, Sinclair Broadcast Group and MGM&#x27;s joint venture sci-fi network Comet picked up the series for a weekly Sunday night double-run; by coincidence, Sinclair&#x27;s CW station in the Twin Cities, WUCW, which had originated the series when it was KTMA-TV, carries Comet on their second subchannel, returning the series to its original home for the first time in 27 years. The show premiered on IFC on January 7, 2020. It also airs on Z Living.

===Feature film===

In 1996, Universal Pictures under the Gramercy Pictures Label released &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie&quot;, a film adaptation in which Mike and the bots riffed &quot;This Island Earth&quot;. The film was released on DVD in the United States by Image Entertainment. Universal re-released the film on DVD on May 6, 2008, with a new anamorphic widescreen transfer, Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround Sound mix and the film&#x27;s original trailer.

===Print===
In 1996, the book, &quot;The Amazing Colossal Episode Guide&quot; (written by many of the cast members), was released, which contained a synopsis for every episode from seasons one through six, and even included some behind-the-scenes stories as well. In it, Murphy related two tales about celebrity reactions he encountered. In one, the cast went to a taping of Dennis Miller&#x27;s eponymous show; when they were brought backstage to meet Miller, the comedian proceeded to criticize the &quot;MST3K&quot; cast for their choice of movie to mock in the then-recent episode &quot;Space Travelers&quot; (a re-branded version of the Oscar-winning film &quot;Marooned&quot;). Murphy also discussed how he met Kurt Vonnegut, one of his literary heroes. When he had mentioned the show and its premise to Vonnegut, the author suggested that even people who work hard on bad films deserve some respect. Murphy then invited Vonnegut to dine with his group, which Vonnegut declined, claiming that he had other plans. When Murphy and friends ate later that night, he saw Vonnegut dining alone in the same restaurant, and remarked that he had been &quot;faced...but &quot;nicely&quot; faced&quot; by one of his literary heroes.

Dark Horse Comics announced on February 16, 2017, that it had planned a &quot;MST3K&quot; comic book series that was set for initial release in 2017. In June 2018, Dark Horse affirmed that the six-issue series would launch in September 2018, and would feature Jonah and the bots riffing on public domain comic books. The first comic was released on September 12, 2018, and it focuses on Jonah and the Bots trying to get out of comics while trying to save Crow when he starts to become a monster in the pages of Horrific. Hodgson oversaw the writing.

===Live shows===

The first &quot;MST3K&quot; live event was held on June 5 and 6, 1989 at the Comedy Gallery in Minneapolis. Jim Mallon served as the emcee of the event that featured stand-up sets by Joel, Josh Weinstein, and Trace Beaulieu. A Q&amp;A session about the show was conducted, and the show&#x27;s original pilot was shown. The robots and various props were on display for attendees to see.

The first live riffing event, called &quot;MST Alive!&quot; was held at the Uptown Theater in Minneapolis on July 11, 1992. There were two showings, both with live riffing of the feature film &quot;World Without End&quot;, as well as sing-alongs of different songs from the show, followed by a Q&amp;A session. The event was hosted, in character, by Dr. Forrester, TV&#x27;s Frank, Joel, and the Bots. A second version of &quot;MST Alive!&quot; was presented as a part of the first ever MST3K &quot;ConventioCon ExpoFest-A-Rama&quot; in 1994. In this show, Forrester and Frank forced Mike and the bots to watch &quot;This Island Earth&quot;, a film which was later riffed as a part of &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie&quot;.

Hodgson and the team for the 2017 revival announced an &quot;MST3K&quot; &quot;Watch Out For Snakes Tour&quot; during mid-2017 covering 29 cities in the United States and Canada. Jonah and the Bots riff on one of two films live for audiences, either &quot;Eegah&quot; (which had already been featured on the original run of &quot;MST3K&quot;, and which popularized the riff &quot;Watch out for snakes&quot;, but featured new riffs for this tour) or an unannounced surprise film: &quot;Argoman the Fantastic Superman&quot;. The tour featured Ray, Yount and Hanson reprising their roles as Jonah Heston, Crow and Gypsy/Synthia. Vaughn was unavailable to perform Servo due to the birth of his child and the role was covered by Tim Ryder. The tour also featured Grant Baciocco as Terry the Bonehead, pre-recorded appearances from Day and Oswalt as Kinga and Max, and a live introduction from Hodgson.

Hodgson and Ray also toured in late 2018 as part of a 30th anniversary of &quot;MST3K&quot; in a similar format to the 2017 tour. Hodgson reprised the role of Joel Robinson and riffed movies alongside Ray and the bots during these shows. Ryder continued to perform Tom Servo, while Grant Baciocco, the lead puppeteer, voiced Crow. Rebecca Hanson also joined in her role as Synthia as the host of the show. Movies riffed at these shows included &quot;The Brain&quot; and &quot;Deathstalker II&quot;. During the tour, Hodgson announced that Deanna Rooney will be joining the cast in the twelfth season as a new &quot;Mad&quot; working with Kinga and Max.

The 2019 live tour, The Great Cheesy Movie Circus Tour, is promoted as Hodgson&#x27;s &quot;final live tour&quot;. Most of the tour dates feature the film &quot;No Retreat, No Surrender&quot;, while a few show &quot;Circus of Horrors&quot;. The tour was promoted with video production updates and on-the-road updates via the tour&#x27;s official website. In addition to Joel, the parts of Crow and Servo are portrayed by Nate Begle and Conor McGiffin respectively. Yvonne Freese plays the part of Gypsy and Mega-Synthia, a clone of both Pearl Forrester and the original Synthia. Emily Marsh also features in the tour as the new character Crenshaw.

The Time Bubble Tour started on November 2, 2021, in Cleveland, OH with Emily Marsh, Yvonne Freese, Nate Begle and Conor McGiffin reprising their parts from the 2019 tour. Kelsey Brady joined the cast as Swing Puppeteer. The film was Roland Emmerich&#x27;s &quot;Making Contact&quot; (1985).

===Other appearances===
In 1996, during promotion for the film, Nelson and the bots were interviewed in-character on MTV, and seen in silhouettes heckling footage from MTV News featuring the band Radiohead. Also that year, Hodgson was a featured guest on Cartoon Network&#x27;s &quot;Space Ghost Coast to Coast&quot;.

In 1997, the videogame magazine &quot;PlayStation Underground&quot; (Volume 2, Number 1) included a Best Brains-produced &quot;MST3K&quot; short on one of their promotional discs. The video opened with a host segment of Mike and the Bots playing some PlayStation games, only to go into the theater to riff on some videos from the magazine&#x27;s past. The feature is about seven minutes long. An Easter egg on the disc has some behind-the-scenes footage of Best Brains filming the sequences.

Nelson and the robot characters appeared in silhouette on an episode of &quot;Cheap Seats&quot;, a TV series in which the Sklar Brothers commented on clips of sporting events in a manner similar to MST3K.

In May 2020, Hodgson announced a special &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000 Live Riff-Along&quot; with a planned date of May 3; the show featured Hodgson along with Emily Marsh, Conor McGiffin, Nate Begle, and Yvonne Freese, who had joined him during the 2019 &quot;MST3K&quot; live tour riffing atop the &quot;MST3K&quot; season one episode featuring &quot;Moon Zero Two&quot; and then riffing to a new short &quot;Circus Days&quot;. In another charitable event, Hodgson, alongside Weinstein and Corbett reprising their voice roles as Tom Servo and Crow, riffed two new shorts as part of a crowdfunded effort to support MIGIZI, a Native American youth non-profit group whose headquarters were destroyed during the George Floyd protests in May 2020.

==Reception and legacy==
In 2004, the show was listed as in a featured &quot;TV Guide&quot; article, &quot;25 Top Cult Shows Ever!&quot;, and included a sidebar which read, &quot;Mike Nelson, writer and star (replacing creator Joel Hodgson), recently addressed a college audience: &#x27;There was nobody over the age of 25. I had to ask, &quot;Where are you seeing this show?&quot; I guess we have some sort of timeless quality.&#x27;&quot; Three years later, &quot;TV Guide&quot; rewrote the article, and bumped &quot;MST3K&quot; to #13. In 2007, the show was listed as one of &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;100 Best TV Shows of All-Time&quot; (it was also chosen as one of the magazine&#x27;s top 10 shows of 1990).
In 2012, the show was listed as #3 in &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;″s &quot;25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years&quot;, with the comment that &quot;&quot;MST3K&quot; taught us that snarky commentary can be way more entertaining than the actual media.&quot;

The 2017 relaunch was met with critical acclaim; the first revival season currently has a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.

===Reactions by those parodied===
The reactions of those parodied by &quot;MST3K&quot; have been mixed. Some notable negative reactions include that of Sandy Frank, who held the rights to several &quot;Gamera&quot; films parodied on the show. He said he was &quot;intensely displeased&quot; by the mockery directed at him. (The crew once sang the &quot;Sandy Frank Song&quot;, which said that Frank was &quot;the source of all our pain&quot;, &quot;thinks that people come from trees&quot;, Steven Spielberg &quot;won&#x27;t return his calls&quot;, and implied that he was too lazy to make his own films.) Because of this, Frank reportedly refused to allow the shows to be rebroadcast once &quot;MST3K&quot;″s rights ran out. However, this may in fact be a rumor, as other rumors indicate that the &quot;Gamera&quot; films distribution rights prices were increased beyond what Best Brains could afford as a result of the show&#x27;s success. According to Shout! Factory, the Japanese movie studio Kadokawa Pictures were so horrified with MST3K&#x27;s treatment of five &quot;Gamera&quot; films that they refused to let Shout release the episodes on home video. Brian Ward (one of the members of Shout! Factory) explained to fans on the forums of the official Shout! Factory website that they tried their best to convince them, but &quot;the Japanese take their &quot;Gamera&quot; films very seriously and do not appreciate them being mocked&quot;. However, eventually Shout was able to clear the episodes for a special 2011 release due to the rights in North America shifting away from the Japanese to another North American entity that had no such qualms.

Kevin Murphy has said that Joe Don Baker wanted to &quot;beat up&quot; the writers of the show for the relentless riffing Baker received during &quot;Mitchell&quot;. Murphy later stated that Baker probably meant it in a joking manner, although Mike Nelson has said that he had deliberately avoided encountering Baker while the two happened to be staying at the same hotel. Jeff Lieberman, director of &quot;Squirm&quot;, was also quite angry at the &quot;MST3K&quot; treatment of his film.

Director Rick Sloane was shocked at his treatment at the conclusion of &quot;Hobgoblins&quot;, in which Sloane himself was mercilessly mocked over the film&#x27;s end credits. In a 2008 interview, however, Sloane clarified his comments, saying that &quot;I laughed through the entire &quot;MST3K&quot; episode, until the very end. I wasn&#x27;t expecting the humor to suddenly be at my own expense. I was mortified when they dragged out the cardboard cutout and pretended to do an interview with me. I was caught off guard. I had never seen them rip apart any other director before on the show.&quot; However, he credits the success of the &quot;MST3K&quot; episode with inspiring him to make a sequel to &quot;Hobgoblins&quot;, released in 2009.

Others, however, have been more positive: Robert Fiveson and Myrl Schriebman, producers of &quot;&quot;, said they were &quot;flattered&quot; to see the film appear on &quot;MST3K&quot;. Actor Miles O&#x27;Keeffe, the star of the film &quot;Cave Dwellers&quot;, called Best Brains and personally requested a copy of the &quot;MST3K&quot; treatment of the film, saying he enjoyed their skewering of what he had considered to be a surreal experience; according to Hodgson, O&#x27;Keeffe said his friends always heckled his performance in the film when it was on, and he appreciated the &quot;MST3K&quot; treatment. In the form of an essay and E. E. Cummings-esque poem, Mike Nelson paid tribute to O&#x27;Keeffe with a humorous mix of adulation and fear.

Rex Reason, star of &quot;This Island Earth&quot;, made appearances at several &quot;MST3K&quot; events and credits &quot;MST3K&quot; with introducing the film to a new generation. The crew of &quot;Time Chasers&quot; held a party the night the &quot;MST3K&quot; treatment of their film aired and, while reactions were mixed, director David Giancola said, &quot;Most of us were fans and knew what to expect and we roared with laughter and drank way too much. I had a blast, never laughed so hard in my life.&quot;

Actor Adam West, star of the 1960s &quot;Batman&quot; TV series, co-starred in &quot;Zombie Nightmare&quot;, another film &quot;MST3K&quot; mocked. West apparently held no grudges, as he hosted the 1994 &quot;Turkey Day&quot; marathon in which the episode featuring &quot;Zombie Nightmare&quot; had its broadcast premiere. Mamie Van Doren (who appeared in episode 112, &quot;Untamed Youth&quot;, and episode 601, &quot;Girls Town&quot;), Robert Vaughn (star of episode 315, &quot;Teenage Cave Man&quot;, which he called the worst movie ever made) and Beverly Garland (who had appeared in many &quot;MST3K&quot;-featured Roger Corman films) also hosted at the marathon.

===Awards===
In 1993, &quot;MST3K&quot; won a Peabody Award for &quot;producing an ingenious eclectic series&quot;: &quot;With references to everything from Proust to &quot;Gilligan&#x27;s Island&quot;, &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; fuses superb, clever writing with wonderfully terrible B-grade movies&quot;. In 1994 and 1995, the show was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing for a Variety or Music Program, but lost both times to &quot;Dennis Miller Live&quot;. Every year from 1992 to 1997, it was also nominated for CableACE Awards. Its DVD releases have been nominated for Saturn Awards in 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2018.

The revival&#x27;s first season was nominated for a Best Presentation on Television Saturn Award and an OFTA Television Award nod for Best Variety Program.

===Influence===
Through &quot;MST3K&quot;, many obscure films have been more visible to the public, and several have since been considered some of the worst films ever made and are voted into the Bottom 100 on the Internet Movie Database. Of note is &quot;&quot;, which was riffed on by &quot;MST3K&quot; in its fourth season. &quot;Manos&quot; was a very low-budget film produced by Hal Warren, a fertilizer salesman at the time, taking on a dare from a screenwriter friend to show that anyone could make a horror film. The film suffered from numerous production issues due to its limited filming equipment, and many critics describe the result using a riff from &quot;MST3K&quot;, in that &quot;every frame of this movie looks like someone&#x27;s last-known photograph&quot;. The &quot;MST3K&quot; episode featuring &quot;Manos&quot; was considered one of its most popular and best episodes, and brought &quot;Manos&quot; into the public light as one of the worst films ever produced. The film gained a cult following, and an effort was made to restore the film to high-definition quality from its original film reels. &quot;MST3K&quot; also riffed on three films directed by Coleman Francis: &quot;Red Zone Cuba&quot;, &quot;The Skydivers&quot;, and &quot;The Beast of Yucca Flats&quot;, which brought awareness of Francis&#x27; poor direction and low-budget films, similar to that of Ed Wood. &quot;MST3K&quot; also brought to the limelight lackluster works by Bert I. Gordon, primarily giant monster B-movies, that gained attention through the show, and many Japanese kaiju movies imported and dubbed through producer Sandy Frank (jokingly referred to as &quot;the source of all our pain&quot;), particularly those in the &quot;Gamera&quot; series.

&quot;MST3K&quot;″s riffing style to poke fun at bad movies, films, and TV shows, have been used in other works. In 2003, the television series &quot;Deadly Cinema&quot;, starring Jami Deadly, debuted, which featured the cast making fun of bad movies, &quot;MST3K&quot;-style. In 2004, the ESPN Classic series &quot;Cheap Seats&quot;, debuted, which featured two brothers making fun of clips of old sporting events, &quot;MST3K&quot;-style, and is noteworthy for containing an episode in which Mike, Crow, and Tom Servo briefly appeared in a cameo to make fun of the hosts&#x27; own skits. In 2008, the internet and direct-to-DVD comedy series &quot;Incognito Cinema Warriors XP&quot;, debuted, which used the same &quot;host segment-movie segment&quot; format the show established, while featuring completely original characters and plot. &quot;ICWXP&quot; gained a similar cult following, even earning the praises of former &quot;MST3K&quot; host Michael J. Nelson. In 2010, the television series &quot;This Movie Sucks!&quot; (and its predecessor &quot;Ed&#x27;s Nite In&quot;), starring Ed the Sock and co-hosts Liana K and Ron Sparks, debuted. It features the cast making fun of bad movies. Creator Steven Kerzner, however, was quick to point out that &quot;MST3K&quot; was not &quot;the creator of this kind of format, they&#x27;re just the most recent and most well-known&quot;. In 2011, the theater silhouette motif was parodied by golf commentator and talk show host David Feherty in an episode of &quot;Feherty&quot;. He is shown sitting in front of a large screen and &quot;riffing&quot; while viewing footage of golfer Johnny Miller and is joined in the theater by his stuffed rooster (Frank) and his gnome statue (Costas).

Further, the riffing style from &quot;MST3K&quot; is considered part of the influence for DVD commentaries and successful YouTube reviewers and Let&#x27;s Play-style commentators. DVD releases for both &quot;Ghostbusters&quot; and &quot;Men in Black&quot; used a similar format to Shadowrama for an &quot;in-vision&quot; commentary features. The concept of social television, where social media is integrated into the television viewing experience, was significantly influenced by &quot;MST3K&quot;. This social media practice of live-tweeting riffs and jokes on broadcast shows, such as for films like &quot;Sharknado&quot;, has its roots in &quot;MST3K&quot;. The &quot;MST3K&quot; approach has inspired Internet movie critics to create comedic movie reviews approaches, such as through RedLetterMedia and Screen Junkies which are considered more than just snarking on the movie but aim to help the viewer understand film and story techniques and their flawed use in poorly-received films.

Public performances of live riffing have been hosted by various groups in different cities across the U.S. and Canada, including Cineprov (Atlanta, Georgia), Master Pancake Theater (Austin, TX), The Gentlemen Hecklers (Vancouver, BC Canada), Counterclockwise Comedy (Kansas City, Missouri), FilmRoasters (Richmond, Virginia), Moxie Skinny Theatre 3000 (Springfield, Missouri), Riff Raff Theatre (Iowa City, Iowa), Twisted Flicks (Seattle, Washington), and Turkey Shoot (Metro Cinema at the Garneau, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada).

The Center for Puppetry Arts crowdfunded and successfully acquired Tom Servo and Crow T. Robot in 2019.

===Fandom===
&quot;MST3K&quot;, broadcasting during the emergence of the Internet for public use, developed a large fan base during its initial broadcast; which has continued to thrive since then. The show had already had its postal-based fan club, which people could write into and which some letters and drawings read on subsequent episodes, and the producers encouraged fans to share recordings of their episodes with others. At its peak, the &quot;MST3K Fan Club&quot; had over 50,000 members, and Best Brains were receiving over 500 letters each week. Fans of the show generally refer to themselves as &quot;MSTies&quot;. Usenet newsgroups rec.arts.tv.mst3k.misc and rec.arts.tv.mst3k.announce were established in the mid-1990s for announcements and discussions related to the show. A type of fan fiction called MiSTings, in which fans would add humorous comments to other, typically bad, fan fiction works, was popular on these groups. The fan-run website &quot;Satellite News&quot; continues to track news and information about the show and related projects from its cast members. Another fan site, &quot;The Annotated MST&quot;, attempts to catalog and describe all the obscure popular culture references used in a given episode.

In addition to the show&#x27;s fandom, a number of celebrities have expressed their love for the show. One of the earliest known celebrity fans was Frank Zappa, who went so far as to telephone Best Brains, calling &quot;MST3K&quot; as &quot;the funniest fucking thing on TV&quot; (according to Beaulieu). Zappa became a friend of the show, and following his death, episode 523 was dedicated to him. Other known celebrities fans include Al Gore, Neil Patrick Harris, Penn Jillette, and Patton Oswalt (who would later become TV&#x27;s Son of TV&#x27;s Frank in the revival).

Filmmaker Jordan Vogt-Roberts (&quot;&quot;) also praised &quot;MST3K&quot;:

&quot;Mystery Science Theater built something artful, endearing and comedic on top of the foundation other people&#x27;s work. It had merit to itself.&quot;

There were two official fan conventions in Minneapolis (run by the series&#x27; production company Best Brains) called &quot;ConventioCon ExpoFest-A-Rama&quot; (1994) and &quot;ConventioCon ExpoFest-A-Rama 2: Electric Boogaloo&quot; (1996). At least 2,500 people attended the first convention.

==Related post-show projects==
The various cast and crew from the show&#x27;s broadcast run have continued to produce comedy works following the show. Two separate projects were launched that specifically borrowed on the theme of riffing on bad movies. After the short-lived &quot;The Film Crew&quot; in 2006, Nelson started RiffTrax, providing downloadable audio files containing &quot;MST3K&quot;-style riffs that the viewer can synchronize to their personal copy of a given popular movie (such as &quot;Star Wars: Episode I&quot;); this was done to avoid copyright and licensing issues with such films. RiffTrax″s cast expanded to include Murphy and Corbett along with occasional guest stars, and are able to use a wider range of films, including films and shorts in the public domain, and films for which they could get the license to distribute digitally and, sometimes, on DVD/Blu-ray. In addition, they launched production of &quot;RiffTrax Live&quot; shows for various films, where they perform their riffing in front of a live audience that is simultaneously broadcast to other movie theaters across the country and later made available as on-demand video. , RiffTrax continues to offer new material and shows. As part of a tribute to their roots, RiffTrax has performed some works that previously appeared on &quot;MST3K&quot;, including &quot;Manos: the Hands of Fate&quot;, &quot;Santa Claus&quot;, and &quot;Time Chasers&quot;.

Similarly, Hodgson, after some experimental creative works such as &quot;The TV Wheel&quot;, started &quot;Cinematic Titanic&quot; with Beaulieu, Weinstein, Conniff, and Pehl in 2007. Like &quot;MST3K&quot;, the five riffed on movies for which they were able to acquire the licenses (including &quot;Santa Claus Conquers the Martians&quot;), which then were distributed on DVD and, later, through on-demand video and streaming options. They later did a number of live shows across the United States, most of which were made available on DVD and digitally.

In 2015, Trace Beaulieu and Frank Conniff began performing together as &quot;The Mads&quot;, riffing movies at live screenings across the U.S. Many of their stops included two nights of movies with a separate riff writing class the morning of the second film. Beginning in 2020, the Mads ceased in-person performances due to the COVID-19 pandemic, shifting, instead, to a livestream format for the shows, with digital downloads available afterwards.

Other related projects by the &quot;MST3K&quot; crew following the show&#x27;s end include:

In 2000, most of the cast of the Sci-Fi era of the show collaborated on a humor website, Timmy Big Hands, that closed in 2001.

In 2001, Mike Nelson, Patrick Brantseg, Bill Corbett, Kevin Murphy and Paul Chaplin created &quot;The Adventures of Edward the Less&quot;, an animated parody of J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; and others in the fantasy genre, with additional vocals by Mary Jo Pehl and Mike Dodge, for the Sci Fi Channel website.

In 2008, Bill Corbett and fellow writer Rob Greenberg wrote the screenplay for &quot;Meet Dave&quot;, a family comedy starring Eddie Murphy about a tiny &quot;Star Trek&quot;-like crew operating a spaceship that looks like a man. The captain of the crew and the spaceship were both played by Murphy. Originally conceived as a series called &quot;Starship Dave&quot; for SciFi.com, it was dropped in favor of &quot;Edward the Less&quot;. The script (along with the title) were changed drastically by studio executives and other writers, although Corbett and Greenberg received sole screenwriter credit.

In 2010, Trace Beaulieu, Frank Conniff, Joel Hodgson, Mary Jo Pehl, Josh Weinstein, Beth McKeever and Clive Robertson voiced characters for &quot;&quot;, a computer game created by J. Allen Williams.

In 2013, Frank Conniff and animation historian Jerry Beck debuted &quot;Cartoon Dump&quot;, a series of classically bad cartoons, which are also occasionally performed live.

Trace Beaulieu and Joel Hodgson were featured in the Yahoo! Screen series &quot;Other Space&quot; in 2015, with Beaulieu voicing a robot companion of Hodgson&#x27;s character, a burned-out spaceship engineer. Series creator Paul Feig, a fan of &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot;, said that he envisioned Hodgson and Beaulieu as their respective characters while writing them.

===Reunions===
In 2008, to commemorate the show&#x27;s 20th anniversary, the principal cast and writers from all eras of the show reunited for a panel discussion at San Diego Comic-Con, which was hosted by actor-comedian Patton Oswalt (who would later go on to star in the revived series). The event was recorded and included as a bonus feature on the 20th Anniversary DVD release via Shout! Factory. Also that year, original &quot;MST3K&quot; cast members Joel Hodgson, Trace Beaulieu and Frank Conniff reunited to shoot a brief sketch to be included on the DVD release of &quot;The Giant Gila Monster&quot;. The new disc was added to Volume 10 of the &quot;MST3K Collection&quot; DVD boxed set series, replacing the &quot;Godzilla vs. Megalon&quot; disc which could no longer be sold due to licensing conflicts. The new package was sold under the name &quot;Volume 10.2&quot;, and the sketch was presented as a seminar to instruct consumers on how to &quot;upgrade&quot; their DVD set, which merely consists of &quot;disposing&quot; of the old disc and inserting the new one.

In 2013, Joel Hodgson and Trace Beaulieu reprised their roles as Joel Robinson and Crow T. Robot for cameo appearances in the fourth season of &quot;Arrested Development&quot;.

As part of its live show events for 2016, RiffTrax presented a &quot;MST3K&quot; reunion at a live show in Minneapolis in June 2016. Hodgson, Bridget Nelson, Pehl, Conniff, and Beaulieu all joined the three regulars along with Jonah Ray from the revived series. The gathered cast riffed on a variety of shorts as part of the event.

==In popular culture==
* &quot;Futurama&quot; featured silhouetted robots resembling Crow and Servo in the season 2 episode &quot;Raging Bender&quot;.
* The poster for the 1996 film can be seen in the 2005 comedy &quot;The 40-Year Old Virgin&quot; and the 2017 horror comedy &quot;Happy Death Day&quot;.
* In the 2004 direct-to-video Disney film &quot;The Lion King 1½&quot;, Timon and Pumbaa are shown in silhouette commenting on the movie shown before them, in a style similar to that of the show. Roger Allers, co-director of the original 1994 film, suggested this format.

==See also==

* &quot;Cheap Seats&quot;
* &quot;The Cinema Snob&quot; — also influenced by MST3K
* List of films considered the worst
* Horror host
* 1988 in American television
* Kitsch
* Camp (style)
* Cult film
* &quot;SchleFaZ&quot;
* Rifftrax
* Cinematic Titanic
==References==
==External links==
* at Sci-Fi Channel
* 
* &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; on RiffTrax 
* MST3K on Twitch










 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q761469" start="67" end="89" title="science fiction comedy" label="science fiction comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546778" start="119" end="131" title="Joel Hodgson" label="Joel Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956562" start="155" end="162" title="WUCW" label="KTMA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956562" start="168" end="172" title="WUCW" label="WUCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="177" end="199" title="Minneapolis, Minnesota" label="Minneapolis, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726921" start="271" end="289" title="The Comedy Channel (American TV channel)" label="The Comedy Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="312" end="326" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="408" end="426" title="Syfy" label="The Sci-Fi Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="516" end="527" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q348303" start="703" end="714" title="crowdfunding" label="crowdfunded"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="796" end="803" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="980" end="989" title="Gizmoplex" label="Gizmoplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590951" start="1065" end="1077" title="List of Mystery Science Theater 3000 episodes" label="230 episodes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1084" end="1096" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596209" start="1183" end="1196" title="Joel Robinson" label="Joel Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760141" start="1200" end="1207" title="janitor" label="janitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="1223" end="1236" title="mad scientist" label="mad scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="1345" end="1352" title="B movie" label="B movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475517" start="1456" end="1465" title="Tom Servo" label="Tom Servo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185931" start="1467" end="1480" title="Crow T. Robot" label="Crow T. Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067144" start="1482" end="1488" title="Cambot" label="Cambot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099609" start="1493" end="1498" title="GPC (Mystery Science Theater 3000)" label="Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="1729" end="1735" title="short film" label="shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q596138" start="1740" end="1756" title="educational film" label="educational film"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="1796" end="1806" title="silhouette" label="silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508972" start="2072" end="2083" title="Mike Nelson (character)" label="Mike Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q674380" start="2095" end="2112" title="Michael J. Nelson" label="Michael J. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793721" start="2233" end="2247" title="Trace Beaulieu" label="Trace Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384599" start="2249" end="2263" title="J. Elvis Weinstein" label="Josh Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196585" start="2265" end="2275" title="Jim Mallon" label="Jim Mallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594562" start="2277" end="2289" title="Kevin Murphy (actor)" label="Kevin Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015748" start="2291" end="2304" title="Frank Conniff" label="Frank Conniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584326" start="2306" end="2318" title="Mary Jo Pehl" label="Mary Jo Pehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q691500" start="2320" end="2332" title="Bill Corbett" label="Bill Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149778" start="2334" end="2346" title="Paul Chaplin" label="Paul Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q913846" start="2352" end="2372" title="Bridget Jones Nelson" label="Bridget Jones Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271925" start="2432" end="2441" title="Jonah Ray" label="Jonah Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786774" start="2479" end="2491" title="Jonah Heston" label="Jonah Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q234314" start="2504" end="2515" title="Felicia Day" label="Felicia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="2520" end="2533" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862882" start="2562" end="2574" title="Baron Vaughn" label="Baron Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823585" start="2576" end="2589" title="Hampton Yount" label="Hampton Yount"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="3125" end="3144" title="Rhino Entertainment" label="Rhino Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="3191" end="3205" title="Shout! Studios" label="Shout! Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3341" end="3345" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="3429" end="3437" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="3490" end="3505" title="cult television" label="cult television"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="3528" end="3541" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="3578" end="3589" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024866" start="3620" end="3634" title="CableACE Award" label="CableACE Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q734525" start="3735" end="3752" title="social television" label="social television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208131" start="3837" end="3850" title="The Film Crew" label="The Film Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985929" start="3852" end="3860" title="RiffTrax" label="RiffTrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206919" start="3866" end="3883" title="Cinematic Titanic" label="Cinematic Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776408" start="4101" end="4133" title="List of films considered the worst" label="among the worst movies ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596209" start="4321" end="4334" title="Joel Robinson" label="Joel Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546778" start="4336" end="4348" title="Joel Hodgson" label="Joel Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508972" start="4356" end="4367" title="Mike Nelson (character)" label="Mike Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q674380" start="4369" end="4386" title="Michael J. Nelson" label="Michael J. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786774" start="4407" end="4419" title="Jonah Heston" label="Jonah Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271925" start="4421" end="4430" title="Jonah Ray" label="Jonah Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488994" start="4750" end="4758" title="sentience" label="sentient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475517" start="4943" end="4952" title="Tom Servo" label="Tom Servo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185931" start="4954" end="4967" title="Crow T. Robot" label="Crow T. Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099609" start="4969" end="4972" title="GPC (Mystery Science Theater 3000)" label="GPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067144" start="5036" end="5042" title="Cambot" label="Cambot"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="6482" end="6488" title="short film" label="shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104464" start="6638" end="6649" title="censor bars" label="censor bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250043" start="7068" end="7079" title="prop comedy" label="prop comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038225" start="7486" end="7494" title="Sandworm (Dune)" label="wormsign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="7500" end="7520" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="7542" end="7558" title="Dune (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Dune&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="8470" end="8481" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114577" start="8681" end="8693" title="Jack Perkins (reporter)" label="Jack Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806831" start="8923" end="8954" title="Late Night with David Letterman" label="Late Night with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="8971" end="8990" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923786" start="9021" end="9038" title="Brandon Tartikoff" label="Brandon Tartikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="9051" end="9054" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="9074" end="9088" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="9378" end="9398" title="Minneapolis-Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis-St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250043" start="9651" end="9662" title="prop comedy" label="prop comedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9756" end="9769" title="Ostinato#Riff" label="musical riffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="9837" end="9849" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013276" start="9865" end="9875" title="Dana Gould" label="Dana Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488261" start="9973" end="9997" title="The Golden Turkey Awards" label="The Golden Turkey Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="10300" end="10311" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="10317" end="10327" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q827363" start="10341" end="10366" title="Goodbye Yellow Brick Road" label="Goodbye Yellow Brick Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="10448" end="10466" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="10536" end="10548" title="pirate radio" label="pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q770904" start="10604" end="10618" title="Silent Running" label="Silent Running"/>
<link wikidata="Q599657" start="10666" end="10682" title="Douglas Trumbull" label="Douglas Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q357001" start="10828" end="10838" title="Bruce Dern" label="Bruce Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="11080" end="11086" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="11225" end="11244" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658389" start="11764" end="11778" title="Harlan Tarbell" label="Harlan Tarbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q354508" start="11805" end="11811" title="Sun Ra" label="Sun Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113303" start="12112" end="12130" title="Doctor Clayton Forrester (War of the Worlds)" label="the main character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113303" start="12140" end="12161" title="The War of the Worlds (1953 film)" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430434" start="12223" end="12244" title="Satellite of Love" label="song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="12248" end="12256" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q444806" start="12319" end="12330" title="Jim Carroll" label="Jim Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053082" start="12344" end="12356" title="Catholic Boy" label="Catholic Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q354508" start="12435" end="12441" title="Sun Ra" label="Sun Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057112" start="12461" end="12482" title="Interstellar Low Ways" label="Interstellar Low Ways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121886" start="12858" end="12866" title="Compositing" label="luma key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070749" start="13214" end="13231" title="Mickey Mouse Club" label="Mickey Mouse Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247268" start="13297" end="13306" title="Get Smart" label="Get Smart"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13538" end="13559" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554003" start="13657" end="13675" title="soft light" label="motivated lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q908848" start="14376" end="14380" title="Devo" label="Devo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066024" start="14382" end="14398" title="The Replacements (band)" label="The Replacements"/>
<link wikidata="Q951348" start="14404" end="14416" title="The Rivieras" label="The Rivieras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021124" start="14461" end="14475" title="California Sun" label="California Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196585" start="15358" end="15368" title="Jim Mallon" label="Jim Mallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919007" start="15450" end="15480" title="Independent station" label="independent television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384599" start="15674" end="15692" title="J. Elvis Weinstein" label="J. Elvis Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604225" start="15789" end="15803" title="Josh Weinstein" label="Josh Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="15835" end="15847" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793721" start="15859" end="15873" title="Trace Beaulieu" label="Trace Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035289" start="16049" end="16064" title="The Green Slime" label="The Green Slime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594562" start="16493" end="16505" title="Kevin Murphy (actor)" label="Kevin Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134593" start="16668" end="16681" title="Paragon Cable" label="Paragon Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992894" start="16721" end="16739" title="Hopkins, Minnesota" label="Hopkins, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q310735" start="17257" end="17263" title="ad-lib" label="ad-lib"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="17836" end="17848" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896597" start="18979" end="18990" title="Best Brains" label="Best Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="19362" end="19365" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726921" start="19424" end="19438" title="The Comedy Channel (American TV channel)" label="Comedy Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q985558" start="20410" end="20422" title="Eden Prairie, Minnesota" label="Eden Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636332" start="21184" end="21187" title="Ha! (TV channel)" label="HA!"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="21247" end="21261" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22073" end="22112" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="22238" end="22256" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593631" start="22261" end="22278" title="Gramercy Pictures" label="Gramercy Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754658" start="22338" end="22355" title="This Island Earth" label="This Island Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259005" start="23028" end="23043" title="The Sidehackers" label="The Sidehackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="23228" end="23232" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="23238" end="23244" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237336" start="26018" end="26043" title="practical special effects" label="practical special effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q277503" start="27479" end="27488" title="Flaming (Internet)" label="flame war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="27575" end="27584" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="27671" end="27677" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508972" start="27771" end="27776" title="Pearl Forrester" label="Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300559" start="27908" end="27919" title="Doug Herzog" label="Doug Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="27969" end="27983" title="The Daily Show" label="The Daily Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023632" start="27997" end="28023" title="Win Ben Stein&amp;#x27;s Money" label="Win Ben Stein&amp;#x27;s Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="28037" end="28047" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253951" start="28064" end="28096" title="Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist" label="Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q974846" start="28775" end="28787" title="USA Networks" label="USA Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508972" start="29498" end="29512" title="Professor Bobo" label="Professor Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508972" start="29530" end="29538" title="Observer (Mystery Science Theater 3000)" label="Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="30395" end="30413" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q685935" start="30747" end="30764" title="trade publication" label="trade publication"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="30771" end="30784" title="Daily Variety" label="Daily Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821504" start="31282" end="31320" title="Merlin&amp;#x27;s Shop of Mystical Wonders" label="Merlin&amp;#x27;s Shop of Mystical Wonders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389472" start="31533" end="31552" title="The Screaming Skull" label="The Screaming Skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206919" start="31893" end="31910" title="Cinematic Titanic" label="Cinematic Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="32008" end="32015" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q348303" start="32063" end="32075" title="crowdfunding" label="crowdfunding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="32261" end="32275" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="32486" end="32497" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561018" start="33091" end="33104" title="Veronica Mars (film)" label="Veronica Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930958" start="33121" end="33136" title="Reading Rainbow" label="Reading Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561018" start="34061" end="34074" title="Veronica Mars (film)" label="Veronica Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079668" start="34183" end="34196" title="Critical Role" label="Critical Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271925" start="34372" end="34381" title="Jonah Ray" label="Jonah Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786774" start="34388" end="34400" title="Jonah Heston" label="Jonah Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753414" start="34536" end="34547" title="The Nerdist" label="The Nerdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823585" start="34655" end="34668" title="Hampton Yount" label="Hampton Yount"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862882" start="34673" end="34685" title="Baron Vaughn" label="Baron Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q234314" start="34879" end="34890" title="Felicia Day" label="Felicia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q15274619" start="35242" end="35261" title="Salt Lake Comic Con" label="Salt Lake Comic Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q579563" start="35378" end="35387" title="The Guild (web series)" label="The Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q842253" start="35404" end="35439" title="Dr. Horrible&amp;#x27;s Sing-Along Blog" label="Dr. Horrible&amp;#x27;s Sing-Along Blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="35514" end="35527" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="35913" end="35928" title="The Second City" label="The Second City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653472" start="36019" end="36036" title="Har Mar Superstar" label="Har Mar Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437096" start="36076" end="36086" title="house band" label="house band"/>
<link wikidata="Q485310" start="36809" end="36828" title="Neil Patrick Harris" label="Neil Patrick Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q215506" start="36830" end="36844" title="Jerry Seinfeld" label="Jerry Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q210447" start="36850" end="36861" title="Mark Hamill" label="Mark Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365678" start="37939" end="37952" title="Elliott Kalan" label="Elliott Kalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="37983" end="38014" title="The Daily Show" label="The Daily Show with Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995072" start="38039" end="38053" title="The Flop House" label="The Flop House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150289" start="38089" end="38099" title="Dan Harmon" label="Dan Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311993" start="38104" end="38115" title="Joel McHale" label="Joel McHale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318075" start="38253" end="38267" title="Justin Roiland" label="Justin Roiland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340535" start="38269" end="38279" title="Rob Schrab" label="Rob Schrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337908" start="38281" end="38293" title="Nell Scovell" label="Nell Scovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732112" start="38295" end="38306" title="Ernie Cline" label="Ernie Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q514546" start="38308" end="38320" title="Pat Rothfuss" label="Pat Rothfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013276" start="38322" end="38332" title="Dana Gould" label="Dana Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154562" start="38366" end="38382" title="Paul &amp;amp; Storm" label="Paul &amp;amp; Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435778" start="38387" end="38399" title="Robert Lopez" label="Robert Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976772" start="38624" end="38635" title="Wayne White (artist)" label="Wayne White"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38637" end="38649" title="Aaron Somers" label="Aaron Somers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246742" start="38651" end="38659" title="Pendleton Ward" label="Pen Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q12569944" start="38661" end="38674" title="Rebecca Sugar" label="Rebecca Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="38726" end="38735" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q297618" start="38794" end="38805" title="Adam Savage" label="Adam Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149778" start="39243" end="39255" title="Paul Chaplin" label="Paul Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157134" start="39637" end="39651" title="Jonathan Stern" label="Jonathan Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207711" start="39771" end="39790" title="Abominable Pictures" label="Abominable Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051308" start="40937" end="40953" title="Radio-controlled model" label="radio-controlled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914692" start="41020" end="41042" title="The Jim Henson Company" label="The Jim Henson Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340535" start="42173" end="42183" title="Rob Schrab" label="Rob Schrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197302" start="44987" end="44998" title="ethnic slur" label="ethnic slur"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="45007" end="45013" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="45024" end="45041" title="Nomad" label="itinerant peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q484031" start="45283" end="45293" title="Anaglyph 3D" label="3D episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q496437" start="45817" end="45829" title="Sarah Connor (Terminator)" label="Sarah Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q620588" start="45845" end="45855" title="Terminator (franchise)" label="Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985929" start="46108" end="46116" title="RiffTrax" label="RiffTrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353386" start="46390" end="46400" title="Robot Wars (film)" label="Robot Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899924" start="46414" end="46429" title="Beyond Atlantis (film)" label="Beyond Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794698" start="46443" end="46450" title="Munchie" label="Munchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287360" start="46464" end="46478" title="Doctor Mordrid" label="Doctor Mordrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q109973865" start="46492" end="46503" title="Demon Squad" label="Demon Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952540" start="46517" end="46533" title="Gamera vs. Jiger" label="Gamera vs. Jiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q423182" start="46573" end="46599" title="The Million Eyes of Sumuru" label="The Million Eyes of Sumuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184902" start="46613" end="46658" title="H. G. Wells&amp;#x27; The Shape of Things to Come" label="H. G. Wells&amp;#x27; The Shape of Things to Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219558" start="46672" end="46680" title="The Mask (1961 film)" label="The Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720450" start="46694" end="46704" title="The Bubble (1966 film)" label="The Bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q21869235" start="46722" end="46742" title="The Christmas Dragon" label="The Christmas Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022235" start="47243" end="47250" title="PlutoTV" label="PlutoTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026712" start="48424" end="48452" title="Lost television broadcast" label="&amp;quot;missing episodes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393553" start="48986" end="49003" title="Tape trading" label="share VHS tapings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="49477" end="49489" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="49874" end="49882" title="streaming media" label="streamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="50858" end="50872" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="51263" end="51282" title="Rhino Entertainment" label="Rhino Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q156376" start="51894" end="51899" title="Vimeo" label="Vimeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="51938" end="51945" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="52406" end="52413" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077724" start="53205" end="53212" title="Retro Television Network" label="RetroTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="53342" end="53345" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288792" start="53386" end="53410" title="Sinclair Broadcast Group" label="Sinclair Broadcast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="53415" end="53418" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189282" start="53455" end="53460" title="Comet (TV network)" label="Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956562" start="53583" end="53587" title="WUCW" label="WUCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="53780" end="53783" title="IFC (American TV channel)" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405332" start="53820" end="53828" title="Z Living" label="Z Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="53860" end="53878" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593631" start="53889" end="53906" title="Gramercy Pictures" label="Gramercy Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257444" start="53977" end="53992" title="film adaptation" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754658" start="54033" end="54050" title="This Island Earth" label="This Island Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q30277272" start="54111" end="54130" title="Image Entertainment" label="Image Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q622550" start="54286" end="54302" title="Trailer (promotion)" label="original trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q953153" start="54680" end="54693" title="Dennis Miller" label="Dennis Miller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54701" end="54715" title="Dennis Miller#The Dennis Miller Show" label="eponymous show"/>
<link wikidata="Q918485" start="54972" end="54980" title="Marooned (1969 film)" label="Marooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="55022" end="55035" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="55534" end="55551" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164095" start="56688" end="56705" title="World Without End (film)" label="World Without End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754658" start="57107" end="57124" title="This Island Earth" label="This Island Earth"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57181" end="57220" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113568" start="57485" end="57490" title="Eegah" label="Eegah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684159" start="57714" end="57744" title="Argoman the Fantastic Superman" label="Argoman the Fantastic Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719807" start="58577" end="58586" title="The Brain (1988 film)" label="The Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127610" start="58603" end="58618" title="Deathstalker II" label="Deathstalker II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326650" start="58942" end="58966" title="No Retreat, No Surrender" label="No Retreat, No Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221469" start="58997" end="59014" title="Circus of Horrors" label="Circus of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="59483" end="59496" title="Cleveland, OH" label="Cleveland, OH"/>
<link wikidata="Q60100" start="59664" end="59679" title="Roland Emmerich" label="Roland Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q325204" start="59693" end="59707" title="Joey (1985 film)" label="Making Contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="59840" end="59843" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976494" start="59891" end="59899" title="MTV News" label="MTV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="59919" end="59928" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="59978" end="59993" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667921" start="60007" end="60033" title="Space Ghost Coast to Coast" label="Space Ghost Coast to Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="60293" end="60304" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q330574" start="60438" end="60448" title="Easter egg (virtual)" label="Easter egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088856" start="60613" end="60624" title="Cheap Seats (TV series)" label="Cheap Seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292539" start="60657" end="60671" title="Sklar Brothers" label="Sklar Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q806329" start="61099" end="61112" title="Moon Zero Two" label="Moon Zero Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="61456" end="61477" title="George Floyd protests" label="George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="61569" end="61577" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="62076" end="62080" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="62262" end="62282" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472100" start="62762" end="62773" title="Sandy Frank" label="Sandy Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q687240" start="62812" end="62818" title="Gamera" label="Gamera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="63101" end="63117" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="63565" end="63579" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11630733" start="63607" end="63624" title="Kadokawa Pictures" label="Kadokawa Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q962579" start="64295" end="64308" title="Joe Don Baker" label="Joe Don Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721214" start="64418" end="64426" title="Mitchell (film)" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176532" start="64641" end="64655" title="Jeff Lieberman" label="Jeff Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757036" start="64675" end="64681" title="Squirm (film)" label="Squirm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331748" start="64768" end="64779" title="Rick Sloane" label="Rick Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621605" start="64836" end="64846" title="Hobgoblins (film)" label="Hobgoblins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875035" start="65452" end="65486" title="Hobgoblins 2" label="a sequel to &amp;quot;Hobgoblins&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354688" start="65700" end="65719" title="Miles O&amp;#x27;Keeffe" label="Miles O&amp;#x27;Keeffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629018" start="65748" end="65761" title="Ator 2 - L&amp;#x27;invincibile Orion" label="Cave Dwellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q298703" start="66148" end="66162" title="E. E. Cummings" label="E. E. Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q256028" start="66261" end="66271" title="Rex Reason" label="Rex Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754658" start="66287" end="66304" title="This Island Earth" label="This Island Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4342987" start="66460" end="66472" title="Time Chasers" label="Time Chasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234108" start="66596" end="66610" title="David Giancola" label="David Giancola"/>
<link wikidata="Q351156" start="66782" end="66791" title="Adam West" label="Adam West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247201" start="66817" end="66823" title="Batman (TV series)" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349339" start="66861" end="66877" title="Zombie Nightmare" label="Zombie Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q264596" start="67099" end="67114" title="Mamie Van Doren" label="Mamie Van Doren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261818" start="67151" end="67164" title="Untamed Youth" label="Untamed Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q593160" start="67195" end="67205" title="Girls Town (1959 film)" label="Girls Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q314834" start="67214" end="67227" title="Robert Vaughn" label="Robert Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018427" start="67256" end="67272" title="Teenage Caveman (1958 film)" label="Teenage Cave Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q508986" start="67327" end="67342" title="Beverly Garland" label="Beverly Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="67396" end="67408" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="67492" end="67505" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="67603" end="67609" title="Marcel Proust" label="Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141741" start="67619" end="67641" title="Gilligan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Gilligan&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="67816" end="67836" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916752" start="67948" end="67966" title="Dennis Miller Live" label="Dennis Miller Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024866" start="68030" end="68044" title="CableACE Award" label="CableACE Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="68088" end="68100" title="Saturn Award" label="Saturn Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="68218" end="68230" title="Saturn Award" label="Saturn Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776408" start="68442" end="68463" title="List of films considered the worst" label="worst films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="68505" end="68528" title="Internet Movie Database" label="Internet Movie Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q931534" start="69469" end="69484" title="Coleman Francis" label="Coleman Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305259" start="69492" end="69505" title="Red Zone Cuba" label="Red Zone Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190650" start="69519" end="69532" title="The Skydivers" label="The Skydivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834722" start="69550" end="69574" title="The Beast of Yucca Flats" label="The Beast of Yucca Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q221843" start="69679" end="69686" title="Ed Wood" label="Ed Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q827379" start="69756" end="69770" title="Bert I. Gordon" label="Bert I. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="69864" end="69869" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472100" start="69914" end="69925" title="Sandy Frank" label="Sandy Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q687240" start="70024" end="70030" title="Gamera" label="Gamera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146356" start="70226" end="70237" title="Jami Deadly" label="Jami Deadly"/>
<link wikidata="Q689039" start="70336" end="70348" title="ESPN Classic" label="ESPN Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088856" start="70362" end="70373" title="Cheap Seats (TV series)" label="Cheap Seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q30640242" start="70696" end="70724" title="Incognito Cinema Warriors XP" label="Incognito Cinema Warriors XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786170" start="71051" end="71068" title="This Movie Sucks!" label="This Movie Sucks!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335629" start="71102" end="71119" title="Ed&amp;#x27;s Nite In" label="Ed&amp;#x27;s Nite In"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335629" start="71137" end="71148" title="Ed the Sock" label="Ed the Sock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335629" start="71162" end="71169" title="Liana Kerzner" label="Liana K"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364413" start="71174" end="71184" title="Ron Sparks (comedian)" label="Ron Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594332" start="71250" end="71264" title="Steven Kerzner" label="Steven Kerzner"/>
<link wikidata="Q960618" start="71522" end="71535" title="David Feherty" label="David Feherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q436423" start="71677" end="71690" title="Johnny Miller" label="Johnny Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="71873" end="71889" title="Audio commentary" label="DVD commentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="71905" end="71912" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q25975" start="71927" end="71942" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Play (video gaming)" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q108745" start="71991" end="72003" title="Ghostbusters" label="Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q51416" start="72020" end="72032" title="Men in Black (1997 film)" label="Men in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q734525" start="72140" end="72157" title="social television" label="social television"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="72165" end="72177" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="72313" end="72326" title="Twitter" label="live-tweeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q13794921" start="72392" end="72401" title="Sharknado" label="Sharknado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303556" start="72572" end="72586" title="RedLetterMedia" label="RedLetterMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995456" start="72591" end="72605" title="Screen Junkies" label="Screen Junkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059833" start="73308" end="73332" title="Center for Puppetry Arts" label="Center for Puppetry Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="73482" end="73490" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="74036" end="74052" title="Usenet newsgroup" label="Usenet newsgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q461524" start="74207" end="74218" title="fan fiction" label="fan fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="74796" end="74807" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="75084" end="75091" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q485310" start="75093" end="75112" title="Neil Patrick Harris" label="Neil Patrick Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129653" start="75114" end="75127" title="Penn Jillette" label="Penn Jillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="75133" end="75146" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091099" start="75232" end="75251" title="Jordan Vogt-Roberts" label="Jordan Vogt-Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129398" start="75482" end="75497" title="fan conventions" label="fan conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="75501" end="75512" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208131" start="76034" end="76047" title="The Film Crew" label="The Film Crew"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76259" end="76279" title="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace" label="Star Wars: Episode I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931267" start="77145" end="77156" title="Santa Claus (1959 film)" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767857" start="77268" end="77280" title="The TV Wheel" label="The TV Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206919" start="77302" end="77319" title="Cinematic Titanic" label="Cinematic Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="78081" end="78098" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806816" start="78385" end="78400" title="Timmy Big Hands" label="Timmy Big Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346060" start="78522" end="78555" title="The Adventures of Edward the Less" label="The Adventures of Edward the Less"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="78566" end="78574" title="animated cartoon" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="78585" end="78601" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="78615" end="78636" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="78739" end="78753" title="Syfy" label="Sci Fi Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340167" start="78804" end="78817" title="Rob Greenberg" label="Rob Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q838381" start="78849" end="78858" title="Meet Dave" label="Meet Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143665" start="78868" end="78881" title="family film" label="family comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="78891" end="78903" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="78923" end="78932" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134663" start="79469" end="79484" title="Clive Robertson (actor)" label="Clive Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104588" start="79548" end="79565" title="J. Allen Williams" label="J. Allen Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183232" start="79615" end="79625" title="Jerry Beck" label="Jerry Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047400" start="79640" end="79652" title="Cartoon Dump" label="Cartoon Dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115106" start="79796" end="79809" title="Yahoo! View" label="Yahoo! Screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757626" start="79823" end="79834" title="Other Space" label="Other Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031292" start="79967" end="79976" title="Paul Feig" label="Paul Feig"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="80291" end="80310" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="80347" end="80360" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="80511" end="80525" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627041" start="80706" end="80728" title="The Giant Gila Monster" label="The Giant Gila Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742061" start="80850" end="80870" title="Godzilla vs. Megalon" label="Godzilla vs. Megalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="81354" end="81374" title="Arrested Development" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="81747" end="81755" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993958" start="81846" end="81859" title="Raging Bender" label="Raging Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139794" start="81935" end="81957" title="The 40-Year Old Virgin" label="The 40-Year Old Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514884" start="81997" end="82012" title="Happy Death Day" label="Happy Death Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="82034" end="82049" title="direct-to-video" label="direct-to-video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="82050" end="82056" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q223217" start="82068" end="82084" title="The Lion King 1½" label="The Lion King 1½"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073705" start="82092" end="82108" title="Timon and Pumbaa" label="Timon and Pumbaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36479" start="82147" end="82156" title="The Lion King" label="the movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q847468" start="82216" end="82228" title="Roger Allers" label="Roger Allers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088856" start="82315" end="82326" title="Cheap Seats (TV series)" label="Cheap Seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072383" start="82341" end="82356" title="The Cinema Snob" label="The Cinema Snob"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776408" start="82392" end="82426" title="List of films considered the worst" label="List of films considered the worst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905231" start="82429" end="82440" title="Horror host" label="Horror host"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584808" start="82443" end="82470" title="1988 in American television" label="1988 in American television"/>
<link wikidata="Q131711" start="82473" end="82479" title="Kitsch" label="Kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="82482" end="82494" title="Camp (style)" label="Camp (style)"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="82497" end="82506" title="Cult film" label="Cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15805885" start="82515" end="82523" title="SchleFaZ" label="SchleFaZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985929" start="82532" end="82540" title="RiffTrax" label="Rifftrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206919" start="82543" end="82560" title="Cinematic Titanic" label="Cinematic Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="82600" end="82614" title="Syfy" label="Sci-Fi Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555537" start="82685" end="82691" title="Twitch (service)" label="Twitch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20841" wikidata="Q6942427" url="?curid=20841" title="Music radio">
<text>Music radio is a radio format in which music is the main broadcast content. After television replaced old time radio&#x27;s dramatic content, music formats became dominant in many countries. Radio drama and comedy continue, often on public radio.

Music drives radio technology, including wide-band FM, modern digital radio systems such as Digital Radio Mondiale, and even the rise of internet radio and music streaming services (such as Pandora and Spotify).

When radio was the main form of entertainment, regular programming, mostly stories and variety shows, was the norm. If there was music, it was normally a live concert or part of a variety show. Backstage sound engineers who jockeyed discs (records) from one turntable to another to keep up with the live programming were often called disc jockeys.

With the mass production and popularity of records in the mid 1940s, as well as the birth of TV, it was discovered that a show was needed to simply play records and hire a disc jockey to host the program. One of the first disc jockeys (later called DJs) was Dick Clark. Others followed suit and today music radio is the most numerous format.

==Format==
The radio station provides programming to attract listeners. Commercial radio stations make profits by selling advertising. Public and community radio stations are sustained by listener donations and grants. Young people are targeted by advertisers because their product preferences can be changed more easily. Therefore, the most commercially successful stations target young audiences.

The programming usually cycles from the least attractive item, to most attractive, followed by commercials. The purpose of this plan is to build listener interest during the programming. There are several standard ways of selecting the music, such as free-form, top-40, album-oriented rock, and Jack. These can be applied to all types of music.

Because dead air does not attract listeners, the station tries to fill its broadcast day with sound. Audiences will only tolerate a certain number of commercials before tuning away. In some regions, government regulators specify how many commercials can be played in a given hour.

Jingles are radio&#x27;s equivalent of neon signs. Jingles are brief, bright pieces of choral music that promote the station&#x27;s call letters, frequency and sometimes disc-jockey or program segment. Jingles are produced for radio stations by commercial specialty services such as JAM, in Texas. Jingles are often replaced by recorded voice-overs (called &quot;stingers&quot;, also depending on region more often &quot;liners&quot;).

In order to build station loyalty, the station announces time, station calls letters and frequency as often as six to twelve times per hour. Jingles and stingers (liners) help to give the station a branded sound in a pleasant, minimal amount of air-time. The legal requirement for station identification in the U.S. is once per hour, approximately at the top of the hour, or at the conclusion of a transmission.

News, time-checks, real-time travel advice and weather reports are often valuable to listeners. The news headlines and station identification are therefore given just before a commercial. Time, traffic and weather are given just after. The engineer typically sets the station clocks to standard local time each day, by listening to WWV or WWVH (see atomic clock). These segments are less valued by the most targeted market, young people, so many commercial stations shorten or omit these segments in favor of music.

While most music stations that offer news reports simply &quot;tear and read&quot; news items (from the newswires or the Internet), larger stations (generally those affiliated with news/talk stations) may employ an editor to rewrite headlines, and provide summaries of local news. Summaries fit more news in less air-time. Some stations share news collection with TV or newspapers in the same media conglomerate. An emerging trend is to use the radio station&#x27;s web site to provide in-depth coverage of news and advertisers headlined on the air. Many stations contract with agencies such as Smartraveler and AccuWeather for their weather and traffic reports instead of using in-house staff.
Fewer radio stations (except on medium and major market, depending on daypart) maintain a call-in telephone line for promotions and gags, or to take record requests. DJs of commercial stations do not generally answer the phone and edit the call during music plays in non-major markets, as the programming is either delivered via satellite, or voice-tracked using a computer. More and more stations take requests by e-mail and online chat only.

The value of a station&#x27;s advertising is set by the number, age and wealth of its listeners. Arbitron, a commercial statistical service, historically used listener diaries to statistically measure the number of listeners. Arbitron diaries were collected on Thursdays, and for this reason, most radio stations have run special promotions on Thursdays, hoping to persuade last-minute Arbitron diarists to give them a larger market-share. Arbitron contractually prevents mention of its name on the air.

Promotions are the on-air equivalent of lotteries for listeners. Promotional budgets usually run about $1 per listener per year. In a large market, a successful radio station can pay a full-time director of promotions, and run several lotteries per month of vacations, automobiles and other prizes. Lottery items are often bartered from advertisers, allowing both companies to charge full prices at wholesale costs. For example, cruising companies often have unused capacity, and when given the choice, prefer to pay their bills by bartering cruise vacations. Since the ship will sail in any case, bartered vacations cost the cruise company little or nothing. The promotion itself advertises the company providing the prize. The FCC has defined a lottery as &quot;any game, contest or promotion that combines the elements of prize, chance and consideration.&quot;

==Programming by time==
Most music stations have DJs who play music from a playlist determined by the program director, arranged by blocks of time. Though practices differ by region and format, what follows is a typical arrangement in a North American urban commercial radio station.

The first block of the day is the &quot;morning drive time&quot; block in the early morning. Arbitron defines this block between 6 a.m. and 10 a.m., though it can begin as early as 5 a.m. (though usually not later than 6), and end as early as 9 a.m. or as late as 11 a.m. This block usually includes news bulletins and traffic and weather advisories for commuters, as well as light comedy from the morning DJ team (many shock jocks started as or still work on drive-time radio). Some stations emphasize music, and reduce gags and call-ins in this period.

The midday block (defined by Arbitron as 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., though often extended later to about 5 p.m.) is mostly music, and in many places is at least partially voicetracked from another market. For a period around noon a station may play nonstop music or go to an all-request format for people eating lunch. This block is often occupied by a &quot;no-repeat workday;&quot; stations that offer this feature usually target captive audiences such as retail workers, who have to listen to the station for long periods of time and can become irritated by repetition.

In the early evening, or &quot;afternoon drive&quot; (defined by Arbitron as 3 to 7 p.m.), the evening rush-hour programming resembles the midday programming, but adds traffic and weather advisories for commuters. Some stations insert a short snippet of stand-up comedy (&quot;5 O&#x27;Clock Funnies&quot;) around 5 o&#x27;clock when commuters leave work, or play specifically selected &quot;car tunes&quot; ideal for listening while driving.

The evening block (defined by Arbitron as 7 p.m. to midnight), if present, returns to music. Syndicated programs such as Tom Kent or Delilah are popular in this shift.

The overnight programming, from midnight to the beginning of drive time, is generally low-key music with quiet, if any, announcing. Some stations play documentaries or even infomercials, while some others play syndicated or voicetracked DJs. Complete automation, with no jock, is very common in this day part. It is not uncommon to play more adventurous selections during late night programming blocks, since late night is generally not considered significant for ratings, and are not subject to federal restrictions as stringently as during the daytime. Stations are permitted to sign off during this time; in areas where AM radio is still significant (especially in the United States), local stations may be required to either sign off or cut to low-power to protect clear-channel stations.

Weekends, especially Sundays, often carry different programming. The countdown show, ranking the top songs of the previous week, has been a staple of weekend radio programming since 1970; current hosts of countdown shows in various formats include Rick Dees, Ryan Seacrest, Jeff Foxworthy, Kix Brooks, Bob Kingsley, Crook &amp; Chase, Randy Jackson, Walt Love, Al Gross, Dick Bartley, and (via reruns) Casey Kasem. Other types of weekend programming include niche programming, retrospective shows and world music such as the Putumayo World Music Hour. Stations may carry shows with different genres of music such as blues or jazz. Community affairs and religious programming is often on Sunday mornings, generally one of the least listened-to periods of the week. In addition, weekend evenings are particularly specialized; a dance station might have a sponsored dance party at a local club, or a classical station may play an opera. Saturday nights are also similar to this; request shows, both local and national (e.g. Dick Bartley), are very popular on Saturday night. The longest running radio program in the country, the &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot;, has aired on Saturday night since its inception in 1925.

Many music stations in the United States perform news and timechecks only sparingly, preferring to put more music on the air. News is often restricted to the talk-heavy commuting hours, though weather updates are still very common throughout the day, even on these stations. ABC FM News is an example of an American news network that is designed for music radio stations. The BBC and ABC take a different approach, with all of its stations giving news updates (BBC Radio 1Xtra produces its own news segments under the name TX.)

==Music formats==
Some well-known music-radio formats are &quot;Top 40&quot;, &quot;Freeform Rock&quot; and &quot;AOR (Album Oriented Rock)&quot;. It turns out that most other stations (such as Rhythm &amp; Blues) use a variation of one of these formats with a different playlist. The way stations advertise themselves is not standardized. Some critical interpretation is needed to recognize classic formulas in the midst of the commercial glitz.

See List of music radio formats for further details, and note that there is a great deal of format evolution (or, to borrow a television term, channel drift) as music tastes and commercial conditions change. For example, the Beautiful music format that developed into today&#x27;s Easy listening and Soft rock formats is nearly extinct due to a lack of interest from younger generations, whereas classic rock has become popular over the last 20 years or so and Jack FM has arisen only since 2000 or so.
The most popular format in the U.S. is country music, but rock music sells the most.

===Top 40===
The original formulaic radio format was Top 40 music, now known within the industry as contemporary hit radio or &quot;CHR&quot;. In this radio format, disc-jockeys would select one of a set of the forty best-selling singles (usually in a rack) as rated by Billboard magazine or from the station&#x27;s own chart of the local top selling songs. In general, the more aggressive &quot;Top 40&quot; stations could sometimes be better described as &quot;Top 20&quot; stations. They would aggressively skirt listener boredom to play only the most popular singles.

Top 40 radio would punctuate the music with jingles, promotions, gags, call-ins, and requests, brief news, time and weather announcements and most importantly, advertising. The distinguishing mark of a traditional top-40 station was the use of a hyperexcited disc-jockey, and high tempo jingles. The format was invented in the US and today can be heard worldwide. Todd Storz and Gordon McLendon invented Top 40 radio. Bill Drake and Rick Sklar have had a lasting modern influence.

Variants and hybrids include the freeform-like Jack FM (mentioned below under Freeform Rock) and the &quot;Mix&quot; formats mentioned below under Oldies. Top 40 music is heavily criticized by some music fans as being repetitive and of low quality, and is almost exclusively dominated by large media conglomerates such as iHeartMedia and CBS Corporation. Top 40 tends to be underrepresented on the Internet, being mostly the domain of commercial broadcasters such as Virgin Radio UK.

Some of the most famous Top 40 stations have been Musicradio 77 WABC/New York City, Boss Radio 93 KHJ/Los Angeles, The Big 89 WLS/Chicago, 1050 CHUM/Toronto, Famous 56 WFIL/ Philadelphia, and The Big 68 WRKO/Boston. Today, there are popular Top 40 stations such as WHTZ-Z100/New York City, 102.7 KIIS-FM/, and KAMP-97.1 AMP Radio/ in Los Angeles, and Jovem Pan in Brazil

===Freeform and progressive rock===
A later development was freeform radio, later commercially developed as progressive rock radio, and still later even more commercially developed as AOR (Album-Oriented Rock), in which selections from an album would be played together, with an appropriate introduction.

Traditional free-form stations prided themselves on offering their disc jockeys freedom to play significant music and make significant social commentary and humor. This approach developed commercial problems because disc jockeys attracted to this freedom often had tastes substantially different from the audience, and lost audience share. Also, freeform stations could lack predictability, and listeners&#x27; loyalty could then be put at risk. Progressive rock radio (not to be confused with the progressive rock music genre) was freeform in style but constrained so that some kind of rock music was what was always or almost always played.

Responsible jocks would realize their responsibility to the audience to produce a pleasant show, and try to keep the station sound predictable by listening to other jocks, and repeating some of their music selections. WNEW-FM in New York during the 1970s exemplified this approach to progressive rock radio.

At their best, free-form stations have never been equaled for their degree of social activism, programmatic freedom, and listener involvement. However, to succeed, the approach requires genius jocks, totally in-tune with their audience, who are also committed to the commercial success of the radio station. This is a rare combination of traits. Even if such people are available, they often command extremely high salaries. However, this may be an effective approach for a new station, if talented jocks can be recruited and motivated at low salaries.

Freeform radio is particularly popular as a college radio format; offshoots include the recent (and somewhat controversial, due to its lack of on-air personalities) eclectic-pop format known as variety hits, which plays a wide assortment of mostly top-40 music from a span of several decades; and podcast radio, a mostly talk format pioneered by Infinity Broadcasting&#x27;s KYOU station in California and Adam Curry&#x27;s Podcast show on Sirius Satellite Radio.

===AOR (album-oriented rock)===
AOR (album-oriented rock) developed as a commercial compromise between top-forties-style formulas and progressive rock radio/freeform. A program director or music consultant would select some set of music &quot;standards&quot; and require the playlist to be followed, perhaps in an order selected by the jock. The jock would still introduce each selection, but the jock would have available a scripted introduction to use if he was not personally familiar with a particular piece of music and its artist. Obviously a computer helps a lot in this process.

A useful, relatively safe compromise with the artistic freedom of the jocks is that a few times each hour, usually in the least commercially valuable slots of the hour, the disc-jockey can highlight new tracks that he or she thinks might interest the audience. The audience is encouraged to comment on the new tracks, allowing the station to track audience tastes. The freedom to introduce new artists can help a station develop its library.

Significant AOR offshoots include classic rock and adult album alternative.

===Oldies, standards, and classic rock===
Classic rock or oldies formats have been described as having the weakness of not playing new artists. This is true in a creative sense, but not a commercial one. Conventional wisdom in the radio industry is that stations will not get good ratings or revenue if they frequently play songs unfamiliar to their audience. This is why &quot;Top 40&quot; stations played only the biggest hits and why oldies and classic rock formats do the same for the eras they cover. An inherent danger to this philosophy is that closed-campus work environments, such as retail, foster an environment where listeners hear the station continuously for several hours, multiple days in a row, which can become unpleasant after a short amount of time. Oldies and related formats do have an inherent advantage in that they have a much broader time frame (up to 30 years, compared to the current hits of a top-40 station) from which to draw their playlist and can thus play a greater variety of songs than a station bound to devote the majority of its spins to a limited list. The ideal &quot;classic&quot; station (of whatever format) finds the balance between playing listener favorites frequently enough to develop a base while at the same time cultivating a playlist broad enough not to breed contempt. Nevertheless, there seems to be a cottage industry of Internet stations specializing in specific forms of classic rock and oldies, particularly psychedelic rock and progressive rock.

The oldies and classic rock formats have a strong niche market, but as the audience becomes older the station becomes less attractive to advertisers. Advertisers perceive older listeners as set in their brand choices and not as responsive to advertising as younger, more impulsive listeners. Oldies stations must occasionally change to more youthful music formats; as a result, the definition of what constitutes an &quot;oldies&quot; station has gradually changed over the years (and the phrase &quot;oldies&quot; itself is falling out of use except for the stations that still regularly play music from the 1960s and earlier). This is why many oldies stations, like WCBS-FM in New York City and WJMK in Chicago, have switched over to the younger-oriented Jack FM format in recent years—although WCBS-FM adopted a Classic Hits format on July 12, 2007, and the &quot;Jack FM&quot; format was moved to its HD2 subchannel. Unlike WCBS-FM&#x27;s pre-JACK format which was centered on the 1955–1979 era, the post-JACK station was based on the 1964-1989 era because of the aging listener demographics of the original format.

This preference for younger listeners caused the decline of the &quot;Big Band&quot; or &quot;Standards&quot; music formats that covered music from the 1930s to the 1950s. As the audience grew too old for advertisers, the radio stations that carried these formats saw a sharp loss of ratings and revenue. This left them with no choice but to adopt more youthful formats, though the Standards format (also known as the Great American Songbook from the series of albums produced by rocker Rod Stewart) has undergone something of an off-air revival, with artists such as Stewart, Tony Bennett and Queen Latifah putting their own interpretation on the music.

During the mid-to-late-1990s, the &quot;Mix&quot; format—a loosely defined mixture of Top-40 and classic rock with something of an emphasis on adult contemporary music—began to appear across the country. While the format has no particular standard identity, most &quot;mix&quot; stations have rotations consisting largely of pop and rock music from the 1980s and 1990s (and often the 1970s), with some current material mixed in. In addition, stations devoted to the pop music of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s on their own have developed as the audiences that grew up with that music grew older and nostalgic for the sounds of their youth. The continued play of such songs on such stations has also exposed the music to younger generations that can take a renewed interest in the music, prolonging its shelf life beyond what conventional wisdom in the industry may suggest.

The full service format is a more freeform variant of this type of format. Full-service stations will often mix the oldies, classic rock, classic hits, and adult standards music, occasionally with music found in formats such as beautiful music, adult contemporary, or classic country. On weekends, specialty or niche programs focusing on formats such as Celtic music, polka and Italian music (depending on the ethnicity of the area) are common. In addition to music, a limited amount of local talk programming is heard on most full-service stations. Full service tends to be heard primarily on rural stations.

===Classical, pop, easy-listening, jazz, dance===
These formats all have small but very loyal audiences in the largest markets. Most follow formats similar to the above (Top 40s, Freeform, AOR and Oldies), except with a different playlist. Public service stations following these formats tend to be &quot;freeform&quot; stations.

===Regional Mexican===
Regional Mexican is a Latin music radio format, typically including Banda, Conjunto, Corridos, Duranguense, Grupero, Huapango, Mariachi, New Mexico music, Norteña, Ranchera, and Tejano music. It is the most popular radio format targeting Hispanic Americans in the United States.[2] The large number of immigrants from Northern Mexico can lead to an emphasis upon Norteña on Regional Mexican radio stations,[1] though markets with larger Hispanic audiences can have multiple Regional Mexican stations, with variations in which region from which the music is taken and where it is popular.

===Easy listening===
Easy listening and adult contemporary are related formats that play largely down-tempo pop music of various styles. The difference is mostly in the era and styles covered -- Easy Listening is mostly older music done in the style of standards from the early 20th century (typical artists include Johnny Mathis and Frank Sinatra) combined with Big Band music and more modern performers in the same style such as Céline Dion and Josh Groban, while Adult Contemporary focuses more on newer pop music from the 1970s on. An ancestor to the easy listening format is Beautiful Music, a now-rare format (though XM features one channel of it, called Sunny) focusing mostly on smooth jazz or classical arrangements of pop music and original compositions in a similar vein. Perhaps the best-known Adult Contemporary station currently in operation is WLTW in New York City, better known as 106.7 Lite FM. Hot adult contemporary is a hybrid format that crosses adult contemporary with top-40.

Jazz stations generally play either traditional jazz forms or smooth jazz. The jazz station, more than any other except the college station, is stereotyped as having a small listenership and a somewhat overly highbrow on-air personality, and many are college-run stations. California State University Long Beach sponsors KJAZZ 88.1, which has a fairly significant online listenership as well. Two very well known smooth jazz stations are WNUA in Chicago and 94.7 The Wave in Los Angeles, both of which were introduced in 1987, and still continue to enjoy tremendous success in the format today. Also, WUCF-FM in Orlando has been playing jazz music since 1978. Both traditional and smooth jazz stations have been in severe decline, both on commercial and noncommercial stations, since the 2000s, in part because of the formats&#x27; lower profitability compared to other formats (adult contemporary for commercial stations, NPR-driven news/talk for noncommercial ones).

Blues programming is generally limited to niche programs on stations that primarily broadcast other formats. An exception to this is CIDG-FM, an all-blues station based in the Canadian city of Ottawa.

Dance music is a niche, and so-called &quot;rhythmic pop&quot; stations have had a fierce but not always commercially sustainable following. There was a wide spectrum of disco-format radio stations during the late 1970s, but virtually all of them died out during the disco backlash; WXKS in Boston is one of the few notable survivors, now a Clear Channel Communications-owned top-40 station of considerable influence. Nevertheless, there are a large number of dance music stations available both on the internet and on satellite radio, mostly specializing in various forms of electronica. Both major US satellite radio services include disco stations.

===Alternative and modern rock===
Rock music has a long and honorable radio tradition going back to DJs like Wolfman Jack and Alan Freed, and as a result variations on rock radio are fairly common. The classic rock and oldies formats are discussed above; in addition to those, however, there are several genres of music radio devoted to different aspects of modern rock music. Alternative rock grew out of the grunge scene of the late 1980s and early 1990s and is particularly favored by college radio and adult album alternative stations; there is a strong focus on songwriters and bands with an outsider sound or a more sophisticated sound than the &quot;three chord wonder&quot; cliché. Meanwhile, other stations focus on heavy metal, punk rock, or the various post-punk and pop-influenced sounds known collectively as &quot;modern rock&quot;.

Narrow-interest rock stations are particularly common on the Internet and satellite radio scenes, broken down into genres such as punk, metal, classic rock, indie music, and the like. There is a general feeling among radio connoisseurs that rock radio is becoming badly watered down by big corporate ownership, leading to a considerable do-it-yourself spirit.

===Country===

While stereotyped as rural music, the Country music format is common and popular throughout the United States and in some other countries (particularly Canada and Australia, both of which share much of the same Anglo-Saxon and Celtic roots as the United States). Country has been a popular radio format since the early days of music radio, dating back to the early days of radio itself when barn dance radio programs were widely popular; however, the format was indeed originally a predominantly rural phenomenon, especially on AM radio. Decades worth of efforts at mainstreaming the format eventually paid off when country radio became widely popular among a large number of FM radio stations that signed on in the suburban United States in the 1980s and early 1990s.

For most mainstream country stations, the emphasis is generally on current pop country, following the same process as top 40; the remaining music in a particular station&#x27;s library generally uses music from the past fifteen years (shorter for &quot;hot country&quot; or &quot;new country&quot; stations), with the exact music used varying depending on the station and the style of music the listener wants to hear.

Classic country is a variant of the country music format; it is effectively the country music analog to oldies. Classic country is generally preserved in the rural AM stations that country music aired on before its mainstream expansion. Depending on the music mix, it can play either relatively recent classic country tunes from the 1970s to the 1990s (generally more favorable to advertisers) or can span all the way back to the 1920s, thus playing music far older than almost any other radio format available.

Due to increasing similarities between country music and some variants of rock music (such as southern rock, country rock and heartland rock), there have been efforts at combining country and rock formats together, most of which have been unsuccessful.

An alternative country format is Americana, which eschews the mainstream pop country songs in favor of classic-era, alt country and cult musicians. Like the music it plays, these stations can develop strong cult followings and listener loyalty, but they are also less commercially successful than pop country stations.

===Urban (hip-hop/R&amp;B)===
The explosive rise in popularity during the 1980s of rap music has led to a large number of radio stations specializing in rap/hip-hop and R&amp;B music (with the exception of classic R&amp;B such as Motown, which is as often as not the province of Oldies stations). This format is popular among all ethnic groups and social classes.

===Dance music radio===

Dance music radio focuses on live DJ sets and hit singles from genres of techno, house, electro, drum and bass, UK garage and big beat. While some stations play all kinds of electronic dance music, others (mainly pirate radio stations) focus on particular genres. This format is popular in England, Germany, Netherlands and some other countries, but less so in the United States (where dance is a niche format often exclusive to internet radio stations).

However, the number of U.S. stations airing such content has grown; five terrestrial radio stations in the U.S. with a purely dance-oriented format (one of which airing it part-time during the night and early-morning hours) report their airplay to the Billboard Dance/Mix Show Airplay chart, while top 40 and rhythmic stations may also air EDM songs that have crossed over onto pop-oriented charts due to the recent growth in mainstream popularity of dance music.

===Christian and gospel music===

Christian and gospel radio stations usually plays the popular Contemporary Christian music, others playing Gospel music and/or Praise and worship. K-Love and Air1 are among the most popular Christian radio stations. In the United States, Christian music stations (especially ostensibly noncommercial ones) often rely heavily on brokered programming: a Christian music station typically only carries music for part of the day, with the rest of the day filled by evangelists who pay to place recordings of their sermons on the station.

==Public, commercial and community radio==
===Public radio formats===
Some music radio is broadcast by public service organizations, such as National Public Radio or the BBC. In the United States, public radio is typically confined to three formats: news/talk, classical music, or jazz, the last of which is declining rapidly as of the late 2000s. In other countries, where national broadcasters hold significantly more clout, formats can vary more widely.

===Community radio===
Community radio often relies heavily on the music format because it is relatively cheap and generally makes for easy listening.

===Commercial radio===
Commercial stations charge advertisers for the estimated number of listeners. The larger the audience, the higher the stations&#x27; rate card can be for commercial advertising.

Commercial stations program the format of the station to gain as large a slice of the demographic audience as possible.

A station&#x27;s value is usually measured as a percentage of market share in a market of a certain size. The measurement in U.S. markets has historically been by Arbitron, a commercial statistical service that uses listener diaries. Arbitron diaries were historically collected on Thursdays, and for this reason, most radio stations have run special promotions on Thursdays, hoping to persuade last-minute Arbitron diarists to give them a larger market-share. Stations are contractually prohibited from mentioning Arbitron on the air.

Market share is not always a consideration, because not all radio stations are commercial. Public radio is funded by government and private donors. Since most public broadcasting operations do not have to make a profit, no commercials are necessary. (In fact, because most public broadcasting stations operate under noncommercial licenses from their country&#x27;s broadcasting regulator, they may not be allowed to sell advertising at all.) Underwriting spots, which mention the name of a sponsor and some information but cannot include &quot;calls to action&quot; attempting to convince the listener to patronize the sponsor, may be allowed.

Also, satellite radio either charges subscribers or is operated by a public broadcasting service. Therefore, satellite radio rarely carries commercials or tries to raise money from donors. The lack of commercial interruptions in satellite radio is an important advantage. Often the only breaks in a satellite music station&#x27;s programming are for station identification and DJ introductions.

Internet radio stations exist that follow all of these plans.

Much early commercial radio was completely freeform; this changed drastically with the payola scandals of the 1950s. As a result, DJs seldom have complete programming freedom. Occasionally a special situation or highly respected, long established personality is given such freedom. Most programming is done by the program director. Program directors may work for the station or at a central location run by a corporate network. The DJ&#x27;s function is generally reduced to introducing and playing songs. Many stations target younger listeners, because advertisers believe that advertising can change a younger person&#x27;s product choice. Older people are thought to be less easy to change.

Music radio has several possible arrangements. Originally, it had blocks of sponsored airtime that played music from a live orchestra. In the 1930s, phonograph records, especially the single, let a disc jockey introduce individual songs, or introduce blocks of songs. Since then, the program has been arranged so that commercials are followed by the content that is most valuable to the audience.

Programming is different for non-traditional broadcasting. The Jack FM format eliminates DJs entirely, as do many internet radio stations. The music is simply played. If it is announced, it is by RDS (for FM broadcast) or ID3 tags (for Internet broadcast). Satellite radio usually uses DJs, but their programming blocks are longer and not distinguished much by the time of day. In addition, receivers usually display song titles, so announcing them is not needed.

Internet and satellite broadcasting are not considered public media, so treaties and statutes concerning obscenity, transmission of ciphers and public order do not apply to those formats. So, satellite and internet radio are free to provide sexually explicit, coarse and political material. Typical providers include Playboy Radio, uncensored rap and hard rock stations, and &quot;outlaw&quot; country music stations.

The wide reach and selective, non-broadcast usage of the internet allows programmers access to special interest audiences. As a result, both mainstream and narrow-interest webcasts flourish; in particular, electronic music stations are much more common on the Internet than they are in satellite or broadcast media.

==Regional differences==
Outside of English-speaking world, several radio formats built around local musical genres are popular. Examples include Portuguese Fado, Spanish-speaking Mexican Regional, Reggaeton and tejano, French Cajun (especially in French Louisiana), Russian Shanson, and (since the late 2000s) Korean K-pop.

==Cost of programming==
Stations usually adopt a music format to gain the greatest number of listeners for the least expense. Since the content has already been produced, the station merely adds the low-cost on-air programming between records.

Music radio stations pay music-licensing fees to licensing agencies such as ASCAP and BMI in the United States or PRS in the UK. These fees or royalties are generally paid to the songwriters; the musicians themselves typically do not get a cut of radio royalties, even if they own a share of the performance rights, unless they wrote the song themselves. (Thus, a song that is in the public domain is free to play on the radio, regardless of who performs it or when it was performed.) For example, the industry-wide fees payable in 2004 to ASCAP was $176 million. Commercial stations often get their CDs free, but still pay royalties to play it on air. Some small neighborhood stations play unlisted locally produced music, and avoid these fees.

Licensing issues nearly destroyed early Internet radio. In the U.S., Congress intervened with a royalty structure that was expensive to small independent operators, but easier than the RIAA&#x27;s standard scale. Both XM and Sirius provide commercial packages allowing exclusive license-free use (though not rebroadcast) of their music programming by businesses. Most popular internet radio networks such as Pandora and Digitally Imported were paying royalty fees annually to SoundExchange.

==Music radio and culture==
Music radio, particularly top 40, has often acted as both a barometer and an arbiter of musical taste, and radio airplay is one of the defining measures of success in the mainstream musical world. In fact, the rise of rock music to popularity is intimately tied to the history of music radio. Early forms of rock had languished in poor areas of the South. It was enjoyed mostly by rural blacks, with notable exposure in Memphis, Tennessee due to the all African American programming of WDIA. Rock music entered the mainstream during the 1950s because of controversial white DJs such as Dewey Phillips, Alan Freed, Dick Clark, and Wolfman Jack with an appreciation for black music. 

For many years, many listeners have been dissatisfied with the content of radio programming since the decline of early free form-rock radio. The popularity of offshore pirate radio stations in the United Kingdom was an early symptom of frustration with the often overly safe and occasionally politicized playlists of commercial radio.

The growth of Internet radio from a small experimenter&#x27;s toy in the mid-1990s to a huge phenomenon allowing both small do-it-yourselfers and large commercial stations to make their offerings available worldwide was seen as a threat to over-the-air music broadcasting, and was nearly shut down by onerous licensing demands made by the recording industry. Meanwhile, the rise of satellite radio services as a major competitor has brought many of the advantages of Internet radio to an increasingly mobile listening public, including lack of censorship, greater choice, a more eclectic approach to format programming, and static-free digital sound quality. Indeed, one-size-fits-all programming is no longer seen as tenable by some, as the diversity of musical tastes among the listening public has created a proliferation of radio formats in what some might call a form of narrowcasting.

==See also==
* Playlist
* Music scheduling system
* Audio theater
* Radio format
* List of radio programs

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6942427" start="0" end="11" title="Music radio" label="Music radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="17" end="29" title="radio format" label="radio format"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="39" end="44" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353903" start="102" end="116" title="old time radio" label="old time radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="233" end="245" title="public radio" label="public radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="299" end="301" title="Frequency modulation" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="310" end="323" title="digital radio" label="digital radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q946584" start="340" end="362" title="Digital Radio Mondiale" label="Digital Radio Mondiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="385" end="399" title="internet radio" label="internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196431" start="438" end="445" title="Pandora Radio" label="Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="450" end="457" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="795" end="807" title="disc jockeys" label="disc jockeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245448" start="1907" end="1915" title="dead air" label="dead air"/>
<link wikidata="Q264922" start="2181" end="2187" title="Jingle" label="Jingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="2313" end="2325" title="call sign" label="call letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107670" start="2464" end="2467" title="JAM Creative Productions" label="JAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671825" start="2899" end="2921" title="station identification" label="station identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q227467" start="3380" end="3392" title="atomic clock" label="atomic clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822885" start="4160" end="4171" title="AccuWeather" label="AccuWeather"/>
<link wikidata="Q629981" start="4785" end="4793" title="Arbitron" label="Arbitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="6391" end="6401" title="drive time" label="drive time"/>
<link wikidata="Q629981" start="6436" end="6444" title="Arbitron" label="Arbitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499869" start="6763" end="6773" title="shock jock" label="shock jock"/>
<link wikidata="Q675431" start="7062" end="7074" title="voice tracking" label="voicetracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="7506" end="7511" title="drive time" label="drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816441" start="8030" end="8038" title="Tom Kent" label="Tom Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253981" start="8042" end="8049" title="Delilah Rene" label="Delilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662452" start="8251" end="8262" title="infomercial" label="infomercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130615" start="8847" end="8868" title="clear-channel station" label="clear-channel station"/>
<link wikidata="Q721977" start="9120" end="9129" title="Rick Dees" label="Rick Dees"/>
<link wikidata="Q299266" start="9131" end="9144" title="Ryan Seacrest" label="Ryan Seacrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449557" start="9146" end="9160" title="Jeff Foxworthy" label="Jeff Foxworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418942" start="9162" end="9172" title="Kix Brooks" label="Kix Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933035" start="9174" end="9186" title="Bob Kingsley" label="Bob Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187760" start="9188" end="9205" title="Crook &amp;amp; Chase" label="Crook &amp;amp; Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q337521" start="9207" end="9220" title="Randy Jackson" label="Randy Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964015" start="9222" end="9231" title="Walt Love" label="Walt Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272646" start="9243" end="9255" title="Dick Bartley" label="Dick Bartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047230" start="9274" end="9285" title="Casey Kasem" label="Casey Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119405" start="9397" end="9417" title="Putumayo World Music" label="Putumayo World Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257679" start="9503" end="9520" title="Public affairs (broadcasting)" label="Community affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272646" start="9893" end="9905" title="Dick Bartley" label="Dick Bartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="10004" end="10018" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650150" start="10359" end="10370" title="ABC FM News" label="ABC FM News"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10460" end="10463" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="10468" end="10471" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q795563" start="10545" end="10560" title="BBC Radio 1Xtra" label="BBC Radio 1Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569406" start="10884" end="10892" title="playlist" label="playlist"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="11065" end="11092" title="List of music radio formats" label="List of music radio formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072494" start="11204" end="11217" title="channel drift" label="channel drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877851" start="11286" end="11301" title="Beautiful music" label="Beautiful music"/>
<link wikidata="Q848399" start="11342" end="11356" title="Easy listening" label="Easy listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q217191" start="11361" end="11370" title="Soft rock" label="Soft rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="11457" end="11469" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332952" start="11522" end="11529" title="Jack FM" label="Jack FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="11603" end="11616" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="11622" end="11632" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="11703" end="11709" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="11750" end="11772" title="contemporary hit radio" label="contemporary hit radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332952" start="12752" end="12759" title="Jack FM" label="Jack FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="13027" end="13038" title="iHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950380" start="13043" end="13058" title="CBS Corporation" label="CBS Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560650" start="13172" end="13187" title="Virgin Radio" label="Virgin Radio UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322074" start="13254" end="13258" title="WABC (AM)" label="WABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13259" end="13272" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330167" start="13288" end="13291" title="KHJ (AM)" label="KHJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="13292" end="13303" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952483" start="13316" end="13319" title="WLS (AM)" label="WLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="13320" end="13327" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931474" start="13329" end="13338" title="CHUM (AM)" label="1050 CHUM"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="13339" end="13346" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949318" start="13358" end="13362" title="WFIL" label="WFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="13364" end="13376" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955115" start="13393" end="13397" title="WRKO" label="WRKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="13398" end="13404" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355524" start="13455" end="13464" title="WHTZ" label="WHTZ-Z100"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13465" end="13478" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582014" start="13480" end="13493" title="KIIS-FM" label="102.7 KIIS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325114" start="13500" end="13519" title="KNX-FM" label="KAMP-97.1 AMP Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="13524" end="13535" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10358223" start="13541" end="13550" title="Jovem Pan" label="Jovem Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="13554" end="13560" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500879" start="13622" end="13630" title="freeform (radio format)" label="freeform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248866" start="13670" end="13686" title="progressive rock (radio format)" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="14366" end="14382" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957237" start="14730" end="14737" title="WNEW-FM" label="WNEW-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510800" start="15569" end="15581" title="variety hits" label="variety hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="15672" end="15679" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682873" start="15750" end="15754" title="KZDG" label="KYOU"/>
<link wikidata="Q996079" start="15815" end="15837" title="Sirius Satellite Radio" label="Sirius Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q428656" start="15872" end="15875" title="album-oriented rock" label="AOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q428656" start="15877" end="15896" title="album-oriented rock" label="album-oriented rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q428656" start="16883" end="16886" title="album-oriented rock" label="AOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="16905" end="16917" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605852" start="16922" end="16945" title="adult album alternative" label="adult album alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="16990" end="17002" title="Classic rock" label="Classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852647" start="17006" end="17012" title="oldies" label="oldies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646525" start="17152" end="17171" title="Conventional wisdom" label="Conventional wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q170512" start="18255" end="18269" title="familiarity breeds contempt" label="breed contempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="18415" end="18431" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="18436" end="18452" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947634" start="19123" end="19130" title="WCBS-FM" label="WCBS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19134" end="19147" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951290" start="19152" end="19156" title="WBMX (FM)" label="WJMK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="19160" end="19167" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332952" start="19212" end="19219" title="Jack FM" label="Jack FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151397" start="19994" end="20017" title="Great American Songbook" label="Great American Songbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="20063" end="20074" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q296729" start="20153" end="20165" title="Tony Bennett" label="Tony Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112005" start="20170" end="20183" title="Queen Latifah" label="Queen Latifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="20375" end="20393" title="adult contemporary" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689021" start="21031" end="21041" title="shelf life" label="shelf life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508202" start="21108" end="21120" title="full service (radio format)" label="full service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877851" start="21332" end="21347" title="beautiful music" label="beautiful music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128236" start="21372" end="21387" title="classic country" label="classic country"/>
<link wikidata="Q854451" start="21458" end="21470" title="Celtic music" label="Celtic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="21472" end="21477" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679098" start="21482" end="21495" title="Music of Italy" label="Italian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q848399" start="22679" end="22693" title="Easy listening" label="Easy listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="22698" end="22716" title="adult contemporary" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q848399" start="22853" end="22867" title="Easy Listening" label="Easy Listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q449612" start="22974" end="22987" title="Johnny Mathis" label="Johnny Mathis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="22992" end="23005" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="23021" end="23029" title="Big Band" label="Big Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="23089" end="23100" title="Céline Dion" label="Céline Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q218083" start="23105" end="23116" title="Josh Groban" label="Josh Groban"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="23124" end="23142" title="Adult Contemporary" label="Adult Contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877851" start="23238" end="23253" title="Beautiful Music" label="Beautiful Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952516" start="23517" end="23521" title="WLTW" label="WLTW"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="23525" end="23538" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="23571" end="23593" title="Hot adult contemporary" label="Hot adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="23659" end="23663" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q831354" start="23721" end="23732" title="smooth jazz" label="smooth jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="24105" end="24112" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="24134" end="24145" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956556" start="24260" end="24267" title="WUCF-FM" label="WUCF-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="24271" end="24278" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="24582" end="24585" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="24629" end="24634" title="Blues" label="Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011625" start="24762" end="24769" title="CIDG-FM" label="CIDG-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="24822" end="24828" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="25098" end="25112" title="disco backlash" label="disco backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957715" start="25114" end="25118" title="WXKS-FM" label="WXKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="25172" end="25200" title="Clear Channel Communications" label="Clear Channel Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="25407" end="25418" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="25518" end="25528" title="Rock music" label="Rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935194" start="25593" end="25605" title="Wolfman Jack" label="Wolfman Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q453956" start="25610" end="25620" title="Alan Freed" label="Alan Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="25686" end="25698" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605852" start="25990" end="26013" title="adult album alternative" label="adult album alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="26209" end="26220" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="26222" end="26231" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="26489" end="26500" title="independent rock" label="indie music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="26746" end="26759" title="Country music" label="Country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q808399" start="27099" end="27109" title="barn dance" label="barn dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128236" start="27898" end="27913" title="Classic country" label="Classic country"/>
<link wikidata="Q852767" start="28505" end="28518" title="southern rock" label="southern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q613408" start="28520" end="28532" title="country rock" label="country rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q747717" start="28537" end="28551" title="heartland rock" label="heartland rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407862" start="28698" end="28707" title="Americana (music)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q438476" start="28781" end="28792" title="alt country" label="alt country"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="28872" end="28886" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="29068" end="29077" title="hip hop music" label="rap music"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="29154" end="29161" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="29215" end="29221" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="29448" end="29454" title="techno music" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="29456" end="29461" title="house music" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q217597" start="29463" end="29470" title="electro music" label="electro"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="29472" end="29485" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165777" start="29487" end="29496" title="UK garage" label="UK garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q858579" start="29501" end="29509" title="big beat" label="big beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="29549" end="29571" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="29588" end="29600" title="pirate radio" label="pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628528" start="30093" end="30115" title="Dance/Mix Show Airplay" label="Dance/Mix Show Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="30191" end="30203" title="Crossover (music)" label="crossed over"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30247" end="30278" title="Electronic dance music#Mainstream appeal in the United States" label="growth in mainstream popularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379958" start="30392" end="30420" title="Contemporary Christian music" label="Contemporary Christian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="30437" end="30449" title="Gospel music" label="Gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339121" start="30457" end="30475" title="Praise and worship music" label="Praise and worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286098" start="30477" end="30483" title="K-Love" label="K-Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697708" start="30488" end="30492" title="Air1" label="Air1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973546" start="30658" end="30678" title="brokered programming" label="brokered programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="31006" end="31027" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="31035" end="31038" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="31062" end="31074" title="public radio" label="public radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179112" start="31345" end="31360" title="Community radio" label="Community radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q629981" start="31960" end="31968" title="Arbitron" label="Arbitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="32425" end="32437" title="Public radio" label="Public radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883951" start="32776" end="32793" title="Underwriting spot" label="Underwriting spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090081" start="32985" end="33000" title="satellite radio" label="satellite radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671825" start="33329" end="33351" title="station identification" label="station identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="33375" end="33389" title="Internet radio" label="Internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297671" start="33525" end="33531" title="payola" label="payola"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="34331" end="34342" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332952" start="34594" end="34601" title="Jack FM" label="Jack FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q263015" start="34727" end="34730" title="Radio Data System" label="RDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203230" start="35313" end="35326" title="Playboy Radio" label="Playboy Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="35339" end="35342" title="hip hop music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="35347" end="35356" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="35390" end="35403" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="35768" end="35790" title="English-speaking world" label="English-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q185676" start="35889" end="35893" title="Fado" label="Fado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309098" start="35912" end="35928" title="Mexican Regional" label="Mexican Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q202930" start="35930" end="35939" title="Reggaeton" label="Reggaeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="35944" end="35950" title="Tejano music" label="tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="35959" end="35964" title="Cajun music" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891685" start="36007" end="36014" title="Shanson" label="Shanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="36050" end="36055" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941979" start="36328" end="36343" title="Music licensing" label="music-licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="36379" end="36384" title="ASCAP" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="36389" end="36392" title="Broadcast Music Incorporated" label="BMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120528" start="36417" end="36420" title="PRS for Music" label="PRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="37235" end="37239" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564617" start="37526" end="37539" title="SoundExchange" label="SoundExchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="37596" end="37602" title="top 40" label="top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="37788" end="37798" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="37990" end="38008" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="38024" end="38040" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118627" start="38056" end="38060" title="WDIA" label="WDIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268205" start="38156" end="38170" title="Dewey Phillips" label="Dewey Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q453956" start="38172" end="38182" title="Alan Freed" label="Alan Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q366563" start="38184" end="38194" title="Dick Clark" label="Dick Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935194" start="38200" end="38212" title="Wolfman Jack" label="Wolfman Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="38421" end="38433" title="pirate radio" label="pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="39417" end="39430" title="List of music radio formats" label="radio formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q771175" start="39465" end="39478" title="narrowcasting" label="narrowcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569406" start="39496" end="39504" title="Playlist" label="Playlist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942431" start="39507" end="39530" title="Music scheduling system" label="Music scheduling system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="39533" end="39546" title="Audio theater" label="Audio theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="39549" end="39561" title="Radio format" label="Radio format"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635774" start="39564" end="39586" title="List of radio programs" label="List of radio programs"/>
</links>
</doc>
