<doc id="21292" wikidata="Q1030" url="?curid=21292" title="Namibia">
<text>Namibia (), officially the Republic of Namibia, is a country on the west coast of Southern Africa. Its borders include the Atlantic Ocean to the west, Angola and Zambia to the north, Botswana to the east and South Africa to the south; in the northeast, approximating a quadripoint, Zimbabwe lies less than 200 metres (660 feet) away along the Zambezi River near Kazungula, Zambia. Namibia&#x27;s capital and largest city is Windhoek. 

Namibia is the driest country in sub-Saharan Africa. being inhabited since prehistoric times by the Khoi, San, Damara and Nama people. Around the 14th century, immigrating Bantu peoples arrived as part of the Bantu expansion. From 1600 the Ovambo formed kingdoms, such as Ondonga and Oukwanyama.

In 1884, the German Empire established rule over most of the territory, forming a colony known as German South West Africa. Between 1904 and 1908, German troops waged a punitive campaign against the Herero and Nama which escalated into the first genocide of the 20th century. German rule ended during the First World War with a 1915 defeat by South African forces. In 1920, after the end of the war, the League of Nations mandated administration of the colony to South Africa. From 1948, with the National Party elected to power, this included South Africa applying apartheid to what was then known as South West Africa. 

In the later 20th century, uprisings and demands for political representation resulted in the United Nations assuming direct responsibility over the territory in 1966, but South Africa maintained rule until 1973. That year the UN recognised the South West Africa People&#x27;s Organisation (SWAPO) as the official representative of the Namibian people. 

Namibia gained independence from South Africa on 21 March 1990, following the South African Border War. However, Walvis Bay and the Penguin Islands remained under South African control until 1994. 

Namibia is a stable parliamentary democracy. Agriculture, tourism and the mining industry – including mining for gem diamonds, uranium, gold, silver and base metals – form the basis of its economy, while the manufacturing sector is comparatively small. Despite significant GDP growth since its independence, poverty and inequality remain significant in the country. 40.9% of the population is affected by multidimensional poverty, and more than 400,000 people continue to live in informal housing. Income disparity in the country is one of the world&#x27;s highest with a Gini coefficient of 59.1 in 2015. 

With a population of 3.1 million people, Namibia is one of the most sparsely populated countries in the world. Since the end of the Cold War, it has attracted notable immigration from Germany, Angola, and Zimbabwe.

Namibia is a member state of the United Nations, the Southern African Development Community, the African Union and the Commonwealth of Nations.

==History==
===Etymology===
The name of the country is derived from the Namib desert, the oldest desert in the world. The word &quot;Namib&quot; itself is of Nama origin and means &quot;vast place&quot;. The name was chosen by Mburumba Kerina, who originally proposed &quot;Republic of Namib&quot;. Before Namibia became independent in 1990, its territory was known first as German South-West Africa (&quot;Deutsch-Südwestafrika&quot;), and then as South West Africa, reflecting its colonial occupation by Germans and South Africans, respectively.

===Pre-colonial period===
The dry lands of Namibia have been inhabited since prehistoric times by the San, Damara, and Nama. For thousands of years, the Khoisan peoples of Southern Africa maintained a nomadic life, the Khoikhoi as pastoralists and the San people as hunter-gatherers. Around the 14th century, immigrating Bantu people began to arrive during the Bantu expansion from central Africa.

From the late 18th century onward, Oorlam people from Cape Colony crossed the Orange River and moved into the area that today is southern Namibia. Their encounters with the nomadic Nama tribes were largely peaceful. They received the missionaries accompanying the Oorlam very well, granting them the right to use waterholes and grazing against an annual payment. On their way further north, however, the Oorlam encountered clans of the OvaHerero at Windhoek, Gobabis, and Okahandja, who resisted their encroachment. The Nama-Herero War broke out in 1880, with hostilities ebbing only after the German Empire deployed troops to the contested places and cemented the status quo among the Nama, Oorlam, and Herero.

In 1878, the Cape of Good Hope, then a British colony, annexed the port of Walvis Bay and the offshore Penguin Islands; these became an integral part of the new Union of South Africa at its creation in 1910.

The first Europeans to disembark and explore the region were the Portuguese navigators Diogo Cão in 1485 and Bartolomeu Dias in 1486, but the Portuguese did not try to claim the area. Like most of the interior of Sub-Saharan Africa, Namibia was not extensively explored by Europeans until the 19th century. At that time traders and settlers came principally from Germany and Sweden. In 1870, Finnish missionaries came to the northern part of Namibia to spread the Lutheran religion among the Ovambo and Kavango people. In the late 19th century, Dorsland Trekkers crossed the area on their way from the Transvaal to Angola. Some of them settled in Namibia instead of continuing their journey.

===German rule===

Namibia became a German colony in 1884 under Otto von Bismarck to forestall perceived British encroachment and was known as German South West Africa (&quot;Deutsch-Südwestafrika&quot;). The Palgrave Commission by the British governor in Cape Town determined that only the natural deep-water harbour of Walvis Bay was worth occupying and thus annexed it to the Cape province of British South Africa.

In 1897, a rinderpest epidemic caused massive cattle die-offs of an estimated 95% of cattle in southern and central Namibia. In response the German colonisers set up a veterinary cordon fence known as the Red Line. In 1907 this fence then broadly defined the boundaries for the first Police Zone.

From 1904 to 1907, the Herero and the Namaqua took up arms against ruthless German settlers. In a calculated punitive action by the German settlers, government officials ordered the extinction of the natives in the OvaHerero and Namaqua genocide. In what has been called the &quot;first genocide of the 20th century&quot;, the Germans systematically killed 10,000 Nama (half the population) and approximately 65,000 Herero (about 80% of the population). The survivors, when finally released from detention, were subjected to a policy of dispossession, deportation, forced labour, racial segregation, and discrimination in a system that in many ways foreshadowed the apartheid established by South Africa in 1948. Most Africans were confined to so-called native territories, which under South African rule after 1949 were turned into &quot;homelands&quot; (Bantustans). 

Some historians have speculated that the downfall of the Herero in Namibia was a model for the Nazis in the Holocaust. The memory of what happened under German rule has contributed to shape the ethnic identity in independent Namibia and has kept its significance in today&#x27;s relations with Germany.

The German minister for development aid apologised for the Namibian genocide in 2004. However, the German government distanced itself from this apology. Only in 2021 did the German government acknowledge the genocide and agreed to pay €1.1 billion over 30 years in community aid.

===South African mandate===

During World War I, South African troops under General Louis Botha occupied the territory and deposed the German colonial administration. The end of the war and the Treaty of Versailles resulted in South West Africa remaining a possession of South Africa, at first as a League of Nations mandate, until 1990. The mandate system was formed as a compromise between those who advocated for an Allied annexation of former German and Ottoman territories and a proposition put forward by those who wished to grant them to an international trusteeship until they could govern themselves. It permitted the South African government to administer South West Africa until that territory&#x27;s inhabitants were prepared for political self-determination. South Africa interpreted the mandate as a veiled annexation and made no attempt to prepare South West Africa for future autonomy.
As a result of the Conference on International Organization in 1945, the League of Nations was formally superseded by the United Nations (UN) and former League mandates by a trusteeship system. Article 77 of the United Nations Charter stated that UN trusteeship &quot;shall apply...to territories now held under mandate&quot;; furthermore, it would &quot;be a matter of subsequent agreement as to which territories in the foregoing territories will be brought under the trusteeship system and under what terms&quot;. The UN requested all former League of Nations mandates be surrendered to its Trusteeship Council in anticipation of their independence. South Africa declined to do so and instead requested permission from the UN to formally annex South West Africa, for which it received considerable criticism. When the UN General Assembly rejected this proposal, South Africa dismissed its opinion and began solidifying control of the territory. The UN General Assembly and Security Council responded by referring the issue to the International Court of Justice (ICJ), which held a number of discussions on the legality of South African rule between 1949 and 1966.

South Africa began imposing &quot;apartheid,&quot; its codified system of racial segregation and discrimination, on South West Africa during the late 1940s. Black South West Africans were subject to pass laws, curfews, and a host of residential regulations that restricted their movement. Development was concentrated in the southern region of the territory adjacent to South Africa, known as the &quot;Police Zone&quot;, where most of the major settlements and commercial economic activity were located. Outside the Police Zone, indigenous peoples were restricted to theoretically self-governing tribal homelands.

During the late 1950s and early 1960s, the accelerated decolonisation of Africa and mounting pressure on the remaining colonial powers to grant their colonies self-determination resulted in the formation of nascent nationalist parties in South West Africa. Movements such as the South West African National Union (SWANU) and the South West African People&#x27;s Organisation (SWAPO) advocated for the formal termination of South Africa&#x27;s mandate and independence for the territory. In 1966, following the ICJ&#x27;s controversial ruling that it had no legal standing to consider the question of South African rule, SWAPO launched an armed insurgency that escalated into part of a wider regional conflict known as the South African Border War.In 1971 Namibian contract workers led a general strike against the contract system and in support of independence. Some of the striking workers would later join SWAPO&#x27;s PLAN as part of the South African Border War.

===Independence===

As SWAPO&#x27;s insurgency intensified, South Africa&#x27;s case for annexation in the international community continued to decline. The UN declared that South Africa had failed in its obligations to ensure the moral and material well-being of South West Africa&#x27;s indigenous inhabitants, and had thus disavowed its own mandate. On 12 June 1968, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution proclaiming that, in accordance with the desires of its people, South West Africa be renamed &quot;Namibia&quot;. United Nations Security Council Resolution 269, adopted in August 1969, declared South Africa&#x27;s continued occupation of Namibia illegal. In recognition of this landmark decision, SWAPO&#x27;s armed wing was renamed the People&#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN).

Namibia became one of several flashpoints for Cold War proxy conflicts in southern Africa during the latter years of the PLAN insurgency. The insurgents sought out weapons and sent recruits to the Soviet Union for military training. As the PLAN war effort gained momentum, the Soviet Union and other sympathetic states such as Cuba continued to increase their support, deploying advisers to train the insurgents directly as well as supplying more weapons and ammunition. SWAPO&#x27;s leadership, dependent on Soviet, Angolan, and Cuban military aid, positioned the movement firmly within the socialist bloc by 1975. This practical alliance reinforced the external perception of SWAPO as a Soviet proxy, which dominated Cold War rhetoric in South Africa and the United States. For its part, the Soviet Union supported SWAPO partly because it viewed South Africa as a regional Western ally. 

Growing war weariness and the reduction of tensions between the superpowers compelled South Africa, Angola, and Cuba to accede to the Tripartite Accord, under pressure from both the Soviet Union and the United States. South Africa accepted Namibian independence in exchange for Cuban military withdrawal from the region and an Angolan commitment to cease all aid to PLAN. PLAN and South Africa adopted an informal ceasefire in August 1988, and a United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) was formed to monitor the Namibian peace process and supervise the return of refugees. The ceasefire was broken after PLAN made a final incursion into the territory, possibly as a result of misunderstanding UNTAG&#x27;s directives, in March 1989. A new ceasefire was later imposed with the condition that the insurgents were to be confined to their external bases in Angola until they could be disarmed and demobilised by UNTAG.

By the end of the 11-month transition period, the last South African troops had been withdrawn from Namibia, all political prisoners granted amnesty, racially discriminatory legislation repealed, and 42,000 Namibian refugees returned to their homes. Just over 97% of eligible voters participated in the country&#x27;s first parliamentary elections held under a universal franchise. The United Nations plan included oversight by foreign election observers in an effort to ensure a free and fair election. SWAPO won a plurality of seats in the Constituent Assembly with 57% of the popular vote. This gave the party 41 seats, but not a two-thirds majority, which would have enabled it to draft the constitution on its own.

The Namibian Constitution was adopted in February 1990. It incorporated protection for human rights and compensation for state expropriations of private property and established an independent judiciary, legislature, and an executive presidency (the constituent assembly became the national assembly). The country officially became independent on 21 March 1990. Sam Nujoma was sworn in as the first President of Namibia at a ceremony attended by Nelson Mandela of South Africa (who had been released from prison the previous month) and representatives from 147 countries, including 20 heads of state. In 1994, shortly before the first multiracial elections in South Africa, that country ceded Walvis Bay to Namibia.

===After independence===
Since independence Namibia has completed the transition from white minority apartheid rule to parliamentary democracy. Multiparty democracy was introduced and has been maintained, with local, regional and national elections held regularly. Several registered political parties are active and represented in the National Assembly, although the SWAPO has won every election since independence. The transition from the 15-year rule of President Nujoma to his successor Hifikepunye Pohamba in 2005 went smoothly.

Since independence, the Namibian government has promoted a policy of national reconciliation. It issued an amnesty for those who fought on either side during the liberation war. The civil war in Angola spilled over and adversely affected Namibians living in the north of the country. In 1998, Namibia Defence Force (NDF) troops were sent to the Democratic Republic of the Congo as part of a Southern African Development Community (SADC) contingent. In 1999, the national government quashed a secessionist attempt in the northeastern Caprivi Strip. The Caprivi conflict was initiated by the Caprivi Liberation Army (CLA), a rebel group led by Mishake Muyongo. It wanted the Caprivi Strip to secede and form its own society.

In 2007, Twyfelfontein was inscribed as a cultural UNESCO World Heritage Site, a prehistoric site with one of the largest concentrations of rock engravings on the African continent. In December 2014, Prime Minister Hage Geingob, the candidate of ruling SWAPO, won the presidential elections, taking 87% of the vote. His predecessor, President Hifikepunye Pohamba, also of SWAPO, had served the maximum two terms allowed by the constitution. In December 2019, President Hage Geingob was re-elected for a second term, taking 56.3% of the vote. On 4 February 2024, President Hage Geingob died and he was immediately succeeded by vice-president Nangolo Mbumba as new President of Namibia who will be finishing the late President&#x27;s term as it comes to an end in March 2025. SWAPO&#x27;s first female presidential candidate, Netumbo Nandi-Ndaitwah, was declared the winner of the 2024 elections with 57% of the vote.

==Geography==

At , Namibia is the world&#x27;s thirty-fourth largest country (after Venezuela). It lies mostly between latitudes 17° and 29°S (a small area is north of 17°), and longitudes 11° and 26°E.

Being situated between the Namib and the Kalahari deserts, Namibia has the least rainfall of any country in sub-Saharan Africa.

The Namibian landscape consists generally of five geographical areas, each with characteristic abiotic conditions and vegetation, with some variation within and overlap between them: the Central Plateau, the Namib, the Great Escarpment, the Bushveld, and the Kalahari Desert.

The Central Plateau runs from north to south, bordered by the Skeleton Coast to the northwest, the Namib Desert and its coastal plains to the southwest, the Orange River to the south, and the Kalahari Desert to the east. The Central Plateau is home to the highest point in Namibia at Königstein elevation .

The Namib is a broad expanse of hyper-arid gravel plains and dunes that stretches along Namibia&#x27;s entire coastline. It varies between in width. Areas within the Namib include the Skeleton Coast and the Kaokoveld in the north and the extensive Namib Sand Sea along the central coast.

The Great Escarpment swiftly rises to over . Average temperatures and temperature ranges increase further inland from the cold Atlantic waters, while the lingering coastal fogs slowly diminish. Although the area is rocky with poorly developed soils, it is significantly more productive than the Namib Desert. As summer winds are forced over the Escarpment, moisture is extracted as precipitation.

The Bushveld is found in north-eastern Namibia along the Angolan border and in the Caprivi Strip. The area receives a significantly greater amount of precipitation than the rest of the country, averaging around per year. The area is generally flat and the soils sandy, limiting their ability to retain water and support agriculture.

The Kalahari Desert, an arid region that extends into South Africa and Botswana, is one of Namibia&#x27;s well-known geographical features. The Kalahari, while popularly known as a desert, has a variety of localised environments, including some verdant and technically non-desert areas. The Succulent Karoo is home to over 5,000 species of plants, nearly half of them endemic; approximately 10 percent of the world&#x27;s succulents are found in the Karoo. The reason behind this high productivity and endemism may be the relatively stable nature of precipitation.

Namibia&#x27;s Coastal Desert is one of the oldest deserts in the world. Its sand dunes, created by the strong onshore winds, are the highest in the world. Because of the location of the shoreline, at the point where the Atlantic&#x27;s cold water reaches Africa&#x27;s hot climate, often extremely dense fog forms along the coast. Near the coast there are areas where the dune-hummocks are vegetated. Namibia has rich coastal and marine resources that remain largely unexplored. The Caprivi Strip extends east from the northeastern corner of the country.

===Urban settlements===
Namibia has 13 cities, governed by municipalities and 26 towns, governed by town councils. The capital Windhoek is by far the largest urban settlement in Namibia.

===Climate===
Namibia extends from 17°S to 25°S latitude: climatically the range of the sub-Tropical High Pressure Belt. Its overall climate description is arid, descending from the Sub-Humid [mean rain above ] through Semi-Arid [between ] (embracing most of the waterless Kalahari) and Arid [from ] (these three regions are inland from the western escarpment) to the Hyper-Arid coastal plain [less than ]. Temperature maxima are limited by the overall elevation of the entire region: only in the far south, Warmbad for instance, are maxima above recorded.

Typically the sub-Tropical High Pressure Belt, with frequent clear skies, provides more than 300 days of sunshine per year. It is situated at the southern edge of the tropics; the Tropic of Capricorn cuts the country about in half. The winter (June – August) is generally dry. Both rainy seasons occur in summer: the small rainy season between September and November, and the big one between February and April. Humidity is low, and average rainfall varies from almost zero in the coastal desert to more than in the Caprivi Strip. Rainfall is highly variable, and droughts are common. In the summer of 2006/07 the rainfall was recorded far below the annual average. In May 2019, Namibia declared a state of emergency in response to the drought, and extended it by an additional 6 months in October 2019.

Weather and climate in the coastal area are dominated by the cold, north-flowing Benguela Current of the Atlantic Ocean, which accounts for very low precipitation ( per year or less), frequent dense fog, and overall lower temperatures than in the rest of the country. In Winter, occasionally a condition known as &#x27; (German for &quot;mountain wind&quot;) or &#x27; (Afrikaans for &quot;east weather&quot;) occurs, a hot dry wind blowing from the inland to the coast. As the area behind the coast is a desert, these winds can develop into sand storms, leaving sand deposits in the Atlantic Ocean that are visible on satellite images.

The Central Plateau and Kalahari areas have wide diurnal temperature ranges of up to 30C (54F).

&quot;Efundja&quot;, the annual seasonal flooding of the northern parts of the country, often causes not only damage to infrastructure but loss of life. The rains that cause these floods originate in Angola, flow into Namibia&#x27;s Cuvelai-Etosha Basin, and fill the &quot;oshanas&quot; (Oshiwambo: flood plains) there. The worst floods occurred in March 2011 and displaced 21,000 people.

===Water sources===

Namibia is the driest country in sub-Saharan Africa and depends largely on groundwater. With an average rainfall of about per annum, the highest rainfall occurs in the Caprivi Strip in the northeast (about per annum) and decreases in a westerly and southwesterly direction to as little as and less per annum at the coast. The only perennial rivers are found on the national borders with South Africa, Angola, Zambia, and the short border with Botswana in the Caprivi Strip. In the interior of the country, surface water is available only in the summer months when rivers are in flood after exceptional rainfalls. Otherwise, surface water is restricted to a few large storage dams retaining and damming up these seasonal floods and their run-off. Where people do not live near perennial rivers or make use of the storage dams, they are dependent on groundwater. Even isolated communities and those economic activities located far from good surface water sources, such as mining, agriculture, and tourism, can be supplied from groundwater over nearly 80% of the country.

More than 100,000 boreholes have been drilled in Namibia over the past century. One third of these boreholes have been drilled dry. An aquifer called Ohangwena II, on both sides of the Angola-Namibia border, was discovered in 2012. It has been estimated to be capable of supplying a population of 800,000 people in the North for 400 years, at the current (2018) rate of consumption. Experts estimate that Namibia has of underground water.

According to African Folder, a sewage-to-water treatment project in Namibia not only provides citizens with safe drinking water, but also boosts productivity by 6% per year. All pollutants and impurities are removed using cutting-edge &quot;multi-barrier&quot; technology, which includes residual chlorination, ozone treatment, and ultra membrane filtration. Strict bio-monitoring methods are also used throughout the process to ensure high-quality, safe drinking water.

On 8 June 2023, Namibia became the first Southern African country and the eighth country in Africa to accede to the Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes (UN Water Convention).

===Communal wildlife conservancies===
Namibia is one of few countries in the world to specifically address conservation and protection of natural resources in its constitution. Article 95 states, &quot;The State shall actively promote and maintain the welfare of the people by adopting international policies aimed at the following: maintenance of ecosystems, essential ecological processes, and biological diversity of Namibia, and utilisation of living natural resources on a sustainable basis for the benefit of all Namibians, both present and future.&quot;

In 1993, Namibia&#x27;s newly formed government received funding from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) through its Living in a Finite Environment (LIFE) Project. The Ministry of Environment and Tourism, with financial support from organisations such as USAID, Endangered Wildlife Trust, WWF, and Canadian Ambassador&#x27;s Fund, together form a Community-Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) support structure. The project&#x27;s main goal is to promote sustainable natural resource management by giving local communities rights to wildlife management and tourism.

===Wildlife===
Namibia has various species of wildlife including the wild dog, dik dik and critically endangered black rhino. There are 200 terrestrial mammal species, 645 bird species and 115 fish species.

== Government and politics ==

Namibia is a unitary semi-presidential representative democratic republic. The President of Namibia is elected to a five-year term and is both the head of state and the head of government. All members of the government are individually and collectively responsible to the legislature.

The Constitution of Namibia outlines the following as the organs of the country&#x27;s government:
*Executive: executive power is exercised by the President and the Government.
*Legislature: Namibia has a bicameral Parliament with the National Assembly as lower house, and the National Council as the upper house.
*Judiciary: Namibia has a system of courts that interpret and apply the law in the name of the state.

While the constitution envisaged a multi-party system for Namibia&#x27;s government, the SWAPO party has been dominant since independence in 1990. According to 2023 V-Dem Democracy indices Namibia is ranked 66th electoral democracy worldwide and 8th electoral democracy in Africa.

===Foreign relations===
Namibia has a largely independent foreign policy, with persisting affiliations with states that aided the independence struggle, including Cuba. With a small army and a fragile economy, the Namibian government&#x27;s principal foreign policy concern is developing strengthened ties within the Southern African region. A member of the Southern African Development Community, Namibia is a vocal advocate for greater regional integration. It became the 160th member of the UN on 23 April 1990. On its independence it became the 50th member of the Commonwealth of Nations.

===Military===

In 2023, The Global Firepower Index (GFP) reported that Namibia&#x27;s military is ranked as one of the weakest in the world, at 123rd out of 145 countries. Among 34 African countries, Namibia is also poorly ranked at the 28th position. Despite this, government spending for the Ministry of Defence stood at N$5,885 million (a 1.2% decrease from the previous financial year). With close to 6 billion Namibian dollars (US$411 million in 2021) the Ministry of Defence receives the fourth highest amount of money from government per ministry.

Namibia does not have any enemies in the region, though it has been involved in various disputes regarding borders and construction plans.

The Namibian constitution defines the role of the military as &quot;defending the territory and national interests.&quot; Namibia formed the Namibian Defence Force (NDF), comprising former enemies in a 23-year bush war: the People&#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN) and South West African &quot;Territorial Force&quot; (SWATF). The British government formulated the plan for integrating these forces and began training the NDF, which consists of a small headquarters and five battalions.

The United Nations Transitional Assistance Group (UNTAG)&#x27;s Kenyan infantry battalion remained in Namibia for three months after independence to help train the NDF and to stabilise the north. According to the Namibian Defence Ministry, enlistments of both men and women will number no more than 7,500.

The chief of the Namibian Defence Force is Air Vice Marshal Martin Kambulu Pinehas (with effect from 1 April 2020).

In 2017, Namibia signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

===Administrative divisions===
Namibia is divided into 14 regions which are subdivided into 121 constituencies. The administrative division of Namibia is tabled by &quot;Delimitation Commissions&quot; and accepted or declined by the National Assembly. Since state foundation four Delimitation Commissions have delivered their work, the last one in 2013 under the chairmanship of Judge Alfred Siboleka. The most urbanised and economically active regions are the Khomas and Erongo regions, with Khomas home to the capital, Windhoek, and Erongo home to Walvis Bay and Swakopmund.

The table below shows statistics from the 2023 Namibia Population and Housing Census:
Regional councillors are directly elected through secret ballots (regional elections) by the inhabitants of their constituencies.

Local authorities in Namibia can be in the form of municipalities (either Part 1 or Part 2 municipalities), town councils or villages.
===Human rights===
Namibia is one of the most free and democratic countries in Africa, with a government that maintains and protects human rights and freedoms. However, significant issues include government corruption, policy inertia and prison overcrowding. Also, refugees are not permitted free movement.

Homosexual acts were formerly illegal in Namibia, although the respective law was not enforced. Discrimination, as well as intolerance, against LGBT people is widespread, specifically in rural areas. Urban areas are generally neutral or supportive with a few LGBT-dedicated clubs and events. Some Namibian government officials and high-profile figures, such as Namibia&#x27;s Ombudsman John Walters and First Lady Monica Geingos, had called for sodomy and homosexuality to be decriminalised and are in favour of LGBT rights. In 2023, the Supreme Court ruled that same-sex marriages legally made outside of Namibia must be recognized by the government. In 2024 the Windhoek High Court ruled the ban on homosexual acts between men to be unconstitutional.

In November 2018, it was reported that 32% of women aged 15–49 experienced violence and domestic abuse from their spouses/partners and 29.5% of men believe that physical abuse towards their wife/partner is acceptable, although this is typically in rural areas. The Namibian constitution guarantees the rights, freedoms and equal treatment of women in Namibia and SWAPO, the ruling party in Namibia, has adopted a &quot;zebra system&quot;, which ensures a fair balance of both genders in government and equal representation of women in the Namibian government.

==Economy==


The trans-African automobile route – the Tripoli-Cape Town Highway and the Trans-Kalahari Corridor pass through Namibia. Namibia&#x27;s economy is tied closely to South Africa&#x27;s due to their shared history. In Q3 2023, the largest economic sectors were mining (18.0% of GDP), public administration (12.9%), manufacturing (10.1%), and education (9.2%).

Namibia has a highly developed banking and financial services sector with modern infrastructures, such as online banking and cellphone banking. The Bank of Namibia (BoN) is the central bank of Namibia responsible for performing all other functions ordinarily performed by a central bank. There are five BoN authorised commercial banks in Namibia: Bank Windhoek, First National Bank, Nedbank, Standard Bank and Small and Medium Enterprises Bank. Namibia&#x27;s economy is characterised by a divide between the formal and the informal economies, which is in part aggravated by the legacy of apartheid spatial planning.

The country&#x27;s unemployment rate was 33.4% in 2018, with a labour force of 1,090,153. As of 2023, the country has a youth unemployment rate of 38.4%, one of the highest in the world. However, Namibia has a high percentage of skilled labour relative to SADC countries and have relatively low unemployment rates for skilled workers. To fight high unemployment, particularly amongst the youth, the government approved the introduction of an Internship Tax Incentive Programme aimed at incentivising employers to enroll more interns by providing an additional corporate tax deduction. The total financial implication for the Government is estimated at N$126 million.

Poverty and inequality remain significant in the country. 40.9% of the population is affected by multidimensional poverty while an additional 19.2 percent is classified as vulnerable to multidimensional poverty. Income disparity in the country remains one of the world&#x27;s highest with a Gini coefficient of 59.1 in 2015.

In 2004 a labour act was passed to protect people from job discrimination stemming from pregnancy and HIV/AIDS status. In early 2010 the Government tender board announced that &quot;henceforth 100 per cent of all unskilled and semi-skilled labour must be sourced, without exception, from within Namibia&quot;.

In 2013, global business and financial news provider Bloomberg named Namibia the top emerging market economy in Africa and the 13th best in the world. Only four African countries made the Top 20 Emerging Markets list in the March 2013 issue of Bloomberg Markets magazine, and Namibia was rated ahead of Morocco (19th), South Africa (15th), and Zambia (14th). Worldwide, Namibia also fared better than Hungary, Brazil, and Mexico. Bloomberg Markets magazine ranked the top 20 based on more than a dozen criteria. The data came from Bloomberg&#x27;s own financial-market statistics, IMF forecasts and the World Bank. The countries were also rated on areas of particular interest to foreign investors: the ease of doing business, the perceived level of corruption and economic freedom. To attract foreign investment, the government has made improvement in reducing red tape resulted from excessive government regulations, making Namibia one of the least bureaucratic places to do business in the region. Facilitation payments are occasionally demanded by customs due to cumbersome and costly customs procedures. Namibia is also classified as an Upper Middle Income country by the World Bank, and ranks 87th out of 185 economies in terms of ease of doing business.

The cost of living in Namibia is slightly above average because most goods, including cereals, need to be imported. Its capital city, Windhoek, is the 150th most expensive place in the world for expatriates to live.

Taxation in Namibia includes personal income tax, which is applicable to the total taxable income of an individual. All individuals are taxed at progressive marginal rates over a series of income brackets. Tax in Namibia is less than South African tax at monthly incomes greater than N$58,754, with the country&#x27;s effective tax rates typically plateauing at a maximum of 30.8% while South Africa&#x27;s plateaus at 37.4%. This makes it favourable for wealthy South Africans to migrate to Namibia given their similar cost of living, cultures and socio-economic factors. In 2024, the government announced in its FY 2024/25 Budget Statement that personal income tax would be lowered, increasing the minimum taxable income from N$50,000 to N$100,000 and reducing taxable income in higher brackets as well.

The value-added tax (VAT) is applicable to most of the commodities and services, except for staple goods such as bread.
Despite the remote nature of much of the country, Namibia has seaports, airports, highways, well-maintained roads, infrastructure and railways (narrow-gauge). It is an important regional transportation hub for its seaports and trade with landlocked neighbouring countries. The Central Plateau already serves as a transportation corridor from the more densely populated north to South Africa, the source of four-fifths of Namibia&#x27;s imports.

===Agriculture===
About half of the population depends on agriculture (largely subsistence agriculture) for its livelihood, but Namibia must still import some of its food. Although per capita GDP is five times the per capita GDP of Africa&#x27;s poorest countries, the majority of Namibia&#x27;s people live in rural areas and have a subsistence way of life. Namibia has one of the highest rates of income inequality in the world, due in part to the fact that there is an urban economy and a more rural cashless economy. The inequality figures thus take into account people who do not actually rely on the formal economy for their survival. Although arable land accounts for &lt;1% of Namibia, (about .97%), nearly half of the population is employed in agriculture.

About 4,000 commercial farmers own almost half of Namibia&#x27;s arable land. The United Kingdom offered about $180,000 in 2004 to help finance Namibia&#x27;s land reform process, as Namibia plans to start expropriating land from white farmers to resettle landless black Namibians. Germany has offered €1.1bn in 2021 over 30 years in reparations for the genocides in the early 20th century but the money will go towards infrastructure, healthcare and training programmes not land reform.

An agreement has been reached on the privatisation of several more enterprises in coming years, with hopes that this will stimulate much needed foreign investment, but reinvestment of environmentally derived capital has hobbled Namibian per capita income. One of the fastest growing areas of economic development in Namibia is the growth of wildlife conservancies.

===Mining and electricity===
Providing 25% of Namibia&#x27;s revenue, mining is the single most important contributor to the economy. Namibia is the fourth largest exporter of non-fuel minerals in Africa and was the world&#x27;s fourth largest producer of uranium. There have been significant investment in uranium mining and Namibia planned to become the largest exporter of uranium by 2015. However, as of 2019 Namibia continued to produce 750 tons of uranium annually making it a smaller than average exporter in the competitive world market. Rich alluvial diamond deposits make Namibia a primary source for gem-quality diamonds. While Namibia is known predominantly for its gem diamond and uranium deposits, a number of other minerals are extracted industrially such as lead, tungsten, gold, tin, fluorspar, manganese, marble, copper and zinc. Country&#x27;s gold production in 2015 is 6 metric tons. There are offshore gas deposits in the Atlantic Ocean that are planned to be extracted in the future. According to &quot;The Diamond Investigation&quot;, a book about the global diamond market, from 1978, De Beers, the largest diamond company, bought most of the Namibian diamonds, and would continue to do so, because &quot;whatever government eventually comes to power they will need this revenue to survive&quot;.

Although much of the world&#x27;s diamond supply comes from what have been called African blood diamonds, Namibia has managed to develop a diamond mining industry largely free of the kinds of conflict, extortion, and murder that have plagued many other African nations with diamond mines. This has been attributed to political dynamics, economic institutions, grievances, political geography, and the effects of neighbourhoods, and is the result of a joint agreement between the government and De Beers that has led to a taxable base, strengthening state institutions.

Estimates updated in 2022 suggest that two exploration wells in the offshore Orange Basin could hold 2 and 3 billion barrels of oil, respectively. The expected revenue could transform Namibia&#x27;s domestic economy and facilitate sustainable development goals.

Domestic supply voltage is 220 V AC. Electricity is generated mainly by thermal and hydroelectric power plants. Non-conventional methods of electricity generation also play some role. Encouraged by the rich uranium deposits, in 2010 the Namibian government planned to erect its first nuclear power station by 2018. Uranium enrichment was also envisaged to take place locally.

===Tourism===
Tourism is a major contributor (14.5%) to Namibia&#x27;s GDP, creating tens of thousands of jobs (18.2% of all employment) directly or indirectly and servicing over a million tourists per year. The country is a prime destination in Africa and is known for ecotourism, which features Namibia&#x27;s extensive wildlife.

There are many lodges and reserves to accommodate ecotourists. Sport and trophy hunting is also a large and growing component of the Namibian economy, accounting for 14% of total tourism in the year 2000, or 19.6 million U.S. dollars, with Namibia boasting numerous species sought after by international sport hunters.

In addition, extreme sports such as sandboarding, skydiving and 4x4ing have become popular, and many cities have companies that provide tours. The most visited places include the capital city of Windhoek, Caprivi Strip, Fish River Canyon, Sossusvlei, the Skeleton Coast Park, Sesriem, Etosha Pan and the coastal towns of Swakopmund, Walvis Bay and Lüderitz.

Windhoek plays a very important role in Namibia&#x27;s tourism due to its central location and close proximity to Hosea Kutako International Airport. According to The Namibia Tourism Exit Survey, which was produced by the Millennium Challenge Corporation for the Namibian Directorate of Tourism, 56% of all tourists visiting Namibia in 2012–13 visited Windhoek. Many of Namibia&#x27;s tourism related parastatals and governing bodies such as Namibia Wildlife Resorts and the Namibia Tourism Board as well as Namibia&#x27;s tourism-related trade associations such as the Hospitality Association of Namibia are headquartered in Windhoek. There are also a number of notable hotels in Windhoek, such as Windhoek Country Club Resort, and some international hotel chains, such as Hilton Hotels and Resorts.

Namibia&#x27;s primary tourism related governing body, the Namibia Tourism Board (NTB), was established by an Act of Parliament: the &quot;Namibia Tourism Board Act, 2000&quot; (Act 21 of 2000). Its primary objectives are to regulate the tourism industry and to market Namibia as a tourist destination. There are also a number of trade associations that represent the tourism sector in Namibia, such as the Federation of Namibia Tourism Associations (the umbrella body for all tourism associations in Namibia), the Hospitality Association of Namibia, the Association of Namibian Travel Agents, Car Rental Association of Namibia and the Tour and Safari Association of Namibia.

===Water supply and sanitation===

The only bulk water supplier in Namibia is NamWater, which sells it to the respective municipalities which in turn deliver it through their reticulation networks. In rural areas, the directorate of Rural Water Supply in the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform is in charge of drinking water supply.

The UN evaluated in 2011 that Namibia has improved its water access network significantly since independence in 1990. A large part of the population can not, however, make use of these resources due to the prohibitively high consumption cost and the long distance between residences and water points in rural areas. As a result, many Namibians prefer the traditional wells over the available water points far away.

Compared to the efforts made to improve access to safe water, Namibia is lagging behind in the provision of adequate sanitation. This includes 298 schools that have no toilet facilities. Over 50% of child deaths are related to lack of water, sanitation, or hygiene; 23% are due to diarrhea alone. The UN has identified a &quot;sanitation crisis&quot; in the country.

Apart from residences for upper and middle class households, sanitation is insufficient in most residential areas. Private flush toilets are too expensive for virtually all residents in townships due to their water consumption and installation cost. As a result, access to improved sanitation has not increased much since independence: in Namibia&#x27;s rural areas 13% of the population had more than basic sanitation, up from 8% in 1990. Many of Namibia&#x27;s inhabitants have to resort to &quot;flying toilets&quot;, plastic bags to defecate into, which after use are flung into the bush. The use of open areas close to residential land for urination and defecation is very common and has been identified as a major health hazard.

== Demographics ==
Namibia has the second-lowest population density of any sovereign country, after Mongolia, as well as having the lowest population density of any sovereign country with a coastline. In 2017 there were on average 3.08 people per km2. The total fertility rate in 2015 was 3.47 children per woman according to the UN which is lower than the average TFR in sub-Saharan Africa of 4.7.

Namibia conducts a census every ten years. After independence the first Population and Housing Census was carried out in 1991; further rounds followed in 2001, 2011, and 2023 (delayed two years due to the COVID-19 pandemic and financial constraints). The data collection method is to count every person resident in Namibia on the census reference night, wherever they happen to be. This is called the &quot;de facto&quot; method. For enumeration purposes the country is demarcated into 4,042 &quot;enumeration areas&quot;. These areas do not overlap with constituency boundaries to get reliable data for election purposes as well.

The 2011 Population and Housing Census counted 2,113,077 inhabitants. Between 2001 and 2011 the annual population growth was 1.4%, down from 2.6% in the previous ten-year period. In 2023, the Namibia Statistics Agency conducted another census, which counted 3,022,401 inhabitants.

===Ethnic groups===

Namibia has many ethnic groups. The majority of the Namibian population is made of Bantu and Khoisan peoples. The Bantu groups include the Ovambo, Herero, Kavango, Lozi, Tswana and Himba peoples. The Khoisan groups encompass the Damara, Nama, and San peoples. There is also a mixed ancestry population consisting of Coloureds (2.1%) and Basters (1.5%). There is a substantial Chinese minority in Namibia; it stood at 40,000 in 2006.

Whites (being mainly of Afrikaner, German, British and Portuguese origin) make up 1.8% of the population. Although their proportion of the population decreased after independence due to emigration and lower birth rates, they still form the second-largest population of European ancestry, both in terms of percentage and actual numbers, in Sub-Saharan Africa (after South Africa). The majority of Namibian whites and nearly all those who are of mixed race speak Afrikaans and share similar origins, culture, and religion as the white and coloured populations of South Africa. A large minority of whites (around 30,000) trace their family origins back to the German settlers who colonised Namibia prior to the South African invasion during the First World War, and they maintain German cultural and educational institutions. Nearly all Portuguese settlers came to the country from the former Portuguese colony of Angola. The 1960 census reported 526,004 persons in what was then South West Africa, including 73,464 whites (14%).

===Education===


Namibia has free education for both primary and secondary education levels. Grades 1–7 are primary level, grades 8–12 are secondary. In 1998, there were 400,325 Namibian students in primary school and 115,237 students in secondary schools. The pupil-teacher ratio in 1999 was estimated at 32:1, with about 8% of the GDP being spent on education. Curriculum development, educational research, and professional development of teachers is centrally organised by the National Institute for Educational Development (NIED) in Okahandja. Among sub-Saharan African countries, Namibia has one of the highest literacy rates. According to CIA World Factbook, as of 2018 91.5% of the population age 15 and over can read and write.

Most schools in Namibia are state-run, but there are some private schools, which are also part of the country&#x27;s education system. There are four teacher training universities, three colleges of agriculture, a police training college, and three universities: University of Namibia (UNAM), International University of Management (IUM) and Namibia University of Science and Technology (NUST). Namibia was ranked 102nd in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

The 2018 Namibia Labour Force Survey indicates that 99,536 people within the working age population had tertiary education of any level (6.6% of the working age population), while 21,922 (1.5% of the working age population) of these had postgraduate education.

The following table shows the 2018 Namibia Labour Force Survey employment statistics by education. Employment rates in Namibia generally increase with education status. A high school education typically ensures greater employment rates than those with no education or those with primary or junior secondary education as their highest achievement. Namibians with a university certificate, diploma or degree have a significantly higher employment rate at 76.4%, while postgraduate education holders are most likely to be employed with an employment rate of 83.8% in 2018.
=== Religion ===

The Christian community makes up 80%–90% of the population of Namibia, with at least 75% being Protestant, of which at least 50% are Lutheran. Lutherans are the largest religious group, a legacy of the German and Finnish missionary work during the country&#x27;s colonial times. 10%–20% of the population hold indigenous beliefs.

Missionary activities during the second half of the 19th century resulted in many Namibians converting to Christianity. Today most Christians are Lutheran, but there also are Roman Catholic, Methodist, Anglican, African Methodist Episcopal, and Dutch Reformed.

Islam in Namibia is subscribed to by about 9,000 people, many of them Nama. Namibia is home to a small Jewish community of about 100 people.

Groups such as the Latter-day Saints and Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses are also present in the country.

===Languages===
The majority of Namibians can speak and understand English and Afrikaans. Up to 1990, English, German, and Afrikaans were official languages. Long before Namibia&#x27;s independence from South Africa, SWAPO was of the opinion that the country should become officially monolingual, choosing this approach in contrast to that of its neighbour South Africa (which granted all 12 of its major languages official status), which it saw as &quot;a deliberate policy of ethnolinguistic fragmentation.&quot; Consequently, SWAPO instituted English as Namibia&#x27;s sole official language, though only 2.3% of the population speaks it as a home language. Its implementation is focused on the civil service, education and the broadcasting system, especially the state broadcaster NBC. Some other languages have received semi-official recognition by being allowed as medium of instruction in primary schools. Private schools are expected to follow the same policy as state schools, and &quot;English language&quot; is a compulsory subject. Some critics argue that, as in other postcolonial African societies, the push for monolingual instruction and policy has resulted in a high rate of school drop-outs and of individuals whose academic competence in any language is low.

According to the latest statistical data gathered in the most recent survey (2016), the linguistic landscape in the region has witnessed notable shifts since the 2011 census. Oshiwambo remains the predominant language, claiming the position of the most spoken language for a significant 49.7% of households, surpassing its previous standing. KhoeKhoegowab follows at 11.0%, while the Kavango Languages, with a share of 10.4%, have also experienced a noteworthy increase. Afrikaans, identified as the country&#x27;s &quot;lingua franca&quot;, maintains a considerable presence at 9.4%. The Herero Languages account for 9.2%, indicating a slight adjustment from the previous census. Silozi has seen a shift to 4.9%, and English, utilized primarily as a second language, stands at 2.3%. Other Languages collectively represent 1.0%, with San Languages at 0.7%, and German at 0.6%. The diversity of languages in the region is further demonstrated by the presence of Other African Languages at 0.5%, Setswana at 0.3%, and Other European Languages at 0.1%.

Note: (1) Herero languages include: Otjiherero, Otjimbanderu, Oruzemba, Otjizimba, Otjihakahona, Otjindongona and Otjitjavikwa

(2) Kavango languages include:  Rukwangali, Rushambyu, Rugciriku, Thimbukushu, Rumanyo and Rukavango

Most of the white population speaks English, Afrikaans or German. More than a century after the end of the German colonial era, German continues to play a role as a commercial language. As a home language, Afrikaans is spoken by 60% of the white community, German by 32%, English by 7% and Portuguese by 4–5%. Geographical proximity to Portuguese-speaking Angola explains the relatively high number of Portuguese speakers; in 2011 these were estimated to number 100,000.

===Health===

Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 64 years in 2017 – among the lowest in the world.

Namibia launched a National Health Extension Programme in 2012 deployment 1,800 (2015) of a total ceiling of 4,800 health extension workers trained for six months in community health activities including first aid, health promotion for disease prevention, nutritional assessment and counseling, water sanitation and hygiene practices, HIV testing and community-based antiretroviral treatment.

Namibia faces a non-communicable disease burden. The Demographic and Health Survey (2013) summarises findings on elevated blood pressure, hypertension, diabetes, and obesity:
* Among eligible respondents age 35–64, 44% of women and 45% of men have elevated blood pressure or are currently taking medicine to lower their blood pressure.
* 49% of women and 61% of men are not aware that they have elevated blood pressure.
* 43% of women and 34% of men with hypertension are taking medication for their condition.
* Only 29% of women and 20% of men with hypertension are taking medication and have their blood pressure under control.
* 6% of women and 7% of men are diabetic; that is, they have elevated fasting plasma glucose values or report that they are taking diabetes medication. An additional 7% of women and 6% of men are prediabetic.
* 67% of women and 74% of men with diabetes are taking medication to lower their blood glucose.
* Women and men with a higher-than-normal body mass index (25.0 or higher) are more likely to have elevated blood pressure and elevated fasting blood glucose.
The HIV epidemic remains a public health issue in Namibia despite significant achievements made by the Ministry of Health and Social Services to expand HIV treatment services. In 2001, there were an estimated 210,000 people living with HIV/AIDS, and the estimated death toll in 2003 was 16,000. According to the 2011 UNAIDS Report, the epidemic in Namibia &quot;appears to be leveling off.&quot; As the HIV/AIDS epidemic has reduced the working-aged population, the number of orphans has increased. It falls to the government to provide education, food, shelter and clothing for these orphans. A Demographic and Health Survey with an HIV biomarker was completed in 2013 and served as the fourth comprehensive, national-level population and health survey conducted in Namibia as part of the global Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) programme. The DHS observed important characteristics associated to the HIV epidemic:
* Overall, 26 percent of men age 15–49 and 32 percent of those age 50–64 have been circumcised. HIV prevalence for men age 15–49 is lower among circumcised (8.0 percent) than among uncircumcised men (11.9 percent). The pattern of lower HIV prevalence among circumcised than uncircumcised men is observed across most background characteristics. For each age group, circumcised men have lower HIV prevalence than those who are not circumcised; the difference is especially pronounced for men age 35–39 and 45–49 (11.7 percentage points each). The difference in HIV prevalence between uncircumcised and circumcised men is larger among urban than rural men (5.2 percentage points versus 2.1 percentage points).
* HIV prevalence among respondents age 15–49 is 16.9 percent for women and 10.9 percent for men. HIV prevalence rates among women and men age 50–64 are similar (16.7 percent and 16.0 percent, respectively).
* HIV prevalence peaks in the 35–39 age group for both women and men (30.9 percent and 22.6 percent, respectively). It is lowest among respondents age 15–24 (2.5–6.4 percent for women and 2.0–3.4 percent for men).
* Among respondents age 15–49, HIV prevalence is highest for women and men in Zambezi (30.9 percent and 15.9 percent, respectively) and lowest for women in Omaheke (6.9 percent) and men in Ohangwena (6.6 percent).
* In 76.4 percent of the 1,007 cohabiting couples who were tested for HIV in the 2013 NDHS, both partners were HIV negative; in 10.1 percent of the couples, both partners were HIV positive; and 13.5 percent of the couples were discordant (that is, one partner was infected with HIV and the other was not).
As of 2015, the Ministry of Health and Social Services and UNAIDS produced a Progress Report in which UNAIDS projected HIV prevalence among 15–49-year-olds at 13.3% [12.2–14.5%] and an estimated 210,000 [200,000–230,000] living with HIV.

The malaria problem seems to be compounded by the AIDS epidemic. Research has shown that in Namibia the risk of contracting malaria is 14.5% greater if a person is also infected with HIV. The risk of death from malaria is also raised by approximately 50% with a concurrent HIV infection. The country had only 598 physicians in 2002.

==Culture==
Namibian culture is similar to South African culture due to their tied history and family nationalities. Few Namibians express interest in permanently settling in other countries; they prefer the safety of their homeland, have a strong national identity, and enjoy a well-supplied retail sector. Namibians are typically very social and are consistently among the highest alcohol consumption rates per capita, and ranked first in Africa for beer consumption per capita.

===Sport===

The most popular sport in Namibia is association football. The Namibia national football team qualified for the 1998, 2008, 2019, and 2023 editions of the Africa Cup of Nations, but has yet to qualify for the World Cup. Some notable players include Derby County right-back Ryan Nyambe, Mamelodi Sundowns forward Peter Shalulile, and retired footballer Collin Benjamin.

The most successful national team is the Namibian rugby team, having competed in the last seven World Cups. Namibia were participants in the 1999, 2003, 2007, 2011, 2015, 2019, and most recent 2023 Rugby World Cup. Cricket in Namibia is also popular, with the national side having qualified for 2003 Cricket World Cup, 2021 ICC T20 World Cup and 2022 ICC Men&#x27;s T20 World Cup. In December 2017, Namibia Cricket reached the final of the Cricket South Africa (CSA) Provincial One Day Challenge for the first time. In February 2018 Namibia hosted the ICC World Cricket League Division 2 with Namibia, Kenya, UAE, Nepal, Canada and Oman to compete for the final two ICC Cricket World Cup Qualifier positions in Zimbabwe. Namibia also qualified the qualifiers of ICC T20 World Cup 2021 and entered the super 12 club.

The most famous athlete from Namibia is Frankie Fredericks, sprinter in the 100 and 200 m events. He won four Olympic silver medals (1992, 1996) and also has medals from several World Athletics Championships. Golfer Trevor Dodds won the Greater Greensboro Open in 1998, one of 15 tournaments in his career. He achieved a career-high world ranking of 78th in 1998. Professional cyclist and Namibian Road Race champion Dan Craven represented Namibia at the 2016 Summer Olympics in both the road race and individual time trial. Boxer Julius Indongo is the unified WBA, IBF, and IBO world champion in the Light welterweight division. Another famous athlete from Namibia is ex-professional rugby player Jacques Burger. Burger played for Saracens and Aurillac in Europe, as well as gaining 41 caps for the national team.

===Media===

Compared to neighbouring countries, Namibia has a large degree of media freedom. Over the past years, the country usually ranked in the upper quarter of the Press Freedom Index of Reporters without Borders, reaching position 21 in 2010, being on par with Canada and the best-positioned African country. The African Media Barometer shows similarly positive results. However, as in other countries, there is still mentionable influence of representatives of state and economy on media in Namibia. In 2009, Namibia dropped to position 36 on the Press Freedom Index. In 2013, it was 19th, 22nd in 2014 and 23rd in 2019, meaning that it is currently the highest ranked African country in terms of press freedom.

Although Namibia&#x27;s population is fairly small, the country has a diverse choice of media; two TV stations, 19 radio stations (without counting community stations), 5 daily newspapers, several weeklies and special publications compete for the attention of the audience. Additionally, a mentionable amount of foreign media, especially South African, is available. Online media are mostly based on print publication contents. Namibia has a state-owned Press Agency, called NAMPA. Overall 300 journalists work in the country.

The first newspaper in Namibia was the German-language &quot;Windhoeker Anzeiger&quot;, founded 1898. During German rule, the newspapers mainly reflected the living reality and the view of the white German-speaking minority. The black majority was ignored or depicted as a threat. During South African rule, the white bias continued, with mentionable influence of the Pretoria government on the South West African media system. Independent newspapers were seen as a menace to the existing order, and critical journalists were often threatened.

Current daily newspapers are the private publications &quot;The Namibian&quot; (English and other languages), &quot;Die Republikein&quot; (Afrikaans), &quot;Allgemeine Zeitung&quot; (German) and &quot;Namibian Sun&quot; (English) as well as the state-owned &quot;New Era&quot; (predominantly English). Except for the largest newspaper, &quot;The Namibian&quot;, which is owned by a trust, the other mentioned private newspapers are part of Democratic Media Holdings. Other mentionable newspapers are the tabloid &quot;Informanté&quot; owned by TrustCo, the weekly &quot;Windhoek Observer&quot;, the weekly &quot;Namibia Economist&quot;, as well as the regional &quot;Namib Times&quot;. Current affairs magazines include &quot;Insight Namibia&quot;, &quot;Vision2030 Focus magazine&quot; and &quot;Prime FOCUS&quot;. The &quot;Sister Namibia&quot; magazine stands out as the longest running NGO magazine in Namibia, while &quot;Namibia Sport&quot; is the only national sport magazine. Furthermore, the print market is complemented with party publications, student newspapers and PR publications.

Radio was introduced in 1969, TV in 1981. The broadcasting sector today is dominated by the state-run Namibian Broadcasting Corporation (NBC). The public broadcaster offers a TV station as well as a &quot;National Radio&quot; in English and nine language services in locally spoken languages. The nine private radio stations in the country are mainly English-language channels, except for Radio Omulunga (Oshiwambo) and Kosmos 94.1 (Afrikaans).
Privately held One Africa TV has competed with NBC since the 2000s.

Media and journalists in Namibia are represented by the Namibian chapter of the Media Institute of Southern Africa and the Editors&#x27; Forum of Namibia. An independent media ombudsman was appointed in 2009 to prevent a state-controlled media council.

=== Art ===
The National Art Gallery of Namibia houses a permanent exhibition of Namibian, African and European Art and shows temporary exhibitions of local artists. In 2022 Namibia took part in the Venice Biennale (often referred to as the &quot;Olympics of Arts&quot;) for the first time. It competed in the 59th Edition with the exhibition &quot;A Bridge to the Desert&quot; featuring the &quot;Lone Stone Men&quot; project by Renn (Namibian artist).

==See also==
*Index of Namibia-related articles
*Outline of Namibia

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Sources==
* 
* Christy, S. A. (2007). &quot;Namibian Travel Photography&quot;.
* Horn, N/Bösl, A (eds.). &quot;Human rights and the rule of law in Namibia&quot;, Macmillan Namibia, 2008.
* Horn, N/Bösl, A (eds.). &quot;The independence of the judiciary in Namibia&quot;, Macmillan Namibia, 2008.
* KAS Factbook Namibia, Facts and figures about the status and development of Namibia, Ed. Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung e.V.
* . &quot;La Namibie indépendante. Les coûts d&#x27;une décolonisation retardée&quot;, Paris: L&#x27;Harmattan, 1991.
* &quot;World Almanac&quot;. 2004. New York, NY: World Almanac Books.
==External links==


* Namibia . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Namibia from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot; (archived 3 March 2016)
* Key Development Forecasts for Namibia from International Futures
* Republic of Namibia Government Portal (archived 3 December 2012)
*Chief of State and Cabinet Members (archived 10 December 2008)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="0" end="7" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="27" end="46" title="Namibia" label="Republic of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="82" end="97" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="123" end="137" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="151" end="157" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="162" end="168" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="183" end="191" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="208" end="220" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15664" start="269" end="280" title="quadripoint" label="quadripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="282" end="290" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="343" end="356" title="Zambezi" label="Zambezi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305536" start="362" end="371" title="Kazungula" label="Kazungula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="424" end="432" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="469" end="487" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="536" end="540" title="Khoekhoe" label="Khoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="542" end="545" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158214" start="547" end="553" title="Damara people" label="Damara"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="558" end="569" title="Nama people" label="Nama people"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="596" end="607" title="immigration" label="immigrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="608" end="621" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251" start="645" end="660" title="Bantu expansion" label="Bantu expansion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="676" end="682" title="Ovambo people#History" label="Ovambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092216" start="708" end="715" title="Ondonga" label="Ondonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903544" start="720" end="730" title="Oukwanyama" label="Oukwanyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="746" end="759" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="831" end="855" title="German South West Africa" label="German South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170088" start="932" end="938" title="Herero people" label="Herero"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="943" end="947" title="Nama people" label="Nama"/>
<link wikidata="Q312492" start="973" end="987" title="Herero and Namaqua genocide" label="first genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1038" end="1053" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="1076" end="1088" title="Union of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1137" end="1154" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="1155" end="1163" title="League of Nations mandate" label="mandated"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="1230" end="1244" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="1299" end="1308" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="1335" end="1352" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1450" end="1464" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="1601" end="1645" title="South West Africa People&amp;#x27;s Organisation" label="South West Africa People&amp;#x27;s Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="1789" end="1813" title="South African Border War" label="South African Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="1824" end="1834" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q187679" start="1843" end="1858" title="Penguin Islands" label="Penguin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="1930" end="1953" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q569431" start="1968" end="1975" title="Tourism in Namibia" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q819413" start="1984" end="1999" title="Mining in Namibia" label="mining industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q328381" start="2037" end="2044" title="Uranium mining" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="2046" end="2050" title="Gold mining" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048939" start="2052" end="2058" title="Silver mining" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q428855" start="2063" end="2073" title="base metal" label="base metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480250" start="2099" end="2106" title="Economy of Namibia" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="2183" end="2186" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082801" start="2218" end="2225" title="Poverty in Namibia" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415386" start="2230" end="2240" title="Wealth inequality" label="inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952348" start="2315" end="2339" title="Multidimensional Poverty Index" label="multidimensional poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q96382144" start="2390" end="2406" title="informal housing" label="informal housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="2408" end="2424" title="Income disparity" label="Income disparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="2482" end="2498" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="2581" end="2604" title="List of countries and territories by population density" label="most sparsely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2767" end="2781" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="2787" end="2825" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="2831" end="2844" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2853" end="2876" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="2951" end="2956" title="Namib" label="Namib"/>
<link wikidata="Q13301" start="3037" end="3041" title="nama language" label="Nama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224023" start="3106" end="3121" title="Mburumba Kerina" label="Mburumba Kerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="3254" end="3278" title="German South-West Africa" label="German South-West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="3328" end="3345" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="3530" end="3533" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158214" start="3535" end="3541" title="Damara people" label="Damara"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="3547" end="3551" title="Nama people" label="Nama"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="3581" end="3588" title="Khoisan" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="3629" end="3634" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="3647" end="3655" title="Khoikhoi" label="Khoikhoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3694" end="3709" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="3749" end="3761" title="Bantu people" label="Bantu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251" start="3789" end="3804" title="Bantu expansion" label="Bantu expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419240" start="3862" end="3875" title="Oorlam people" label="Oorlam people"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="3905" end="3917" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q170088" start="4263" end="4272" title="OvaHerero people" label="OvaHerero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000609" start="4286" end="4293" title="Gobabis" label="Gobabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q597491" start="4299" end="4308" title="Okahandja" label="Okahandja"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="4421" end="4434" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="4553" end="4570" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q187679" start="4643" end="4658" title="Penguin Islands" label="Penguin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="4701" end="4722" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q313060" start="4836" end="4845" title="Diogo Cão" label="Diogo Cão"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377" start="4858" end="4873" title="Bartolomeu Dias" label="Bartolomeu Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="4962" end="4980" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="5141" end="5148" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="5213" end="5230" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137067" start="5241" end="5247" title="Ovambo people" label="Ovambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q648707" start="5252" end="5266" title="Kavango people" label="Kavango people"/>
<link wikidata="Q316886" start="5294" end="5307" title="Dorsland Trek" label="Dorsland Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="5351" end="5360" title="South African Republic" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="5506" end="5523" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="5585" end="5609" title="German South West Africa" label="German South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931878" start="5651" end="5670" title="Palgrave Commission" label="Palgrave Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q97163433" start="5872" end="5891" title="1890s African rinderpest epizootic" label="rinderpest epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141795" start="6040" end="6046" title="Cordon sanitaire (medicine)" label="cordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521292" start="6066" end="6074" title="Red Line (Namibia)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q170088" start="6182" end="6188" title="Herero people" label="Herero"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="6197" end="6204" title="Nama people" label="Namaqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q16512674" start="6205" end="6217" title="Herero Wars" label="took up arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589263" start="6308" end="6318" title="Government of Namibia" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q312492" start="6374" end="6404" title="Herero and Namaqua genocide" label="OvaHerero and Namaqua genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="6825" end="6834" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="7015" end="7025" title="Bantustans" label="Bantustans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="7125" end="7129" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="7134" end="7147" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q313827" start="7508" end="7525" title="Government of Germany" label="German government"/>
<link wikidata="Q159397" start="7699" end="7710" title="Louis Botha" label="Louis Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q704886" start="7711" end="7733" title="South West Africa campaign" label="occupied the territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="7809" end="7829" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="7914" end="7939" title="League of Nations mandate" label="League of Nations mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504861" start="8536" end="8576" title="United Nations Conference on International Organization" label="Conference on International Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8639" end="8653" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="8729" end="8751" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q219693" start="9111" end="9130" title="United Nations Trusteeship Council" label="Trusteeship Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="9550" end="9580" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="9719" end="9728" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969688" start="9884" end="9893" title="pass laws" label="pass laws"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10088" end="10099" title="Police Zone (South West Africa)" label="Police Zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10282" end="10298" title="Bantustan#Bantustans in South West Africa" label="tribal homelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146918" start="10356" end="10380" title="decolonisation of Africa" label="decolonisation of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560963" start="10580" end="10613" title="South West African National Union" label="South West African National Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="10630" end="10675" title="South West African People&amp;#x27;s Organisation" label="South West African People&amp;#x27;s Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="11023" end="11047" title="South African Border War" label="South African Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060844" start="11088" end="11130" title="1971–72 Namibian contract workers strike" label="general strike against the contract system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165607" start="11222" end="11226" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia" label="PLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272307" start="11798" end="11844" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 269" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 269"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165607" start="12022" end="12062" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12118" end="12126" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843235" start="13097" end="13114" title="Tripartite Accord (Angola)" label="Tripartite Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004902" start="13409" end="13451" title="United Nations Transition Assistance Group" label="United Nations Transition Assistance Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053528" start="14214" end="14237" title="Namibian parliamentary election, 1989" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="14251" end="14270" title="universal franchise" label="universal franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q933054" start="14318" end="14344" title="Election monitoring" label="foreign election observers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14370" end="14392" title="Election#Non-democratic elections" label="free and fair election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814481" start="14432" end="14452" title="Members of the Constituent Assembly of Namibia" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q154104" start="14973" end="14983" title="Sam Nujoma" label="Sam Nujoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q647198" start="15010" end="15030" title="President of Namibia" label="President of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="15057" end="15071" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="15472" end="15492" title="Multiparty democracy" label="Multiparty democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142770" start="15558" end="15576" title="Elections in Namibia" label="national elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="15696" end="15701" title="SWAPO" label="SWAPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q154104" start="15795" end="15801" title="Sam Nujoma" label="Nujoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q57469" start="15819" end="15838" title="Hifikepunye Pohamba" label="Hifikepunye Pohamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q514711" start="16156" end="16177" title="Namibia Defence Force" label="Namibia Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="16208" end="16240" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="16254" end="16292" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="16396" end="16409" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034966" start="16415" end="16431" title="Caprivi conflict" label="Caprivi conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496137" start="16453" end="16476" title="Caprivi Liberation Army" label="Caprivi Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="16486" end="16491" title="Rebellion" label="rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186588" start="16505" end="16520" title="Mishake Muyongo" label="Mishake Muyongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q754791" start="16596" end="16609" title="Twyfelfontein" label="Twyfelfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="16638" end="16664" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568274" start="16802" end="16814" title="Hage Geingob" label="Hage Geingob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262662" start="16855" end="16877" title="2014 Namibian general election" label="presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q57469" start="16930" end="16949" title="Hifikepunye Pohamba" label="Hifikepunye Pohamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q61910908" start="17073" end="17083" title="2019 Namibian general election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q287100" start="17228" end="17242" title="Nangolo Mbumba" label="Nangolo Mbumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q527020" start="17411" end="17433" title="Netumbo Nandi-Ndaitwah" label="Netumbo Nandi-Ndaitwah"/>
<link wikidata="Q84035613" start="17466" end="17480" title="2024 Namibian general election" label="2024 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391503" start="17634" end="17637" title="17th parallel south" label="17°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390447" start="17642" end="17646" title="29th parallel south" label="29°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703483" start="17694" end="17697" title="11th meridian east" label="11°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137519" start="17702" end="17706" title="26th meridian east" label="26°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="17736" end="17741" title="Namib" label="Namib"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="17750" end="17758" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari"/>
<link wikidata="Q461335" start="17933" end="17951" title="Abiotic component" label="abiotic conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q224934" start="18057" end="18073" title="Great Escarpment, Southern Africa" label="Great Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q779758" start="18079" end="18087" title="Bushveld" label="Bushveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135237" start="18177" end="18191" title="Skeleton Coast" label="Skeleton Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="18272" end="18284" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q897834" start="18399" end="18409" title="Königstein, Namibia" label="Königstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889166" start="18630" end="18639" title="Kaokoveld" label="Kaokoveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655033" start="19735" end="19750" title="Succulent Karoo" label="Succulent Karoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="19812" end="19819" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189939" start="19866" end="19876" title="succulents" label="succulents"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="20494" end="20507" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q224934" start="21104" end="21114" title="Great Escarpment, Southern Africa" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q479312" start="21263" end="21270" title="Warmbad, Namibia" label="Warmbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="21493" end="21512" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="21754" end="21758" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135237" start="21794" end="21808" title="Skeleton Coast" label="coastal desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q59676" start="22199" end="22215" title="Benguela Current" label="Benguela Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="22267" end="22280" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="22488" end="22497" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="22805" end="22812" title="Diurnal temperature variation" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q88211959" start="23086" end="23106" title="Cuvelai-Etosha Basin" label="Cuvelai-Etosha Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36489" start="23142" end="23151" title="Oshiwambo" label="Oshiwambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="23298" end="23316" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q502102" start="24353" end="24361" title="borehole" label="borehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="24470" end="24477" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24788" end="24803" title="African Folder," label="African Folder,"/>
<link wikidata="Q766328" start="25585" end="25597" title="Wildlife conservation" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="25616" end="25633" title="natural resources" label="natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="25826" end="25836" title="ecology" label="ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="26114" end="26164" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937083" start="26236" end="26271" title="Ministry of Environment and Tourism (Namibia)" label="Ministry of Environment and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375951" start="26330" end="26355" title="Endangered Wildlife Trust" label="Endangered Wildlife Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="26357" end="26360" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q173651" start="26710" end="26718" title="African wild dog" label="wild dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q216263" start="26720" end="26727" title="Dik-dik" label="dik dik"/>
<link wikidata="Q95036" start="26754" end="26765" title="Black rhinoceros" label="black rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="26893" end="26900" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="26901" end="26918" title="Semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="26919" end="26944" title="Representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="26945" end="26953" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q647198" start="26959" end="26979" title="President of Namibia" label="President of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="27027" end="27040" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="27049" end="27067" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515410" start="27170" end="27193" title="Constitution of Namibia" label="Constitution of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646602" start="27331" end="27341" title="Cabinet of Namibia" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="27371" end="27380" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167580" start="27381" end="27391" title="Parliament of Namibia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769673" start="27401" end="27418" title="National Assembly of Namibia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="27422" end="27433" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969272" start="27443" end="27459" title="National Council of Namibia" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="27467" end="27478" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="27481" end="27490" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="27618" end="27636" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="27672" end="27677" title="SWAPO" label="SWAPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="27693" end="27701" title="Dominant-party system" label="dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="27748" end="27771" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072193" start="27833" end="27862" title="democracy in Africa" label="electoral democracy in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="27923" end="27937" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="28028" end="28032" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="28223" end="28261" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="28433" end="28456" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q514711" start="28546" end="28554" title="Namibia/Military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277605" start="28754" end="28773" title="Ministry of Defence (Namibia)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="29053" end="29063" title="Southern African Development Community" label="the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515410" start="29169" end="29181" title="Constitution of Namibia" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q514711" start="29297" end="29319" title="Namibian Defence Force" label="Namibian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165607" start="29380" end="29420" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="29432" end="29449" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568829" start="29482" end="29487" title="SWATF" label="SWATF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="29494" end="29512" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004902" start="29655" end="29699" title="United Nations Transitional Assistance Group" label="United Nations Transitional Assistance Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q41531164" start="30018" end="30040" title="Martin Pinehas" label="Martin Kambulu Pinehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="30106" end="30150" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769673" start="30386" end="30403" title="National Assembly of Namibia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382047" start="31535" end="31546" title="LGBT rights in Namibia" label="LGBT people"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="31767" end="31776" title="Ombudsman" label="Ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19513511" start="31805" end="31819" title="Monica Geingos" label="Monica Geingos"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="31836" end="31842" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="31903" end="31914" title="LGBT rights" label="LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="32220" end="32228" title="Violence against women" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="32233" end="32247" title="domestic abuse" label="domestic abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081567" start="32761" end="32786" title="Tripoli-Cape Town Highway" label="Tripoli-Cape Town Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q387799" start="32795" end="32818" title="Trans-Kalahari Corridor" label="Trans-Kalahari Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q944487" start="32883" end="32895" title="Economy of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q806684" start="33226" end="33241" title="Bank of Namibia" label="Bank of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082801" start="34364" end="34371" title="Poverty in Namibia" label="Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952348" start="34461" end="34485" title="Multidimensional Poverty Index" label="multidimensional poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="34576" end="34592" title="Income disparity" label="Income disparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="34655" end="34671" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699616" start="34838" end="34850" title="tender board" label="tender board"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="35054" end="35063" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="35304" end="35311" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="36178" end="36188" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174794" start="36267" end="36292" title="cost of living in Namibia" label="cost of living in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689545" start="36480" end="36499" title="Taxation in Namibia" label="Taxation in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q834006" start="37541" end="37549" title="Rail transport in Namibia" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834916" start="37720" end="37743" title="transportation corridor" label="transportation corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="37932" end="37955" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q683667" start="38235" end="38269" title="List of countries by income equality" label="highest rates of income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="38779" end="38790" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="39146" end="39159" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153953" start="39450" end="39472" title="Communal Wildlife Conservancies in Namibia" label="wildlife conservancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="39731" end="39738" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q328381" start="39782" end="39796" title="uranium mining" label="uranium mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="40026" end="40034" title="Alluvium" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="40249" end="40253" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="40255" end="40263" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="40265" end="40269" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="40271" end="40274" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="40276" end="40285" title="fluorspar" label="fluorspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="40287" end="40296" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="40298" end="40304" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="40306" end="40312" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="40317" end="40321" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="40585" end="40593" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464026" start="40888" end="40902" title="blood diamonds" label="blood diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="41292" end="41300" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="42278" end="42288" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001413" start="42305" end="42338" title="Wildlife of Namibia" label="Namibia&amp;#x27;s extensive wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q640682" start="42414" end="42428" title="trophy hunting" label="trophy hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q570459" start="42697" end="42709" title="sandboarding" label="sandboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="42711" end="42720" title="skydiving" label="skydiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="42856" end="42864" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="42866" end="42879" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420196" start="42881" end="42898" title="Fish River Canyon" label="Fish River Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932730" start="42900" end="42910" title="Sossusvlei" label="Sossusvlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135237" start="42916" end="42930" title="Skeleton Coast" label="Skeleton Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q390412" start="42937" end="42944" title="Sesriem" label="Sesriem"/>
<link wikidata="Q280231" start="42946" end="42956" title="Etosha Pan" label="Etosha Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59698" start="42982" end="42992" title="Swakopmund" label="Swakopmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="42994" end="43004" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q159325" start="43009" end="43017" title="Lüderitz" label="Lüderitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q667326" start="43134" end="43168" title="Hosea Kutako International Airport" label="Hosea Kutako International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425405" start="43242" end="43274" title="Millennium Challenge Corporation" label="Millennium Challenge Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964292" start="43495" end="43516" title="Namibia Tourism Board" label="Namibia Tourism Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178147" start="43559" end="43576" title="trade association" label="trade association"/>
<link wikidata="Q15246857" start="43590" end="43624" title="Hospitality Association of Namibia" label="Hospitality Association of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583578" start="43719" end="43747" title="Windhoek Country Club Resort" label="Windhoek Country Club Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q598884" start="43794" end="43819" title="Hilton Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Hilton Hotels and Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964292" start="43881" end="43902" title="Namibia Tourism Board" label="Namibia Tourism Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178147" start="44152" end="44169" title="trade association" label="trade association"/>
<link wikidata="Q15246857" start="44337" end="44371" title="Hospitality Association of Namibia" label="Hospitality Association of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117673" start="44577" end="44585" title="NamWater" label="NamWater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845865" start="44758" end="44804" title="Ministry of Agriculture (Namibia)" label="Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="44849" end="44851" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610511" start="45815" end="45823" title="township" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007834" start="45902" end="45921" title="improved sanitation" label="improved sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691037" start="46349" end="46362" title="Health in Namibia" label="health hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="46407" end="46432" title="List of countries by population density" label="lowest population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="46465" end="46473" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="46621" end="46641" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="47783" end="47788" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="47793" end="47800" title="Khoisan" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137067" start="47839" end="47845" title="Ovambo people" label="Ovambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170088" start="47847" end="47853" title="Herero people" label="Herero"/>
<link wikidata="Q648707" start="47855" end="47862" title="Kavango people" label="Kavango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267805" start="47864" end="47868" title="Lozi people" label="Lozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="47870" end="47876" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q612697" start="47881" end="47886" title="Himba people" label="Himba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158214" start="47929" end="47935" title="Damara people" label="Damara"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="47937" end="47941" title="Nama people" label="Nama"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="47947" end="47950" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151076" start="48016" end="48025" title="Coloured people in Namibia" label="Coloureds"/>
<link wikidata="Q263176" start="48037" end="48044" title="Basters" label="Basters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100884" start="48076" end="48103" title="Chinese people in Namibia" label="Chinese minority in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995099" start="48134" end="48140" title="White Namibians" label="Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="48158" end="48167" title="Afrikaner people" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="48189" end="48199" title="Portuguese diaspora" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="48300" end="48312" title="Independence of Namibia" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="48403" end="48420" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="European ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="48473" end="48491" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995099" start="48530" end="48545" title="White Namibians" label="Namibian whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q263176" start="48578" end="48588" title="Basters" label="mixed race"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="48595" end="48604" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q279595" start="48791" end="48797" title="German Namibians" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="49024" end="49041" title="Portuguese West Africa" label="Portuguese colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="49808" end="49826" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q220226" start="50163" end="50184" title="University of Namibia" label="University of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667019" start="50193" end="50231" title="International University of Management" label="International University of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q488696" start="50242" end="50286" title="Namibia University of Science and Technology" label="Namibia University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="50327" end="50350" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="51306" end="51316" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="51344" end="51352" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="51424" end="51431" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="51521" end="51531" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="51688" end="51696" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="51717" end="51731" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="51733" end="51742" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="51744" end="51752" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="51754" end="51781" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="51787" end="51801" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504653" start="51804" end="51820" title="Islam in Namibia" label="Islam in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="51907" end="51913" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14593423" start="51914" end="51923" title="History of the Jews in Namibia" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="51965" end="51982" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="51987" end="52011" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q131870388" start="52157" end="52163" title="German language in Namibia" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="52169" end="52178" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454806" start="52431" end="52460" title="Languages of South Africa" label="all 12 of its major languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36489" start="53500" end="53509" title="Ovambo language" label="Oshiwambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13301" start="53667" end="53680" title="KhoeKhoegowab" label="KhoeKhoegowab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379098" start="53709" end="53716" title="Kavango – Southwest Bantu languages" label="Kavango"/>
<link wikidata="Q33628" start="54006" end="54012" title="Lozi language" label="Silozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="54319" end="54327" title="Tswana language" label="Setswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="55008" end="55026" title="Portuguese speaker" label="Portuguese speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="55092" end="55107" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629865" start="56680" end="56692" title="HIV/AIDS in Namibia" label="HIV epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840422" start="56779" end="56817" title="Ministry of Health and Social Services (Namibia)" label="Ministry of Health and Social Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q588982" start="59346" end="59352" title="UNAIDS" label="UNAIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="59487" end="59494" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="60349" end="60369" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q328687" start="60375" end="60405" title="Namibia national football team" label="Namibia national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q597115" start="60424" end="60428" title="1998 Africa Cup of Nations" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q276550" start="60430" end="60434" title="2008 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831154" start="60436" end="60440" title="2019 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107167" start="60446" end="60450" title="2023 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="60467" end="60488" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="60521" end="60530" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="60561" end="60573" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q20745120" start="60585" end="60596" title="Ryan Nyambe" label="Ryan Nyambe"/>
<link wikidata="Q784965" start="60598" end="60615" title="Mamelodi Sundowns F.C." label="Mamelodi Sundowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176875" start="60624" end="60639" title="Peter Shalulile" label="Peter Shalulile"/>
<link wikidata="Q503395" start="60664" end="60679" title="Collin Benjamin" label="Collin Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248558" start="60723" end="60742" title="Namibia national rugby union team" label="Namibian rugby team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141048" start="60823" end="60827" title="1999 Rugby World Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q861018" start="60829" end="60833" title="2003 Rugby World Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q124753" start="60835" end="60839" title="2007 Rugby World Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q270736" start="60841" end="60845" title="2011 Rugby World Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q393491" start="60847" end="60851" title="2015 Rugby World Cup" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724176" start="60853" end="60857" title="2019 Rugby World Cup" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124960" start="60875" end="60879" title="2023 Rugby World Cup" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="60880" end="60895" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="60897" end="60904" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143003" start="60905" end="60915" title="Cricket in Namibia" label="in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143003" start="60938" end="60955" title="Namibia national cricket team" label="the national side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139957" start="60977" end="60999" title="2003 Cricket World Cup" label="2003 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124958" start="61001" end="61023" title="2021 ICC T20 World Cup" label="2021 ICC T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602679" start="61028" end="61061" title="2022 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2022 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q310272" start="61539" end="61557" title="Frankie Fredericks" label="Frankie Fredericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="61677" end="61706" title="IAAF World Championships in Athletics" label="World Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188375" start="61715" end="61727" title="Trevor Dodds" label="Trevor Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772957" start="61736" end="61759" title="Greater Greensboro Open" label="Greater Greensboro Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q930472" start="61916" end="61926" title="Dan Craven" label="Dan Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="61954" end="61974" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428648" start="62030" end="62044" title="Julius Indongo" label="Julius Indongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112498" start="62100" end="62118" title="Light welterweight" label="Light welterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158435" start="62197" end="62211" title="Jacques Burger" label="Jacques Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9641" start="62231" end="62239" title="Saracens Rugby Club" label="Saracens"/>
<link wikidata="Q753618" start="62244" end="62252" title="Stade Aurillacois Cantal Auvergne" label="Aurillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="62485" end="62504" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="62508" end="62533" title="Reporters without Borders" label="Reporters without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688923" start="63511" end="63516" title="Namibia Press Agency" label="NAMPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q493500" start="64169" end="64181" title="The Namibian" label="The Namibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215779" start="64225" end="64240" title="Die Republikein" label="Die Republikein"/>
<link wikidata="Q153077" start="64266" end="64284" title="Allgemeine Zeitung (Namibia)" label="Allgemeine Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q513305" start="64310" end="64322" title="Namibian Sun" label="Namibian Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164552" start="64372" end="64379" title="New Era (Namibia)" label="New Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720662" start="64679" end="64696" title="Windhoek Observer" label="Windhoek Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964260" start="64721" end="64738" title="Namibia Economist" label="Namibia Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038099" start="64835" end="64850" title="Insight Namibia" label="Insight Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136301" start="64935" end="64949" title="Sister Namibia" label="Sister Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961759" start="65036" end="65049" title="Namibia Sport" label="Namibia Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461707" start="65307" end="65340" title="Namibian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Namibian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="65352" end="65370" title="public broadcasting" label="public broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q516392" start="65665" end="65678" title="One Africa Television" label="One Africa TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805497" start="65799" end="65833" title="Media Institute of Southern Africa" label="Media Institute of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558600" start="65989" end="66020" title="National Art Gallery of Namibia" label="National Art Gallery of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="66172" end="66187" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q80150520" start="66283" end="66295" title="59th Venice Biennale" label="59th Edition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66322" end="66344" title="A Bridge to the Desert" label="A Bridge to the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66371" end="66385" title="Lone Stone Men" label="Lone Stone Men"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66403" end="66425" title="Renn (Namibian artist)" label="Renn (Namibian artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018476" start="66442" end="66475" title="Index of Namibia-related articles" label="Index of Namibia-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056529" start="66477" end="66495" title="Outline of Namibia" label="Outline of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579383" start="67039" end="67055" title="L&amp;#x27;Harmattan" label="L&amp;#x27;Harmattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="67172" end="67190" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="67198" end="67225" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="67345" end="67366" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21294" wikidata="Q936679" url="?curid=21294" title="Geography of Namibia">
<text>At , Namibia is the world&#x27;s thirty-fourth largest country. After Mongolia, Namibia is the second least densely populated country in the world (). Namibia got its name from the Namib desert that stretches along the coast of the Atlantic. It is also known for its wildlife.

==Geographical areas==
The Namibian landscape consists generally of five geographical areas, each with characteristic abiotic conditions and vegetation with some variation within and overlap between them: the Central Plateau, the Namib Desert, the Great Escarpment, the Bushveld, and the Kalahari Desert.

===Central Plateau===
The Central Plateau runs from north to south, bordered by the Skeleton Coast to the northwest, the Namib Desert and its coastal plains to the southwest, the Orange River to the south, and the Kalahari Desert to the east. The Central Plateau is home to the highest point in Namibia at Königstein elevation . Within the wide, flat Central Plateau is the majority of Namibia&#x27;s population and economic activity. Windhoek, the nation&#x27;s capital, is located here, as well as most of the arable land. Although arable land accounts for only 1% of Namibia, nearly 1/3rd of the population is employed in agriculture.

The abiotic conditions here are similar to those found along the Escarpment; however, the topographic complexity is reduced. Summer temperatures in the area can reach , and frosts are common in the winter.

===Namib Desert===

The Namib Desert is a broad expanse of hyper-arid gravel, gravel with no moisture, plains, and dunes that stretches along the entire coastline, which varies in width between 100 and many hundreds of kilometres. Areas within the Namib include the Skeleton Coast and the Kaokoveld in the north and the extensive Namib Sand Sea along the central coast. The sands that make up the sand sea are a consequence of erosional processes that take place within the Orange River valley and areas farther to the south. As sand-laden waters drop their suspended loads into the Atlantic, onshore currents deposit them along the shore. The prevailing southwest winds then pick up and redeposit the sand in the form of massive dunes in the widespread sand sea, the largest sand dunes in the world. In areas where the supply of sand is reduced because of the inability of the sand to cross riverbeds, the winds also scour the land to form large gravel plains. In many areas within the Namib Desert, there is little vegetation with the exception of lichens found in the gravel plains, and in dry river beds where plants can access subterranean water.

&quot;Fairy circles&quot;, which are circular patches of land barren of plants, varying between 2 in diameter and often encircled by a ring of stimulated growth of grass, are found in the Namib, such as those near the Wolwedans desert camp.

===Great Escarpment===
The Great Escarpment swiftly rises to over . Average temperatures and temperature ranges increase as you move farther inland from the cold Atlantic waters, while the lingering coastal fogs slowly diminish. Although the area is rocky with poorly developed soils, it is nonetheless significantly more productive than the Namib Desert. As summer winds are forced over the Escarpment, moisture is extracted as precipitation. The water, along with rapidly changing topography, is responsible for the creation of microhabitats which offer a wide range of organisms, many of them endemic. Vegetation along the escarpment varies in both form and density, with community structure ranging from dense woodlands to more shrubby areas with scattered trees. A number of Acacia species are found here, as well as grasses and other shrub vegetation.

===Bushveld===
The Bushveld is found in northeastern Namibia along the Angolan border and in the Caprivi Strip which is the vestige of a narrow corridor demarcated for the German Empire to access the Zambezi River. The area receives a significantly greater amount of precipitation than the rest of the country, averaging around per year. Temperatures are also cooler and more moderate, with approximate seasonal variations of between . The area is generally flat and the soils sandy, limiting their ability to retain water. Located adjacent to the Bushveld in north-central Namibia is one of nature&#x27;s most spectacular features: the Etosha Pan. For most of the year, it is a dry, saline wasteland, but during the wet season, it forms a shallow lake covering more than . The area is ecologically important and vital to the large numbers of birds and animals from the surrounding savannah that gather in the region as summer drought forces them to the scattered waterholes that ring the pan. The Bushveld area has been demarcated by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Angolan mopane woodlands ecoregion, which extends north across the Cunene River into neighbouring Angola.

===Kalahari Desert===

The Kalahari Desert is perhaps Namibia&#x27;s best-known geographical feature. Shared with South Africa and Botswana, it has a variety of localised environments ranging from hyper-arid sandy desert to areas that seem to defy the common definition of desert. One of these areas, known as the Succulent Karoo, is home to over 5,000 species of plants, nearly half of them endemic; fully one-third of the world&#x27;s succulents are found in the Karoo.

The reason behind this high productivity and endemism may be the relatively stable nature of precipitation. The Karoo apparently does not experience drought regularly, so even though the area is technically a desert, regular winter rains provide enough moisture to support the region&#x27;s interesting plant community. Another feature of the Kalahari, indeed many parts of Namibia, are inselbergs, isolated mountains that create microclimates and habitats for organisms not adapted to life in the surrounding desert matrix.

===Coastal Desert===
Namibia&#x27;s Coastal Desert is one of the oldest deserts in the world. Its sand dunes, created by the strong onshore winds, are the highest in the world.

The Namib Desert and the Namib-Naukluft National Park are located here. The Namibian coastal deserts are the richest source of diamonds on earth, making Namibia the world&#x27;s largest producer of diamonds. It is divided into the northern Skeleton Coast and the southern Diamond Coast. Because of the location of the shoreline—at the point where the Atlantic&#x27;s cold water reaches Africa—there is often extremely dense fog.

Sandy beach comprises 54% and mixed sand and rock add another 28%. Only 16% of the total length is rocky shoreline. The coastal plains are dune fields, gravel plains covered with lichen and some scattered salt pans. Near the coast, there are areas where the dunes are vegetated with hammocks. Namibia has rich coastal and marine resources that remain largely unexplored.

==Weather and climate==
 Namibia has more than 300 days of sunshine per year. It is situated at the southern edge of the tropics; the Tropic of Capricorn cuts the country about in half. The winter (June–August) is generally dry, both rainy seasons occur in summer, the small rainy season between September and November, and the big one between February and April. Humidity is low, and average rainfall varies from almost zero in the coastal desert to more than in the Caprivi Strip. Rainfall is however highly variable, and droughts are common. A bad rainy season occurred in the summer of 2006/07. Very low rainfall was recorded in 2019. Due to the dry winters snowfall constitutes a very rare occurrence and prompts media coverage whenever it happens. The snow was reported at Spreetshoogte Pass in the Namib-Naukluft Park in June 2011.

Weather and climate in the coastal area are dominated by the cold, north-flowing Benguela Current of the Atlantic Ocean which accounts for very low precipitation totalling per year or less, frequent dense fog, and overall lower temperatures than in the rest of the country. In winter, occasionally a condition known as &quot;Berg wind&quot; or &quot;Oosweer&quot; (Afrikaans: East weather) occurs, a hot dry wind blowing from the inland to the coast. As the area behind the coast is a desert, these winds can develop into sand storms with sand deposits in the Atlantic Ocean visible on satellite images.

The Central Plateau and Kalahari areas have wide diurnal temperature ranges of up to .

=== Examples ===



===Water sources===

Namibia is the driest country in sub-Saharan Africa and depends largely on groundwater. With an average rainfall of about per annum, the highest rainfall occurs in the Caprivi in the northeast (about per annum) and decreases in a westerly and southwesterly direction to as little as and less per annum at the coast. The only perennial rivers are found on the national borders with South Africa, Angola, Zambia, and the short border with Botswana in the Caprivi. In the interior of the country, surface water is available only in the summer months when rivers are in flood after exceptional rainfalls. Otherwise, surface water is restricted to a few large storage dams retaining and damming up these seasonal floods and their runoff. Where people do not live near perennial rivers or make use of storage dams, they are dependent on groundwater. Even isolated communities and those economic activities located far from good surface water sources, such as mining, agriculture, and tourism, can be supplied from groundwater over nearly 80% of the country. The longest river in Namibia is the Fish River with a length of .

More than 120,000 boreholes have been drilled in Namibia over the past century. One-third of these boreholes have been drilled dry. An aquifer called &quot;Ohangwena II&quot;, located on both sides of the Angola-Namibia border, was discovered in 2012. This aquifer has been estimated to be capable of supplying the 800,000 people in the North for 400 years, at the current (2018) rate of consumption. Experts estimate that Namibia has of underground water.

&quot;Efundja&quot;, the annual flooding of the northern parts of the country, often causes not only damage to infrastructure but loss of life. The rains that cause these floods originate in Angola, flow into Namibia&#x27;s Cuvelai basin, and fill the &quot;Oshanas&quot; (Oshiwambo: flood plains) there. The worst floods occurred in March 2011 and displaced 21,000 people.

==Urbanization==
The capital and largest city, Windhoek, is in the centre of the country. It is home to the country&#x27;s Central Administrative Region, Windhoek Hosea Kutako International Airport, and the country&#x27;s railhead. Other important towns are:

*Arandis, uranium mine
*Walvis Bay, seaport, international airport, railhead
*Oshakati, main business centre in the North, railhead
*Otjiwarongo, main business centre in Central-North, rail junction
*Lüderitz, sea port, railhead
*Gobabis, farming centre
*Keetmanshoop, railhead
*Tsumeb, mining
*Swakopmund, Tourism (Ex German Colonial town)
*Rundu,
*Katima Mulilo
*Okahandja

==Statistics==
Location:
Southern Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean, between Angola and South Africa

Geographic coordinates:
;Area:
:*Total: 824,292 km2
:**&quot;country rank in the world:&quot; 34th
:*Land: 823,290 km2
:*Water: 1,002 km2
; Area comparative
:* Australia comparative: slightly larger than New South Wales
:* Canada comparative: approximately smaller than British Columbia
:* United States comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Nevada
:* EU comparative: slightly less than 2 times the size of Finland

Land boundaries:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
4,220 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;border countries:&quot;
Angola 1,427 km, Botswana 1,544 km, South Africa 1,005 km, Zambia 244 km

Coastline:
1,572 km

Maritime claims:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;territorial sea:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;contiguous zone:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;exclusive economic zone:&quot;
 and 

Terrain:
Mostly high plateau; Namib Desert along the coast; Kalahari Desert in the east. In the north near the border with Angola there is a flat area that has been designated by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Angolan mopane woodlands ecoregion.

Elevation extremes:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;lowest point:&quot;
Atlantic Ocean 0 m
&lt;br&gt;&quot;mean elevation:&quot; 1,414 m
&lt;br&gt;&quot;highest point:&quot;
Königstein 2,573 m

Natural resources:
diamonds, copper, uranium, gold, silver, lead, tin, lithium, cadmium, tungsten, zinc, salt, hydropower, fish
&lt;br&gt;&quot;note:&quot;
suspected deposits of oil, coal, and iron ore

Land use:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;agricultural land:&quot;
47.2% (2018)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;arable land:&quot;
1% (2018)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;permanent crops:&quot;
0% (2018)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;permanent pasture:&quot;
46.2% (2018)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;forest:&quot;
8.8% (2018)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;other:&quot;
44% (2018)

Irrigated land:
80 km2 (2012), 75.73 km2 (2003), 70 km2 (1998 est.), 60 km2 (1993 est.)

Total renewable water resources:
17.72 km3 (2011)

Natural hazards:
prolonged periods of drought

Environment – current issues:
depletion and degradation of water and aquatic resources; desertification; land degradation; loss of biodiversity and biotic resources; wildlife poaching

Environment – international agreements:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;party to:&quot;
Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

==Extreme points==
This is a list of the extreme points of Namibia, the points that are farther north, south, east, or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point – unnamed location on the border with Angola in the Kunene River immediately west of the Epupa Falls, Kunene Region
* Easternmost point – the tripoint with Botswana and Zambia, Zambezi Region
* Southernmost point – unnamed location in Pella Drift on the Orange River border with South Africa, ǁKaras Region
* Westernmost point – unnamed section of coast west of the Okotuso well, Kunene Region

==See also==

* Namibia
* Towns in Namibia
* List of rivers of Africa
* Rivers in Namibia

== Sources ==
* Atlas of Namibia Team, 2022, Atlas of Namibia: its land, water and life, Namibia Nature Foundation, Windhoek

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="5" end="12" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="70" end="78" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="181" end="186" title="Namib" label="Namib"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="232" end="240" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q461335" start="396" end="414" title="Abiotic component" label="abiotic conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="508" end="520" title="Namib Desert" label="Namib Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q224934" start="526" end="542" title="Great Escarpment, Southern Africa" label="Great Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q779758" start="548" end="556" title="Bushveld" label="Bushveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="566" end="581" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135237" start="668" end="682" title="Skeleton Coast" label="Skeleton Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="763" end="775" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q897834" start="890" end="900" title="Königstein, Namibia" label="Königstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="1019" end="1027" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="1454" end="1466" title="Namib Desert" label="Namib Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889166" start="1719" end="1728" title="Kaokoveld" label="Kaokoveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q380571" start="2589" end="2602" title="Fairy circle (arid grass formation)" label="Fairy circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q224934" start="2852" end="2868" title="Great Escarpment" label="Great Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="3605" end="3611" title="Acacia" label="Acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="3755" end="3761" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="3781" end="3794" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3856" end="3869" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="3884" end="3897" title="Zambezi River" label="Zambezi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q280231" start="4321" end="4331" title="Etosha Pan" label="Etosha Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="4566" end="4574" title="savannah" label="savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="4723" end="4742" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763767" start="4758" end="4782" title="Angolan mopane woodlands" label="Angolan mopane woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="4783" end="4792" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q320649" start="4825" end="4837" title="Cunene River" label="Cunene River"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="4856" end="4862" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="4892" end="4907" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="4996" end="5004" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655033" start="5179" end="5194" title="Succulent Karoo" label="Succulent Karoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139493" start="5725" end="5734" title="inselberg" label="inselberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773441" start="6067" end="6095" title="Namib-Naukluft National Park" label="Namib-Naukluft National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="6169" end="6176" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135237" start="6282" end="6296" title="Skeleton Coast" label="Skeleton Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933532" start="6314" end="6327" title="Diamond Coast" label="Diamond Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="6651" end="6657" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="6677" end="6685" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="salt pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="6869" end="6876" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="6978" end="6997" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135237" start="7277" end="7291" title="Skeleton Coast" label="coastal desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="7312" end="7325" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580315" start="7623" end="7641" title="Spreetshoogte Pass" label="Spreetshoogte Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773441" start="7649" end="7668" title="Namib-Naukluft Park" label="Namib-Naukluft Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q59676" start="7765" end="7781" title="Benguela Current" label="Benguela Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="7832" end="7845" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891753" start="8009" end="8018" title="Berg wind" label="Berg wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="8049" end="8058" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="8338" end="8345" title="Diurnal temperature variation" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="8451" end="8469" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="8586" end="8593" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="8799" end="8811" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="8813" end="8819" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="8821" end="8827" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="8855" end="8863" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="8871" end="8878" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143836" start="9506" end="9516" title="Fish River (Namibia)" label="Fish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q502102" start="9555" end="9563" title="borehole" label="borehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="9672" end="9679" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10219" end="10232" title="Cuvelai basin" label="Cuvelai basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36489" start="10268" end="10277" title="Oshiwambo" label="Oshiwambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q667326" start="10524" end="10567" title="Windhoek Hosea Kutako International Airport" label="Windhoek Hosea Kutako International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q438851" start="10631" end="10638" title="Arandis, Namibia" label="Arandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="10654" end="10664" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q985622" start="10708" end="10716" title="Oshakati" label="Oshakati"/>
<link wikidata="Q993149" start="10763" end="10774" title="Otjiwarongo" label="Otjiwarongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159325" start="10830" end="10838" title="Lüderitz" label="Lüderitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000609" start="10860" end="10867" title="Gobabis" label="Gobabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160884" start="10885" end="10897" title="Keetmanshoop" label="Keetmanshoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q639467" start="10909" end="10915" title="Tsumeb" label="Tsumeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q59698" start="10925" end="10935" title="Swakopmund" label="Swakopmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q662291" start="10972" end="10977" title="Rundu" label="Rundu"/>
<link wikidata="Q864100" start="10980" end="10993" title="Katima Mulilo" label="Katima Mulilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q597491" start="10995" end="11004" title="Okahandja" label="Okahandja"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="11092" end="11098" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="11117" end="11139" title="Geographic coordinates" label="Geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="11321" end="11336" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="11387" end="11403" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="11477" end="11483" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="11487" end="11489" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="11542" end="11549" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="11663" end="11671" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="11705" end="11711" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="11922" end="11934" title="Namib Desert" label="Namib Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="11952" end="11967" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="12015" end="12021" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="12075" end="12094" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763767" start="12110" end="12134" title="Angolan mopane woodlands" label="Angolan mopane woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="12135" end="12144" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q897834" start="12305" end="12315" title="Königstein, Namibia" label="Königstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="13098" end="13113" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="13115" end="13131" title="land degradation" label="land degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="13133" end="13153" title="loss of biodiversity" label="loss of biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="13185" end="13193" title="poaching" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="13677" end="13683" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q320649" start="13691" end="13703" title="Kunene River" label="Kunene River"/>
<link wikidata="Q187918" start="13728" end="13739" title="Epupa Falls" label="Epupa Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q834513" start="13741" end="13754" title="Kunene Region" label="Kunene Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q316655" start="13781" end="13789" title="tripoint" label="tripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="13795" end="13803" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="13808" end="13814" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q473190" start="13816" end="13830" title="Zambezi Region" label="Zambezi Region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13874" end="13885" title="Pella Drift" label="Pella Drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="13893" end="13905" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q573467" start="13932" end="13945" title="ǁKaras Region" label="ǁKaras Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q834513" start="14019" end="14032" title="Kunene Region" label="Kunene Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="14050" end="14057" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q503707" start="14060" end="14076" title="Towns in Namibia" label="Towns in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368992" start="14079" end="14103" title="List of rivers of Africa" label="List of rivers of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14106" end="14123" title=":Category:Rivers of Namibia" label="Rivers in Namibia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21295" wikidata="Q951237" url="?curid=21295" title="Demographics of Namibia">
<text>This is a demography of the population of Namibia including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Population==

===Census results===
As required by the Namibian &quot;Statistics Act&quot; #66 of 1976, and in accordance with United Nations recommendations, a census is conducted every ten years. After Namibian independence the first Population and Housing Census was carried out in 1991, further rounds followed in 2001 and 2011. The data collection method is to count every person resident in Namibia wherever they happen to be. This is called the &quot;de facto&quot; method. For enumeration purposes the country is demarcated into 4,042 &quot;enumeration areas&quot;. These areas overlap with constituency boundaries in order to get reliable data for election purposes as well.

The 2011 Population and Housing Census counted 2,113,077 inhabitants of Namibia. Between 2001 and 2011 the annual population growth was 1.4%, down from 2.6% in the previous ten–year period.

In 2011 the total fertility rate was 3.6 children per woman, down from 4.1 in 2001.

===UN estimates===
According to the total population was in , compared to only 485 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 36.4%, 59.9% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 3.7% was 65 years or older


Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Based on the results of the 2011 Population Census.):
==Vital statistics==
Registration of vital events in Namibia is not complete. The website Our World in Data prepared the following estimates based on statistics from the Population Department of the United Nations.


===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (followed by wanted fertility rate in brackets) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):

Fertility data as of 2013 (DHS Program):

===Life expectancy at birth===
Life expectancy from 1950 to 2015 (&quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;):
==Ethnic groups==

Namibia has many ethnic groups. The majority of the Namibian population is of Bantu-speaking origin—mostly of the Ovambo ethnicity, which forms about half of the population—residing mainly in the north of the country, although many are now resident in towns throughout Namibia. They also include the Lozi people and Kavango people. Other ethnic groups are the Herero and Himba people, who speak a similar language, and the Damara, who speak the same &quot;click&quot; language as the Nama. Herero and Nama peoples make up less than 10% of the population, but at the beginning of the 20th century and before the Herero and Namaqua Genocide, they made up a majority.

The largest ten ethnic groups are Aakwanyama, Aandonga, Ovaherero, Damara, Aakwambi, Vakwangali, Nama, Aambalantu, Vakavango, and Aangandjera.

In addition to the Bantu majority, there are large groups of San, who are descendants of the original culture of Southern Africa, as well as Nama who are descendants of the above as well as mixed with colonists. They often speak Khoekhoegowab. The country also contains some descendants of refugees from Angola. 

There are also two smaller groups of people with mixed racial origins, called &quot;Coloureds&quot; (2,1%) and &quot;Basters&quot; (1,5%). There is a substantial Chinese minority in Namibia; it stood at 40,000 in 2006.

Whites (mainly of Afrikaner, German, British and Portuguese origin) make up 1,8% of the population, according to the 2023 Population and Housing Census. Although their proportion of the population decreased after independence due to emigration and lower birth rates, they still form the second-largest population of European ancestry, both in terms of percentage and actual numbers, in Sub-Saharan Africa (after South Africa/Angola). The majority of Namibian whites and nearly all those who are of mixed race, speak Afrikaans and share similar origins, culture, and religion as the white and coloured populations of South Africa. A large minority of whites (around 30,000) trace their family origins back to the German settlers who colonised Namibia prior to the British confiscation of German lands after World War I, and they maintain German cultural and educational institutions. Nearly all Portuguese settlers came to the country from the former Portuguese colony of Angola. The 1960 census reported 526,004 persons in what was then South West Africa, including 73,464 whites (14%).

==Languages==



* Oshiwambo – 48.9%
* Khoekhoegowab – 11.3%
* Afrikaans – 10.4%
* Otjiherero – 8.6%
* RuKwangali – 8.5%
* Silozi – 4.8%
* English (official language) – 3.4%
* German (1%)
* Setswana – 0.3%
* Other African languages – 2.3%
* Other – 1.7%

==Religion==
Missionary work during the 19th century drew many Namibians to Christianity, especially Lutheranism. While most Namibian Christians are Lutheran, there also are Roman Catholic, Methodist, Anglican, African Methodist Episcopal, and Dutch Reformed Christians represented.

*Christian 80% to 90% (at least 50% Lutheran)
*Indigenous beliefs 10% to 20%

== References ==
==External links==

* Namibian People</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="10" end="20" title="demographics" label="demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="42" end="49" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="60" end="78" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="80" end="89" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="338" end="352" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="372" end="378" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="415" end="436" title="Independence of Namibia" label="Namibian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="1612" end="1629" title="Our World in Data" label="Our World in Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1721" end="1735" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="2129" end="2134" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137067" start="2165" end="2171" title="Ovambo people" label="Ovambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267805" start="2351" end="2362" title="Lozi people" label="Lozi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q648707" start="2367" end="2381" title="Kavango people" label="Kavango people"/>
<link wikidata="Q170088" start="2411" end="2417" title="Herero people" label="Herero"/>
<link wikidata="Q612697" start="2422" end="2434" title="Himba people" label="Himba people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158214" start="2474" end="2480" title="Damara (people)" label="Damara"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="2535" end="2539" title="Nama people" label="Nama"/>
<link wikidata="Q312492" start="2662" end="2689" title="Herero and Namaqua Genocide" label="Herero and Namaqua Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="2922" end="2925" title="Khoisan" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q13301" start="3090" end="3103" title="Khoekhoe language" label="Khoekhoegowab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763798" start="3136" end="3171" title="Angolans in Namibia" label="descendants of refugees from Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151076" start="3259" end="3268" title="Coloured people in Namibia" label="Coloureds"/>
<link wikidata="Q263176" start="3292" end="3298" title="Baster" label="Baster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100884" start="3337" end="3364" title="Chinese people in Namibia" label="Chinese minority in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995099" start="3395" end="3401" title="White Namibians" label="Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="3413" end="3422" title="Afrikaner people" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="3444" end="3454" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="3608" end="3620" title="Independence of Namibia" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="3711" end="3728" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="European ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="3781" end="3799" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995099" start="3845" end="3860" title="White Namibians" label="Namibian whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q263176" start="3893" end="3903" title="Basters" label="mixed race"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="3911" end="3920" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q279595" start="4107" end="4113" title="German Namibians" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="4345" end="4362" title="Portuguese West Africa" label="Portuguese colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q36489" start="4502" end="4511" title="Ovambo language" label="Oshiwambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13301" start="4522" end="4535" title="Khoekhoe language" label="Khoekhoegowab"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="4546" end="4555" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33315" start="4566" end="4576" title="Otjiherero language" label="Otjiherero"/>
<link wikidata="Q36334" start="4586" end="4596" title="Kwangali language" label="RuKwangali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33628" start="4606" end="4612" title="Lozi language" label="Silozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4622" end="4629" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="4659" end="4665" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="4673" end="4681" title="Tswana language" label="Setswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4814" end="4826" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="4839" end="4850" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4912" end="4926" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="4928" end="4937" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4939" end="4947" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="4949" end="4976" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="4982" end="5006" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="5023" end="5032" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="5058" end="5066" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769343" start="5069" end="5087" title="Indigenous religions" label="Indigenous beliefs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21296" wikidata="Q1155445" url="?curid=21296" title="Politics of Namibia">
<text>Politics of Namibia takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Namibia is both head of state and head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by both the president and the government. Legislative power is vested in the two chambers of Parliament. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

Additional to the government political structure Namibia has a network of traditional leadership with currently 51 recognised traditional authorities and their leaders. These authorities cover the entire Namibian territory. Traditional leaders are entrusted with the allocation of communal land and the formulation of the traditional group&#x27;s customary laws. They also take over minor judicial work.

==Constitution==
The Constituent Assembly of Namibia produced a constitution which established a multi-party system and a bill of rights. It also limited the executive president to two five-year terms and provided for the private ownership of property. The three branches of government are subject to checks and balances, and a provision is made for judicial review. The constitution also states that Namibia should have a mixed economy, and foreign investment should be encouraged.

The constitution is noted for being one of the first to incorporate protection of the environment into its text. Namibia is a democratic but one party dominant state with the South-West Africa People&#x27;s Organisation in power. Opposition parties are allowed, but are widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power.

While the ethnic-based, three-tier, South African-imposed governing authorities have been dissolved, the current government pledged for the sake of national reconciliation to retain civil servants employed during the colonial period. The government is still organising itself on both national and regional levels.

The Constituent Assembly converted itself into the National Assembly on 16 February 1990, retaining all the members elected on a straight party ticket.

==President==

The Namibian head of state is the president, elected by popular vote every five years. Namibia&#x27;s founding president is Sam Nujoma, who was in office for three terms from 21 March 1990 (Namibia&#x27;s Independence Day) until 21 March 2005. Hifikepunye Pohamba was Namibia&#x27;s second president serving from 2005 to 2015. Hage Geingob was president of Namibia from 2015 to 2024. Nangolo Mbumba has been president of Namibia since February 4 2024.

==Separation of powers==
While the separation of powers is enshrined in the country&#x27;s constitution, Namibia&#x27;s civil society and the opposition repeatedly have criticised the overlap between executive and legislature. All cabinet members also sit in the National Assembly and dominate that body—not numerically but by being the superiors to ordinary members.

===Executive branch===

The government is headed by the prime minister, who, together with their cabinet, is appointed by the president. SWAPO, the primary force behind independence, is still the country&#x27;s largest party. Hage Geingob was Namibia&#x27;s first prime minister. He was appointed on 21 March 1990 and served until 28 August 2002. Theo-Ben Gurirab was prime minister from 28 August 2002 to 21 March 2005, and Nahas Angula occupied this position from 21 March 2005 to 4 December 2012. He was succeeded by Hage Geingob, who in turn was succeeded as prime minister by Saara Kuugongelwa when he became president of Namibia on 21 March 2015.

===Legislative branch===
Parliament has two chambers, consisting of a National Assembly (lower house), elected for a five-year term, and a National Council (upper house), elected for a six-year term. The Assembly is the primary legislative body, with the Council playing more of an advisory role.

From Namibian independence until 2014 the National Assembly consisted of 78 members, 72 members elected by proportional representation and 6 members appointed by the president. The National Council had 26 representatives of the Regional Councils. Every Regional Council in the 13 regions of Namibia elected two representatives to serve on this body. Prior to the 2014 general elections the constitution was amended. Since then there are 104 seats in the National Assembly (96 elected, 8 appointed), and 42 seats in the National Council (3 from each region, with the number of regions increased to 14).

===Judicial branch===
The highest judicial body is the Supreme Court, whose judges are appointed by the president on the recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission. The judicial structure in Namibia parallels that of South Africa. In 1919, Roman-Dutch law was declared the common law of the territory and remains so to the present.

==Political parties and elections==
Elections were held in 1992, to elect members of 13 newly established Regional Councils, as well as new municipal officials. Two members from each Regional Council serve simultaneously as members of the National Council, the country&#x27;s second house of Parliament. Nineteen of its members are from the ruling SWAPO party, and seven are from the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA). In December 1994, elections were held for the President and the National Assembly.

Namibia has about 40 political groups, ranging from modern political parties to traditional groups based on tribal authority. Some represent single tribes or ethnic groups while others encompass several. Most participate in political alliances, some of which are multiracial, with frequently shifting membership.

SWAPO is the ruling party, and all but one of the new government&#x27;s first cabinet posts went to SWAPO members. A Marxist-oriented movement, SWAPO has become less left-wing and now espouses the need for a mixed economy. SWAPO has been a legal political party since its formation and was cautiously active in Namibia, although before implementation of the UN Plan, it was forbidden to hold meetings of more than 20 people, and its leadership was subject to frequent detention. In December 1976, the UN General Assembly recognised SWAPO as &quot;the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people,&quot; a characterisation other internal parties did not accept.

In the 1999 presidential and parliamentary elections, SWAPO continued its history of political dominance, taking 55 of the 72 Assembly seats, and returning President Sam Nujoma to the office for his third term. The principal opposition parties are the Congress of Democrats (CoD) and the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA), with each possessing seven seats in the National Assembly.

In 2019 Hage Geingob won the presidential election and received a second term as president. His percentage of votes gained, however, dropped significantly from 87% in 2014 to 56% in 2019. While rural areas predominantly supported Geingob, many urban centres voted for the independent candidate, Panduleni Itula, who received 29% of the overall votes. No other candidate achieved a two-digit result. SWAPO, yet again, won a majority of seats in the National Assembly, but closely missed the threshold for a two-thirds majority, which it held since 1994. Consequently, opposition parties also gained seats, most prominently the Popular Democratic Movement (PDM), formerly the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA), which obtained 16 seats in the National Assembly. The PDM&#x27;s 16.60% vote share is its best electoral performance since the 1994 election. On 4 February 2024, President Hage Geingob died and he was immediately succeeded by vice-president Nangolo Mbumba as new President of Namibia.

===2019 presidential election===
===2019 parliamentary election===

==Traditional leadership==

Namibian government has so far recognised 51 traditional authorities, and a further 40 applications are pending. These institutions are based on ethnicity and headed by the traditional leader of that ethnic group or clan. These positions are not paid by the state. Instead the traditional group&#x27;s members are expected to sustain their leadership. Government did, however, give one car each to the recognised authorities, and awards allowances for fuel and administrative work. The parallel existence of traditional authorities and the Namibian government in Namibia is controversial.

==Administrative divisions==
Namibia is divided into 14 regions: Zambezi, Erongo, Hardap, ǁKaras, Kavango East, Kavango West, Khomas, Kunene, Ohangwena, Omaheke, Omusati, Oshana, Oshikoto, and Otjozondjupa.

==International organisation participation==
Namibia is member of
ACP,
AfDB,
C,
ECA,
FAO,
G-77,
IAEA,
IBRD,
ICAO,
ICCt,
ICFTU,
ICRM,
IFAD,
IFC,
IFRCS,
ILO,
IMF,
IMO,
Interpol,
IOC,
IOM (observer),
ISO (correspondent),
ITU,
NAM,
OAU,
OPCW,
SACU,
SADC,
UN,
UNCTAD,
UNESCO,
UNHCR,
UNIDO,
UNMEE,
UPU,
WCL,
WHO,
WIPO,
WMO,
WToO,
WTrO

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1155445" start="0" end="19" title="Politics of Namibia" label="Politics of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="52" end="69" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="70" end="95" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q647198" start="118" end="138" title="President of Namibia" label="President of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="147" end="160" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="165" end="183" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="204" end="222" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="224" end="239" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="295" end="312" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167580" start="346" end="356" title="Parliament of Namibia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="362" end="371" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626975" start="500" end="522" title="Traditional leadership of Namibia" label="traditional leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="876" end="883" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="928" end="939" title="multi-party" label="multi-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="1254" end="1267" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="1401" end="1412" title="environment (biophysical)" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="1456" end="1480" title="one party dominant state" label="one party dominant state"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="1490" end="1534" title="South-West Africa People&amp;#x27;s Organisation" label="South-West Africa People&amp;#x27;s Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="1545" end="1555" title="Opposition (politics)" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="1556" end="1563" title="political parties" label="parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="1964" end="1984" title="Constituent Assembly" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="2141" end="2154" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q154104" start="2252" end="2262" title="Sam Nujoma" label="Sam Nujoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401503" start="2333" end="2349" title="Independence Day (Namibia)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q57469" start="2372" end="2391" title="Hifikepunye Pohamba" label="Hifikepunye Pohamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568274" start="2455" end="2467" title="Hage Geingob" label="Hage Geingob"/>
<link wikidata="Q287100" start="2512" end="2526" title="Nangolo Mbumba" label="Nangolo Mbumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="2616" end="2636" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646602" start="2812" end="2819" title="Cabinet of Namibia" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769673" start="2844" end="2861" title="National Assembly of Namibia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333976" start="3006" end="3020" title="Prime Minister of Namibia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646602" start="3047" end="3054" title="Cabinet of Namibia" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568274" start="3176" end="3188" title="Hage Geingob" label="Hage Geingob"/>
<link wikidata="Q654433" start="3297" end="3313" title="Theo-Ben Gurirab" label="Theo-Ben Gurirab"/>
<link wikidata="Q57834" start="3375" end="3387" title="Nahas Angula" label="Nahas Angula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395683" start="3531" end="3548" title="Saara Kuugongelwa" label="Saara Kuugongelwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167580" start="3629" end="3639" title="Parliament of Namibia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="3644" end="3656" title="bicameralism" label="two chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769673" start="3674" end="3691" title="National Assembly of Namibia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="3693" end="3704" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969272" start="3743" end="3759" title="National Council of Namibia" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="3761" end="3772" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="3832" end="3843" title="legislative" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993848" start="3907" end="3928" title="Independence of Namibia" label="Namibian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="4009" end="4036" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969272" start="4083" end="4099" title="National Council of Namibia" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262662" start="4265" end="4287" title="2014 Namibian general election" label="2014 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515410" start="4292" end="4304" title="Constitution of Namibia" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="4539" end="4547" title="judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408827" start="4560" end="4573" title="Supreme Court of Namibia" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395172" start="4752" end="4767" title="Roman-Dutch law" label="Roman-Dutch law"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="5193" end="5198" title="SWAPO" label="SWAPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155803" start="5229" end="5258" title="Democratic Turnhalle Alliance of Namibia" label="Democratic Turnhalle Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769673" start="5330" end="5347" title="National Assembly of Namibia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="5664" end="5669" title="SWAPO" label="SWAPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="5781" end="5788" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="6165" end="6184" title="UN General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q154104" start="6504" end="6514" title="Sam Nujoma" label="Sam Nujoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638462" start="6590" end="6611" title="Congress of Democrats" label="Congress of Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155803" start="6626" end="6655" title="Democratic Turnhalle Alliance" label="Democratic Turnhalle Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769673" start="6703" end="6720" title="National Assembly of Namibia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568274" start="6731" end="6743" title="Hage Geingob" label="Hage Geingob"/>
<link wikidata="Q61910908" start="6752" end="6773" title="2019 Namibian general election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155803" start="7349" end="7376" title="Popular Democratic Movement" label="Popular Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115181" start="7561" end="7574" title="1994 Namibian general election" label="1994 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q287100" start="7675" end="7689" title="Nangolo Mbumba" label="Nangolo Mbumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="7989" end="8007" title="traditional leader" label="traditional leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q608843" start="8462" end="8469" title="Regions of Namibia" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="8680" end="8683" title="African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group of States" label="ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="8685" end="8689" title="African Development Bank" label="AfDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="8691" end="8692" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="8694" end="8697" title="Economic Commission for Africa" label="ECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="8699" end="8702" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="8704" end="8708" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="8710" end="8714" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="8716" end="8720" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="8722" end="8726" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="8728" end="8732" title="International Criminal Court" label="ICCt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="8734" end="8739" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="ICFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="8741" end="8745" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="8747" end="8751" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="8753" end="8756" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="8758" end="8763" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="8765" end="8768" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="8770" end="8773" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="8775" end="8778" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="8780" end="8788" title="International Criminal Police Organization" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="8790" end="8793" title="International Olympic Committee" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="8795" end="8798" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="8811" end="8814" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="8832" end="8835" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="8837" end="8840" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="8842" end="8845" title="Organization of African Unity" label="OAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="8847" end="8851" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344350" start="8853" end="8857" title="Southern African Customs Union" label="SACU"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="8859" end="8863" title="Southern African Development Community" label="SADC"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="8869" end="8875" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="8877" end="8883" title="United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="8885" end="8890" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="8892" end="8897" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q487381" start="8899" end="8904" title="United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea" label="UNMEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="8906" end="8909" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q595208" start="8911" end="8914" title="World Confederation of Labour" label="WCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="8916" end="8919" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="8921" end="8925" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="8927" end="8930" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="8932" end="8936" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="8938" end="8942" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21297" wikidata="Q1480250" url="?curid=21297" title="Economy of Namibia">
<text>The economy of Namibia has a modern market sector, which produces most of the country&#x27;s wealth, and a traditional subsistence sector. Although the majority of the population engages in subsistence agriculture and herding, Namibia has more than 200,000 skilled workers and a considerable number of well-trained professionals and managerials.

==Overview==
Namibia is a higher-middle-income country with an annual GDP per capita of N$79,431 in 2022, but has extreme inequalities in income distribution and standard of living. It has the second-highest Gini coefficient out of all nations, with a coefficient of 59.1 as of 2015. Only South Africa has a higher Gini coefficient. However, this statistic may be misleading, as many Namibians in rural areas such as the northern regions do not live on the monetary system are self-sustainable with agriculture and farming.

Since independence, the Namibian Government has pursued free-market economic principles designed to promote commercial development and job creation to bring disadvantaged Namibians into the economic mainstream. To facilitate this goal, the government has actively courted donor assistance and foreign investment. The liberal Foreign Investment Act of 1990 provides guarantees against nationalisation, freedom to remit capital and profits, currency convertibility, and a process for settling disputes equitably. Namibia also is addressing the sensitive issue of agrarian land reform in a pragmatic manner. However, the government runs and owns a number of companies such as TransNamib and NamPost, most of which need frequent financial assistance to stay afloat.

The country&#x27;s sophisticated formal economy is based on capital-intensive industry and farming. However, Namibia&#x27;s economy is heavily dependent on the earnings generated from primary commodity exports in a few vital sectors, including minerals, especially diamonds, livestock, and fish. Furthermore, the Namibian economy remains integrated with the economy of South Africa, as 47% of Namibia&#x27;s imports originate from there.

In 1993, Namibia became a signatory of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and the Minister of Trade and Industry represented Namibia at the Marrakech signing of the Uruguay Round Agreement in April 1994. Namibia also is a member of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

In January 2021, President Hage Geingob formed the Namibia Investment Promotion and Development Board (NIPDB) led by Nangula Nelulu Uaandja. The NIPDB commenced operations as an autonomous entity in the Namibian Presidency and was established to reform the country&#x27;s economic sector.

==Regional integration==
The trans-African automobile route - the Tripoli-Cape Town Highway and the Trans-Kalahari Corridor pass through Namibia. Given its small domestic market but favourable location and a superb transport and communications base, Namibia is a leading advocate of regional economic integration. In addition to its membership in the Southern African Development Community (SADC), Namibia presently belongs to the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) with South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, and Eswatini. Within SACU, there is no customs on goods produced in, and being transported amidst, its members. Namibia is a net receiver of SACU revenues; they are estimated to contribute 13.9 billion NAD in 2012.

The Namibian economy is closely linked to South Africa with the Namibian dollar pegged to the South African rand. Privatisation of several enterprises in coming years may stimulate long-run foreign investment, although with the trade union movement opposed, so far most politicians have been reluctant to advance the issue. In September 1993, Namibia introduced its own currency, the Namibia Dollar (N$), which is linked to the South African Rand at a fixed exchange rate of 1:1. There has been widespread acceptance of the Namibia Dollar throughout the country and, while Namibia remains a part of the Common Monetary Area, it now enjoys slightly more flexibility in monetary policy although interest rates have so far always moved very closely in line with the South African rates.

Namibia imports almost all of its goods from South Africa. Many exports likewise go to the South African market, or transit that country. Namibia&#x27;s exports consist mainly of diamonds and other minerals, fish products, beef and meat products, karakul sheep pelts, and light manufactures. In recent years, Namibia has accounted for about 5% of total SACU exports, and a slightly higher percentage of imports.

Namibia is seeking to diversify its trading relationships away from its heavy dependence on South African goods and services. Europe has become a leading market for Namibian fish and meat, while mining concerns in Namibia have purchased heavy equipment and machinery from Germany, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Canada. The Government of Namibia is making efforts to take advantage of the American-led African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), which will provide preferential access to American markets for a long list of products. In the short term, Namibia is likely to see growth in the apparel manufacturing industry as a result of AGOA.

== Selected Macroeconomic Indicators ==
==Sectors==
Namibia is heavily dependent on the extraction and processing of minerals for export. Taxes and royalties from mining account for 25% of its revenue. The bulk of the revenue is created by diamond mining, which made up 7.2% of the 9.5% that mining contributes to Namibia&#x27;s GDP in 2011. Rich alluvial diamond deposits make Namibia a primary source for gem-quality diamonds. Namibia is a large exporter of uranium and over the years the mining industry has seen a decline in the international commodity prices such as uranium, which has led to the reason behind several uranium projects being abandoned. Experts say that the prices are expected to rise in the next 3 years because of an increase in nuclear activities from both Japan and China.

===Mining and energy===
Mining and quarrying have been at the forefront of Namibia’s consistent growth over the last 40 years. Despite economic diversification in other sectors, the mining sector has maintained strong contributions to annual GDP figures. Average contribution since 1980 stands at 11%.

Diamond mining has been Namibia’s prized mineral over the last 40+ years, and contributed over 60% of the real GDP generated from mining over the period. Diamond production increased over 45% in 2022 thanks to Debmarine Namibia, who produced a record 1.725 million carats, with the Benguela Gem producing 480,000 carats.

Diamond production totalled 2.2 million carats in 2022, generating over N$14 billion in export earnings. Other important mineral resources are uranium, gold, metal ores, copper, and zinc. The country also extracts silver, tin, vanadium, semiprecious gemstones, tantalite, phosphate, sulphur, and mines salt.

==== Uranium ====

Namibia is the fourth-largest exporter of nonfuel minerals in Africa, the world&#x27;s fourth-largest producer of uranium, and the producer of large quantities of lead, zinc, tin, silver, and tungsten. The country produced 11% of uranium worldwide in 2020, making it the second largest producer of Uranium after Kazakhstan.

Namibia is home to two uranium mines (Langer Heinrich and Rössing) believed to be capable of providing 10% of the global mining output. Langer Heinrich began operation in 1976, with Rossing opening in 2006.

The mining sector employs only about 3% of the population while about half of the population depends on subsistence agriculture for its livelihood. Namibia normally imports about 50% of its cereal requirements; in drought years food shortages are a major problem in rural areas.

==== Crude oil ====
During the pre-independence period, large areas of Namibia, including off-shore, were leased for oil prospecting. Some natural gas was discovered in 1974 in the Kudu Field off the mouth of the Orange River, but the extent of this find is only now being determined. It is only in 2022 with the Graff discovery of Shell and the Venus discovery of TotalEnergies that Namibia became a true exploration frontier.

In response to the discovery of an estimated 11 billion barrels of crude oil off its coast in 2022, discovered by international oil giants TotalEnergies SE and Shell Plc, Namibia is preparing for a pivotal moment in its economic development. A final investment decision regarding the commercial viability of this discovery is expected by the end of 2024. To manage potential oil revenues effectively, the Namibian government has proposed the creation of a sovereign wealth fund. This fund is intended to secure long-term economic stability and allocate benefits across generations.

Legislation to outline the management, investment strategies, and withdrawal protocols of the fund is currently under development. This approach reflects Namibia&#x27;s strategic planning to harness its oil resources responsibly while aiming for sustainable economic growth and ensuring that the benefits are widely distributed among its population.

===Agriculture===


About half of the population depends on agriculture (largely subsistence agriculture) for its livelihood, but Namibia must still import some of its food. Although per capita GDP is five times the per capita GDP of Africa&#x27;s poorest countries, the majority of Namibia&#x27;s people live in rural areas and exist on a subsistence way of life. Namibia has one of the highest rates of income inequality in the world, due in part to the fact that there is an urban economy and a more rural cash-less economy. The inequality figures thus take into account people who do not actually rely on the formal economy for their survival. Although arable land accounts for only 1% of Namibia, nearly half of the population is employed in agriculture.

About 4,000, mostly white, commercial farmers own almost half of Namibia&#x27;s arable land. Agreement has been reached on the privatisation of several more enterprises in coming years, with hopes that this will stimulate much needed foreign investment. However, reinvestment of environmentally derived capital has hobbled Namibian per capita income.

One of the fastest growing areas of economic development in Namibia is the growth of wildlife conservancies. These conservancies are particularly important to the rural generally unemployed population.

Agriculture is increasingly under pressure, due to factors such as frequent and prolonged droughts as well as woody plant encroachment. These render conventional agriculture unsustainable for a growing number of land owners, with many diverting their economic activities to alternative of additional sources of income.

In recent years, the utilisation of residual biomass that results from the control of woody plant encroachment has gained traction. In 2022, Namibia was the seventh largest exporter of charcoal globally, with total export volumes of over 280,000 tonnes and revenues of USD 75 million. Other products from local encroacher biomass include bush-based animal fodder, wood-plastic composite materials, thermal energy in a cement factory and a brewery and biochar. In 2019 it was estimated that 10,000 workers were employed in the growing sub-sector of biomass utilisation, rendering it one of the biggest sub-sectors in terms of employment.

====Fishing====

The clean, cold South Atlantic waters off the coast of Namibia are home to some of the richest fishing grounds in the world, with the &quot;potential&quot; for sustainable yields of 1.5 million tonnes per year. Commercial fishing and fish processing is the fastest-growing sector of the Namibian economy in terms of employment, export earnings, and contribution to GDP.

The main species found in abundance off Namibia are pilchards (sardines), anchovy, hake, and horse mackerel. There also are smaller but significant quantities of sole, squid, deep-sea crab, rock lobster, and tuna.
At the time of independence, fish stocks had fallen to dangerously low levels, due to the lack of protection and conservation of the fisheries and the over-exploitation of these resources. This trend appears to have been halted and reversed since independence, as the Namibian Government is now pursuing a conservative resource management policy along with an aggressive fisheries enforcement campaign. The government seeks to develop fish-farming as an alternative and has prioritised it as part of Vision 2030 and NDP2.

On 12 November 2019, WikiLeaks published thousands of documents and email communication by Samherji&#x27;s employees, called the Fishrot Files, that indicated hundreds of millions ISK had been paid to high ranking politicians and officials in Namibia with the objective of acquiring the country&#x27;s coveted fishing quota.

===Manufacturing and infrastructure===
In 2000, Namibia&#x27;s manufacturing sector contributed about 20% of GDP. Namibian manufacturing is inhibited by a small domestic market, dependence on imported goods, limited supply of local capital, widely dispersed population, small skilled labour force and high relative wage rates, and subsidised competition from South Africa.

Walvis Bay is a well-developed, deepwater port, and Namibia&#x27;s fishing infrastructure is most heavily concentrated there. The Namibian Government expects Walvis Bay to become an important commercial gateway to the Southern African region.

Namibia also boasts world-class civil aviation facilities and an extensive, well-maintained land transportation network. Construction is underway on two new arteries—the Trans-Caprivi Highway and Trans-Kalahari Highway—which will open up the region&#x27;s access to Walvis Bay.

The Walvis Bay Export Processing Zone operates in the key port of Walvis Bay.

===Tourism===

Tourism is a major contributor (14.5%) to Namibia&#x27;s GDP, creating tens of thousands of jobs (18.2% of all employment) directly or indirectly and servicing over a million tourists per annum. The country is among the prime destinations in Africa and is known for ecotourism which features Namibia&#x27;s extensive wildlife.

There are many lodges and reserves to accommodate eco-tourists. Sport Hunting is also a large, and growing component of the Namibian economy, accounting for 14% of total tourism in the year 2000, or $19.6 million US dollars, with Namibia boasting numerous species sought after by international sport hunters. In addition, extreme sports such as sandboarding, skydiving and 4x4ing have become popular, and many cities have companies that provide tours. The most visited places include the Caprivi Strip, Fish River Canyon, Sossusvlei, the Skeleton Coast Park, Sesriem, Etosha Pan and the coastal towns of Swakopmund, Walvis Bay and Lüderitz.

In 2020, it would be estimated that tourism would bring is $26 million Namibian dollars however due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Namibia saw a reduction of almost 90% in tourism. In the third quarter of 2021, there was an increase in tourism, however, it is estimated that it will be until 2023 when tourism returns to some kind of normality.

==Labour==
While many Namibians are economically active in one form or another, the bulk of this activity is in the informal sector, primarily subsistence agriculture. A large number of Namibians seeking jobs in the formal sector are held back due to a lack of necessary skills or training. The government is aggressively pursuing education reform to overcome this problem.

The country&#x27;s unemployment rate was 33.4% in 2018, with a labour force of 1,090,153. However, Namibia has a high percentage of skilled labour relative to SADC countries and have relatively low unemployment rates for skilled workers. To fight high unemployment, particularly amongst the youth, the government approved the introduction of an Internship Tax Incentive Programme aimed at incentivising employers to enroll more interns by providing an additional corporate tax deduction. The total financial implication for the Government is estimated at N$126 million.

The 2018 Namibia Labour Force Survey indicates that 99,536 people within the working age population had tertiary education of any level (6.6% of the working age population), while 21,922 (1.5% of the working age population) of these had postgraduate education.

The table below shows the 2018 Namibia Labour Force Survey employment statistics by education. Employment rates in Namibia generally increase with education status. A high school education typically ensures greater employment rates than those with no education or those with primary or junior secondary education as their highest achievement.

Those currently in their first, second or third year of higher education have the lowest employment rates, although it is not as common for students to actively pursue work given their attention on education. Namibians with a university certificate, diploma or degree have a significantly higher employment rate at 76.4%, while postgraduate education holders are most likely to be employed with an employment rate of 83.8% in 2018.

Namibians in the informal sector as well as in low-paid jobs like homemakers, gardeners or factory workers are unlikely to be covered by medical aid or a pension fund. All in all only a quarter or the working population have medical aid, and about half have a pension fund.

Namibia&#x27;s largest trade union federation, the National Union of Namibian Workers (NUNW) represents workers organised into seven affiliated trade unions. NUNW maintains a close affiliation with the ruling SWAPO party.

==Household wealth and income==

In the financial year March 2009 – February 2010, every Namibian earned 15,000 N$ (roughly 2,000 US$) on average. Household income was dominated by wages (49.1%) and subsistence farming (23%), with further significant sources of income being business activities (8.1%, farming excluded), old-age pensions from government (9.9%), and cash remittance (2.9%). Commercial farming only contributed 0.6%.

Every Namibian resident had on average 10,800 US$ of wealth accumulated in 2016, putting Namibia on third place in Africa. Individual wealth is, however, distributed very unequally; the country&#x27;s Gini coefficient of 0.61 is one of the highest in the world. There are 3,300 US$-millionaires in Namibia, 1,400 of which live in the capital Windhoek.

==Namibian businesspeople==
* Benjamin Hauwanga
* Frans Indongo
* Monica Kalondo
* Harold Pupkewitz (1915–2012)
* Wilhelm Sander (1860–1930)
* Sven Thieme

==See also==
* Bank of Namibia
* List of state-owned enterprises in Namibia
* United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

== Notes ==
==References==

==External links==
* Namibia latest trade data on ITC Trade Map
* Unit Trusts Investment in Namibia
* MBendi Namibia overview
* Namibia Economic Policy Research Unit autonomous economic policy research organisation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1480250" start="4" end="22" title="Economy of Namibia" label="economy of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="227" end="234" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391083" start="257" end="271" title="skilled worker" label="skilled worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="485" end="504" title="income distribution" label="income distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="555" end="571" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155445" start="896" end="915" title="Politics of Namibia" label="Namibian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="1165" end="1183" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1197" end="1227" title="Foreign Investment Act of 1990" label="Foreign Investment Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="1256" end="1271" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="1442" end="1453" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069709" start="1501" end="1536" title="List of state-owned enterprises in Namibia" label="runs and owns a number of companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780755" start="1545" end="1555" title="TransNamib" label="TransNamib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509637" start="1560" end="1567" title="NamPost" label="NamPost"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="2117" end="2155" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2255" end="2278" title="Uruguay Round Agreement" label="Uruguay Round Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2326" end="2353" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2362" end="2372" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568274" start="2402" end="2414" title="Hage Geingob" label="Hage Geingob"/>
<link wikidata="Q118541124" start="2492" end="2514" title="Nangula Nelulu Uaandja" label="Nangula Nelulu Uaandja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081567" start="2731" end="2756" title="Tripoli-Cape Town Highway" label="Tripoli-Cape Town Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q387799" start="2765" end="2788" title="Trans-Kalahari Corridor" label="Trans-Kalahari Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="3016" end="3054" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344350" start="3096" end="3126" title="Southern African Customs Union" label="Southern African Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="3153" end="3161" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="3163" end="3170" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="3176" end="3184" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q202462" start="3374" end="3377" title="Namibian Dollar" label="NAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q944487" start="3430" end="3442" title="Economy of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202462" start="3452" end="3467" title="Namibian dollar" label="Namibian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181907" start="3482" end="3500" title="South African rand" label="South African rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="3846" end="3859" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116201" start="3991" end="4011" title="Common Monetary Area" label="Common Monetary Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q770371" start="5000" end="5034" title="African Growth and Opportunity Act" label="African Growth and Opportunity Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="5435" end="5442" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="5589" end="5614" title="alluvial deposit" label="alluvial diamond deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="5620" end="5627" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="5702" end="5709" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="5814" end="5821" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q261247" start="6707" end="6712" title="Carat (unit)" label="carat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="6810" end="6817" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="6849" end="6853" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="6889" end="6892" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="6894" end="6902" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="6917" end="6926" title="gemstones" label="gemstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q637080" start="6928" end="6937" title="tantalite" label="tantalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="6939" end="6948" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="6950" end="6957" title="sulphur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899694" start="7097" end="7105" title="Uranium mining in Namibia" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="7109" end="7116" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="7164" end="7168" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="7170" end="7173" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="7187" end="7195" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="7307" end="7317" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="7343" end="7350" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791607" start="7358" end="7373" title="Langer Heinrich Mine" label="Langer Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504704" start="7378" end="7385" title="Rössing uranium mine" label="Rössing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="7925" end="7928" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7989" end="7999" title="Kudu Field" label="Kudu Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="8021" end="8033" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="8140" end="8145" title="Shell plc" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q154037" start="8173" end="8186" title="TotalEnergies" label="TotalEnergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995667" start="8758" end="8776" title="economic stability" label="economic stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="9252" end="9275" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q683667" start="9559" end="9593" title="List of countries by income equality" label="highest rates of income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="10059" end="10072" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153953" start="10369" end="10391" title="Communal Wildlife Conservancies in Namibia" label="wildlife conservancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="10577" end="10584" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514440" start="10597" end="10621" title="woody plant encroachment" label="woody plant encroachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514440" start="10893" end="10917" title="woody plant encroachment" label="woody plant encroachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273959" start="11171" end="11193" title="Wood–plastic composite" label="wood-plastic composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="11484" end="11492" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="11656" end="11661" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="11896" end="11903" title="sardine" label="sardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192662" start="11907" end="11914" title="anchovy" label="anchovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289807" start="11916" end="11920" title="hake" label="hake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905623" start="11926" end="11940" title="horse mackerel" label="horse mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q972788" start="12076" end="12086" title="Fish stocks" label="fish stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="12180" end="12189" title="fisheries" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="12198" end="12215" title="over-exploitation" label="over-exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="12591" end="12600" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409333" start="12661" end="12676" title="Samherji" label="Samherji&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q75022773" start="12699" end="12712" title="Fishrot Files" label="Fishrot Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q131473" start="12750" end="12753" title="ISK" label="ISK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="12813" end="12820" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="13302" end="13316" title="deepwater port" label="deepwater port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422310" start="13684" end="13705" title="Trans-Caprivi Highway" label="Trans-Caprivi Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824284" start="13710" end="13732" title="Trans-Kalahari Highway" label="Trans-Kalahari Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966859" start="13797" end="13830" title="Walvis Bay Export Processing Zone" label="Walvis Bay Export Processing Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="13859" end="13869" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="14153" end="14163" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001413" start="14179" end="14212" title="Wildlife of Namibia" label="Namibia&amp;#x27;s extensive wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q570459" start="14560" end="14572" title="sandboarding" label="sandboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="14574" end="14583" title="skydiving" label="skydiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="14703" end="14716" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420196" start="14718" end="14735" title="Fish River Canyon" label="Fish River Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932730" start="14737" end="14747" title="Sossusvlei" label="Sossusvlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135237" start="14753" end="14767" title="Skeleton Coast" label="Skeleton Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q390412" start="14774" end="14781" title="Sesriem" label="Sesriem"/>
<link wikidata="Q280231" start="14783" end="14793" title="Etosha Pan" label="Etosha Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59698" start="14819" end="14829" title="Swakopmund" label="Swakopmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="14831" end="14841" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q159325" start="14846" end="14854" title="Lüderitz" label="Lüderitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q202462" start="14928" end="14943" title="Namibian dollar" label="Namibian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="17200" end="17215" title="informal sector" label="informal sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="17320" end="17331" title="medical aid" label="medical aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182103" start="17337" end="17349" title="pension fund" label="pension fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979146" start="17509" end="17543" title="National Union of Namibian Workers" label="National Union of Namibian Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="17667" end="17672" title="SWAPO" label="SWAPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="17880" end="17899" title="subsistence farming" label="subsistence farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="18315" end="18331" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="18456" end="18464" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888795" start="18497" end="18514" title="Benjamin Hauwanga" label="Benjamin Hauwanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445451" start="18517" end="18530" title="Frans Indongo" label="Frans Indongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19513511" start="18533" end="18547" title="Monica Kalondo" label="Monica Kalondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574779" start="18550" end="18566" title="Harold Pupkewitz" label="Harold Pupkewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q99399" start="18581" end="18595" title="Wilhelm Sander" label="Wilhelm Sander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371386" start="18610" end="18621" title="Sven Thieme" label="Sven Thieme"/>
<link wikidata="Q806684" start="18638" end="18653" title="Bank of Namibia" label="Bank of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069709" start="18656" end="18698" title="List of state-owned enterprises in Namibia" label="List of state-owned enterprises in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="18701" end="18746" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21298" wikidata="Q12666278" url="?curid=21298" title="Telecommunications in Namibia">
<text>Telecommunications in Namibia include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Radio and television==
Per 1,000 inhabitants, there were 50 TV sets and 137 radio sets in Namibia in 2008.
* Radio stations: 
** State-run radio service broadcasts in multiple languages; about a dozen private radio stations; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2007);
** AM 2, FM 39, shortwave 4 (2001); 
** AM 2, FM 34, shortwave 5 (1998).

Since Independence in 1990, Namibia has seen a dramatic growth in radio stations, with both commercial (for instance Radio 99, Radio Wave, Radio Energy, Omulunga Radio, West Coast FM, etc.) and community (UNAM Radio, Katutura Community Radio, etc.) receiving licences. Most of these stations broadcast various types of music format, and political discussions, news and phone-in programs remain mostly the domain of the national broadcaster (NBC) which broadcasts nine radio services nationally (in various Namibian languages, including German - the only full-time German service outside of Europe), plus the new !Ha service, broadcasting to the San community in Tsumkwe.

* Television stations: 1 private and 1 state-run TV station; satellite and cable TV service is available; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2007).

The television network with the widest transmission range is the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation (NBC, not to be confused with the American NBC network). The NBC is the successor to the South Africa–run South West African Broadcasting Corporation (SWABC), which was modeled on the original SABC. Like the radio services of the NBC, the television service tries to cater to all the linguistic audiences in Namibia, although the dominant language is English (Namibia&#x27;s official language).

The commercial &quot;free to air&quot; station is One Africa Television, the successor to the now defunct TV Africa. It has expanded its transmitter network and is now available in most major towns and cities in Namibia. In 2007 it commenced broadcasting a local television news bulletin each evening.

The Trinity Broadcasting Network (TBN) is a religion television station, with some material originating locally, although also carrying relays from the United States. It is based in Windhoek and holds a community television licence granted in 2001.

==Telephones==
* Calling code: +264
* International call prefix: 00
* Main lines in use:
** 144,575 lines, 126th in the world (2019);
** 171,000 lines (2012);
** 140,000 lines (2008); 
** 127,900 lines (2004); 
** 110,200 lines (2000); 
** 100,848 lines (1997).
* Mobile cellular:
** 2.92 million lines, 142nd in the world (2019);
** 2.4 million lines (2012);
** 1.1 million lines (2008); 
** 450,000 lines (2006);
** 495,000 lines (2005); 
**   82,000 lines (2000 estimate); 
**   20,000 lines (1998). 
* Telephone system: good system; core fiber-optic network links most centers and connections are now digital; multiple mobile-cellular providers with a combined subscribership of more than 100 telephones per 100 persons; fiber-optic cable to South Africa, microwave radio relay link to Botswana, direct links to other neighboring countries (2010).
* Communications cables: connected to the African Coast to Europe (ACE) and the West Africa Cable System (WACS) submarine cables, as well as the South African Far East (SAFE) submarine cable through South Africa (2010).
* Satellite earth stations: 4 Intelsat (2010).

== Internet ==

* Top-level domain: .na
* Internet users: 1,291,944 users, 134th in the world; 51% of the population (2019).
* Fixed broadband: 61,698 subscriptions, 131st in the world (2019).
* Wireless broadband: 624,257 subscriptions, 86th in the world; 28.8% of the population, 56th in the world (2012).
* Internet hosts: 78,280 hosts, 84th in the world (2012).
* IPv4: 199,168 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 92.0 addresses per 1000 people (2012).
Telecom Namibia, which has offered ADSL access since late 2006, has a de facto monopoly on ADSL access. Their monopoly was unsuccessfully challenged in the courts by MWeb Namibia in May 2007 and again in August 2011.

In February 2007, ISP Namibia Mweb began offering broadband wireless services through WiMax, making Namibia the second African country (after Mozambique) to do so.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet; however, the Communications Act provides that the intelligence services can monitor e-mail and Internet usage with authorization from any magistrate. There have been some allegations and rumors that the government reviewed ways to block or curtail social media sites, but there is no concrete evidence of such action.

The constitution provides for freedom of speech and of the press, and the government generally respects these rights.

==See also==

* Mobile Telecommunications Limited Namibia (MTC-Namibia), a mobile phone company 66% of which is owned by Namibia Post and Telecom Holdings Limited which is intern wholly owned by the Namibian Government. 
* TN Mobile, a mobile telecommunications company 100% owned by Telecom Namibia which is owned by Namibia Post and Telecom Holdings Limited which is intern wholly owned by the Namibian Government.
* Telecom Namibia, a commercialized subsidiary of Namibia Post and Telecom Holdings Limited which is intern wholly owned by the Namibian Government.
* Media of Namibia
* List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa
* Digitalization in Namibia

==References==
* 


==External links==
* Communications Regulatory Authority of Namibia , website.
* Telecom Namibia, website.
* MTC-Namibia , website.
* Namibian Network Information Center (NA-NIC), manager of the .na domain.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12666278" start="0" end="29" title="Telecommunications in Namibia" label="Telecommunications in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="216" end="230" title="Radio broadcasting" label="Radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865189" start="686" end="696" title="UNAM Radio" label="UNAM Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378452" start="698" end="722" title="Katutura Community Radio" label="Katutura Community Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="1126" end="1129" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q622379" start="1143" end="1150" title="Tsumkwe" label="Tsumkwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="1155" end="1174" title="Television broadcasting" label="Television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461707" start="1400" end="1433" title="Namibian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Namibian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1477" end="1480" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419926" start="1627" end="1631" title="South African Broadcasting Corporation" label="SABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q516392" start="1880" end="1901" title="One Africa Television" label="One Africa Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778016" start="2137" end="2165" title="Trinity Broadcasting Network" label="Trinity Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="2315" end="2323" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="2400" end="2412" title="Calling code" label="Calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190395" start="2421" end="2446" title="List of international call prefixes" label="International call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="3237" end="3258" title="List of international submarine communications cables" label="Communications cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650617" start="3277" end="3300" title="ACE (cable system)" label="African Coast to Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946336" start="3315" end="3339" title="WACS (cable system)" label="West Africa Cable System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492219" start="3380" end="3402" title="SAFE (cable system)" label="South African Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3434" end="3446" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="3457" end="3481" title="Communications satellite" label="Satellite earth stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="3485" end="3493" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="3521" end="3537" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42758" start="3539" end="3542" title=".na" label=".na"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="3545" end="3559" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="3630" end="3645" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Fixed broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="3698" end="3716" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Wireless broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="3813" end="3827" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="3871" end="3875" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q114990" start="3981" end="3996" title="Telecom Namibia" label="Telecom Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4016" end="4020" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="4285" end="4290" title="WiMax" label="WiMax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="4299" end="4306" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="4341" end="4351" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="4556" end="4562" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="4821" end="4838" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="4850" end="4855" title="freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709188" start="4926" end="4967" title="MTC Namibia" label="Mobile Telecommunications Limited Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516118" start="5133" end="5142" title="TN Mobile" label="TN Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q114990" start="5329" end="5344" title="Telecom Namibia" label="Telecom Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39047469" start="5478" end="5494" title="Media of Namibia" label="Media of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642859" start="5497" end="5553" title="List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa" label="List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q121461475" start="5556" end="5581" title="Digitalization in Namibia" label="Digitalization in Namibia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21299" wikidata="Q1474033" url="?curid=21299" title="Transport in Namibia">
<text>This article deals with the system of transport in Namibia, both public and private.

==General==
===History===
The beginnings of organised travel and transport routes in the territory of South West Africa, today Namibia, have not yet been established. This is due to the lack of any written records relating to roads prior to the twilight of the 19th century. Archaeological work has dated one stretch of road in the south-western Brandberg Massif to 1250 AD. Although no other such early examples have been found, it is certain that this road was not the only one of its kind.

The first permanent road, established for ox wagons, was built at the initiative of Heinrich Schmelen, Rhenish missionary in Bethanie in the early 19th century. It led from Bethanie to Angra Pequeña, today the town of Lüderitz, and was intended to serve the natural harbour there in order to become independent of the Cape Colony.

== Road ==

Namibia&#x27;s road network is regarded as one of the best on the continent; road construction and maintenance adheres to international standards. The country&#x27;s 48,875.27 km roads (2017) are administered by the &quot;Roads Authority&quot;, a state-owned enterprise established by Act 17 of 1999. Due to low traffic volumes the majority of roads are not tarred. The distribution of road surfaces is:
* standard bitumen road
* low-volume bitumen road. These roads have the same base layer as gravel roads but are covered with a thin layer of bitumen to reduce maintenance cost and dust formation.
* standard gravel road, covered with imported gravel.
* earth-graded road. These roads are built by clearing the vegetation and blading the surface. Compaction is achieved by the traffic using the road. Some of these roads are not graded at all but just consist of earth or sand tracks separated by vegetation. These tracks are in use where a daily usage of less than five vehicles is expected. 
* salt road. These roads consist of concentrated salt water and gypsum-rich material. They are only built near the Atlantic coast inside the mist belt.

=== Roads by region (2017) ===
The major highways in Namibia are as follows:
* (freeway) from Windhoek to Okahandja, .
* in two discontinuous sections, first running from Noordoewer (South African border) to the southern terminus of the A1 in Windhoek, then resuming at the northern terminus of the A1 in Okahandja and running to Oshikango (Angolan border). Combined, the two sections have a length of .
* from Walvis Bay to Okahandja, .
* from Ariamsvlei (South African border) to Grünau, .
* from Lüderitz to Keetmanshoop, .
* from Windhoek to Buitepos (Botswana border), .
* from Otavi via Katima Mulilo to Ngoma (Botswana border), .
* from the Ohangwena Region to Rundu, .
* from Nkurenkuru to Katwitwi (Angolan border), .
* from Grootfontein to Gobabis, .
* from Tsumeb to Mpungu, .

===Road accidents===
In 2018, there were about 393,062 cars registered in Namibia (169,911 in the capital Windhoek). Namibia has a relatively high prevalence of road accidents, compared to its sparse population. In 2011, 491 people died in 2,846 crashes. Causes are often speeding and reckless driving, as well as general non-observance of traffic rules. Stray animals are also a major cause of accidents, particularly in the Kavango Region.

== Railway ==
Rail transport in Namibia is operated on a 2,687-kilometre network by TransNamib.

=== Railway links to adjacent countries ===

* Angola - There is currently no rail connection to Angola, although an agreement has been signed for a link. Angola uses the same gauge, as Namibia. (Rail transport in Angola)
* Botswana - There is currently no rail link with Botswana, though the two countries use the same gauge. As of February 2011, construction on a Trans-Kalahari rail link between Botswanan coal fields and Walvis Bay was expected to begin in a year and a half. (Rail transport in Botswana)
* South Africa - There is a rail connection to South Africa; the two countries use the same gauge. (Rail transport in South Africa)
* Zambia - There is currently no rail-link with Zambia, though the two countries use the same gauge. As of February 2011, there has been some talk of extending rail to the Zambian border. (Rail transport in Zambia)

== Ports and harbours ==
=== Atlantic Ocean ===

* Walvis Bay - railhead
* Lüderitz - railhead

== Merchant marine ==
none (2002, 1999 est.)

== Airports ==
Windhoek Hosea Kutako International Airport is the main international airport in the country. Two others international airports are Walvis Bay Airport and Eros Airport in Windhoek.


==References==
===Notes===
===Literature===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1474033" start="38" end="58" title="Transport in Namibia" label="transport in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="188" end="205" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="213" end="220" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897834" start="432" end="448" title="Brandberg Massif" label="Brandberg Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="457" end="459" title="AD" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957835" start="622" end="630" title="ox wagon" label="ox wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q99400" start="664" end="681" title="Heinrich Schmelen" label="Heinrich Schmelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="683" end="690" title="Rhenish" label="Rhenish"/>
<link wikidata="Q251677" start="705" end="713" title="Bethanie, Namibia" label="Bethanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880264" start="765" end="778" title="Angra Pequeña" label="Angra Pequeña"/>
<link wikidata="Q159325" start="798" end="806" title="Lüderitz" label="Lüderitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="898" end="909" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="1339" end="1346" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="1535" end="1541" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="1984" end="1990" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="2153" end="2160" title="freeway" label="freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="2167" end="2175" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q597491" start="2179" end="2188" title="Okahandja" label="Okahandja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013958" start="2244" end="2254" title="Noordoewer" label="Noordoewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="2316" end="2324" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q597491" start="2378" end="2387" title="Okahandja" label="Okahandja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033319" start="2403" end="2412" title="Oshikango" label="Oshikango"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="2484" end="2494" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q597491" start="2498" end="2507" title="Okahandja" label="Okahandja"/>
<link wikidata="Q654745" start="2518" end="2528" title="Ariamsvlei" label="Ariamsvlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q991160" start="2555" end="2561" title="Grünau, Namibia" label="Grünau"/>
<link wikidata="Q159325" start="2572" end="2580" title="Lüderitz" label="Lüderitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160884" start="2584" end="2596" title="Keetmanshoop" label="Keetmanshoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="2607" end="2615" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003137" start="2619" end="2627" title="Buitepos" label="Buitepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013965" start="2656" end="2661" title="Otavi" label="Otavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q864100" start="2666" end="2679" title="Katima Mulilo" label="Katima Mulilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q497535" start="2683" end="2688" title="Ngoma, Namibia" label="Ngoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q845702" start="2721" end="2737" title="Ohangwena Region" label="Ohangwena Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q662291" start="2741" end="2746" title="Rundu" label="Rundu"/>
<link wikidata="Q918461" start="2757" end="2767" title="Nkurenkuru" label="Nkurenkuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736847" start="2771" end="2779" title="Katwitwi" label="Katwitwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q986336" start="2807" end="2819" title="Grootfontein" label="Grootfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000609" start="2823" end="2830" title="Gobabis" label="Gobabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q639467" start="2841" end="2847" title="Tsumeb" label="Tsumeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649858" start="2851" end="2857" title="Mpungu" label="Mpungu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156669" start="3288" end="3302" title="Kavango Region" label="Kavango Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780755" start="3389" end="3399" title="TransNamib" label="TransNamib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997810" start="3449" end="3455" title="Transportation in Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178985" start="3598" end="3622" title="Rail transport in Angola" label="Rail transport in Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q859713" start="3626" end="3634" title="Transportation in Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q20828777" start="3768" end="3792" title="Trans-Kalahari Railway" label="Trans-Kalahari rail link"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="3827" end="3837" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234710" start="3883" end="3909" title="Rail transport in Botswana" label="Rail transport in Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431424" start="3913" end="3925" title="Transport in South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q437175" start="4011" end="4041" title="Rail transport in South Africa" label="Rail transport in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835109" start="4045" end="4051" title="Transportation in Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q430176" start="4232" end="4256" title="Rail transport in Zambia" label="Rail transport in Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="4310" end="4320" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4323" end="4331" title="railhead" label="railhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q159325" start="4334" end="4342" title="Lüderitz" label="Lüderitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4345" end="4353" title="railhead" label="railhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q667326" start="4416" end="4459" title="Windhoek Hosea Kutako International Airport" label="Windhoek Hosea Kutako International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q960708" start="4548" end="4566" title="Walvis Bay Airport" label="Walvis Bay Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321635" start="4571" end="4583" title="Eros Airport" label="Eros Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21300" wikidata="Q514711" url="?curid=21300" title="Namibian Defence Force">
<text>The Namibian Defence Force (NDF) comprises the national military forces of Namibia. It was created when the country, then known as South West Africa, gained independence from apartheid South Africa in 1990. Chapter 15 of the Constitution of Namibia establishes the NDF and defines its role and purpose as, &quot; ... to defend the territory and national interests of Namibia&quot;.

Namibia&#x27;s military was born from the integration of the formerly belligerent People&#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN), military wing of the South West African People&#x27;s Organization, and the South West African Territorial Force (SWATF) – a security arm of the former South African administration. The British formulated the force integration plan and began training the NDF, which consists of five battalions and a small headquarters element. The United Nations Transitional Assistance Group (UNTAG)&#x27;s Kenyan infantry battalion remained in Namibia for three months after independence to assist in training the NDF and stabilize the north. Martin Shalli and Charles &#x27;Ho Chi Minh&#x27; Namoloh were involved in the negotiations that allowed the Kenyan infantry battalion to remain for that period.

==Purpose==
The main roles of the Namibian Defence Force are to ensure the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country by guarding against external aggression, both conventional and unconventional; prevent violation of Namibia&#x27;s territorial integrity; and provide assistance to civil authorities in guarding and protecting government buildings and key installations as provided in the Defence Act.

Defence spending and percentage of GDP included $90 million in 1997/98, 2.6% of GDP. The 73.1 million figure in 2002 was 2.4% of GDP. These figures are almost certainly CIA World Factbook estimates.

==History==

Major General A W Dennis, CB, OBE (rtd), British Army, previously Director of Military Assistance Overseas, made the following comments on the initial phase in Namibia at a conference in Pretoria, South Africa on 6 August 1992:

You will no doubt recall that the Angola accords were signed in Luanda on 22 December 1988. In November 1989 SWAPO won 57% of the votes in the Namibian General Election and immediately requested the help of a British Military Advisory and Training Team following independence on 21 March 1990. The team, initially 55 strong, was duly deployed on 26 March 1990 and the first leaders cadre, for the 1st and 2nd Battalions, was run from 17 April to 2 June. By 1 July, the 1st Battalion, about 1 000 men strong, accompanied by 5 BMATT Advisors, had deployed to the northern border. By November 1990, only four months later, the 5th Battalion had deployed and in early 1991 the 21st Guards Battalion had also been formed, four staff courses had been run, support weapons and logistics training was well advanced (indeed a logistics battalion deployed as early as July 1990) and an operational test exercise had been conducted. In addition the Ministry of Defence, a mixture of civilian and military personnel, was operating as a department of state. No-one would pretend that everything was working perfectly, nevertheless, a great deal had been achieved in the first year following independence. Most people would probably agree that at some 7 500 strong the Army is unnecessarily large, but sensible plans will need to be made for the employment of any surplus soldiers before they are discharged. Integration has not been easy to achieve, at least in part, because of the need to use several interpreters to cope with the wide variety of languages involved. Battalions are made up of approximately 70% ex-PLAN and 30% ex-SWATF. This mixture could have proved explosive but hounded by their BMATT instructors they united in a common task (or perhaps in the face of a common enemy!) and soon realised that they could work well together. At the higher levels, integration has been more patchy, at least in part because of the departure of most white South African and SWATF officers. But the Government&#x27;s intentions seem clear in that it decided to split the four MOD directorates evenly, appointing two white and two black (ex PLAN) directors. In all this, BMATT Namibia has played a role remarkably similar to that of BMATT Zimbabwe.


==Organization and structure==
The Chief Of Defence Force is the highest-ranking officer and exercises overall executive command of the force. Service chiefs are two-star general officers, air officers and flag officers in command of their respective arms of service. NDF directorates are led by one-star general officers, air officers and flag officers. The exception, however, is the Joint Operations Directorate, whose head is a major general. The Joint Operations Directorate is responsible for force deployment in the Military.
*Chief of Defence Force: Air Marshal Martin Pinehas
**Army Commander: Major-General Aktofel Nambahu
**Air Force Commander: Air Vice Marshal Teofilus Shaende 
**Navy Commander: Rear Admiral Sacheus !Gonteb
***Chief of Staff; Joint Operations: Maj Gen Joshua Namhindo
***Chief of Staff; Human Resources: Air Cdre Retoveni Muhenje
***Chief of Staff; Defence Intelligence: 
***Chief of Staff; Defence Health Services: Brig Gen Dr. Ndapandula Jacob
***Chief of Staff; Information &amp; Communication Technology:
***Chief of Staff; Logistics: 
***Chief of Staff; Defence Inspector General:

===Chief of Defence Force===
The Chief of the Defence Force (Namibia) is always a commissioned three star General/Air/Flag Officer from the officer corps. The first chief of the NDF was Lieutenant-General Dimo Hamaambo. He was previously the leader of PLAN. Lieutenant-General Solomon Huwala replaced Hamaambo as Chief of the NDF on Hamaambo&#x27;s retirement. After Lieutenant-General Huwala retired in October 2006, Lieutenant General Martin Shalli headed the NDF.

President Hifikepunye Pohamba suspended Lieutenant-General Shalli from his post as Chief of Defence Force in 2009 over corruption allegations, dating back to the time when Shalli served as Namibia&#x27;s High Commissioner to Zambia. During the time of the suspension, Army Commander Major General Peter Nambundunga acted as Chief. Shalli eventually retired in January 2011; the post of Chief of the NDF was given to Lieutenant General Epaphras Denga Ndaitwah. Lieutenant Gen Ndaitwah served until 31 December 2013 when the NDF Chief&#x27;s position was given to Lieutenant Gen John Mutwa.

*1990–2000 Lieutenant-General Dimo Hamaambo, Namibian Army.
*2000–2006 Lieutenant-General Solomon Huwala, Namibian Army.
*2006–2011 Lieutenant-General Martin Shalli, Namibian Army.
*2011–2013 Lieutenant-General Epaphras Denga Ndaitwah, Namibian Army.
*2013–2020 Lieutenant-General John Mutwa, Namibian Army.
*2020 – &quot;Incumbent&quot; Air Marshal Martin Pinehas, Namibian Air Force.

===NDF Sergeant Major===

NDF Sergeant Major is the highest appointment a Non-Commissioned Officer may receive. Duties of the NDF Sergeant Major include making sure that discipline, drills, dressing code, performance standards, and morale of the non-commissioned officers are maintained.

Previous Sergeant Majors are:
*1990–1997 WO1 retired K. Lossen, Namibian Army
*1997–2000 Late WO1 retired A.H. Vatileni, Namibian Army
*2000–2007 WO1 retired E.K. Mutota, Namibian Army
*2007–2011 WO1 retired D.J. Angolo, Namibian Navy
*2011–2017 WO1 retired Isak Nankela, Namibian Air Force
*2017–2018 WO1 Albert Siyaya, Namibian Air Force
*2018–2019 WO1 Leonard Iiyambo, Namibian Army
*2019– Incumbent WO1 Joseph Nembungu, Namibian Air Force

===Joint Operations Directorate===

The Joint Operations Directorate is the only directorate headed by a two star Flag/Air/General Officer. Its role is to coordinate and conduct combined Operations, implement plans and doctrines in the force. The first Director of Operation in 1990 was Brigadier General Martin Shalli.

===Defence Health Services===

The Force&#x27;s Defence Health Services provides medical services to service personnel, it operates sick bays at all bases and units as well the military hospitals.

===Logistics Directorate===
The Logistics Directorate is responsible for the supplying materiel to the force. The first Director for Logistics was Colonel Peter Nambundunga

===Defence Inspectorate===

The Defence Inspector General&#x27;s Directorate is responsible for maintaining the efficiency and effectivennes of the Force. It also investigates both internal and external complaints.

===Namibian Defence Force ranks===
NDF ranks are based on the Commonwealth rank structure. There is no approved four-star general rank in the NDF. The Chief of Defence Force is a singular appointment that comes with an elevation to the rank of lieutenant general for an Army officer, air marshal for an Air Force officer and vice admiral for a Navy officer. Arms of services commanders i.e. Army, Air Force and Navy commanders, have a rank of major general, air vice marshal and rear admiral. The rank of brigadier has also been transformed into brigadier general. Directorate heads are always brigadier generals, i.e. the Chief of Staff for Defence Intelligence.
Warrant Officer Class 1 Appointments
Any warrant officer class 1 could be posted to substantive posts, including
==Army==
The Landward Arm of service for the Defence force is the Namibian Army, it is also the largest of the NDF&#x27;s service branches.

==Air Force==

The Aerial Warfare branch is small, but was bolstered with deliveries of some fighter jets in 2006 and 2008.

==Navy==

Development of the Maritime Warfare Branch has been slow, and the force was only formally established in 2004, 14 years after independence. Today, it numbers over 1100 personnel and deploys a small number of lightly armed patrol vessels. Extensive Brazilian aid assisted in its development.

==Joint Headquarters==

The Joint Headquarters is an Arm of Service level institution in the Defence Force and is created by the Minister of Defence in terms of section 13 of the Defence Act.

==Training institutions==

===Army Battle School===
Situated at the Oshivelo Army base, the school offers units and battle groups to test their combat fighting skills in conventional and non-conventional warfare. The school also offers courses such as:
*Company Group Commander Course(CGC)
*Platoon Commander Course(PCC)
*Platoon Sgt Commanders Course
*Section Commanders Course

===Army Technical Training Centre===
Established in 2011 the technical centre impart students with knowledge repair and maintain army systems and installations. The centre was commissioned on 27 February 2015.

===Namibian Defence Force Training Establishment===
The Namibian Defence Force Training Establishment is the main training and academic unit of the Namibian Defence Force. It offers Officer Cadets and NDF officers an opportunity to get a military-oriented academic qualification. Training and teaching in the institution ranges from Basic Military Training to technical mechanical training.

===Namibia Command and Staff College===

The Namibia Command and Staff College offers the Junior Staff Course (JSC) and the Senior Command and Staff Course (SCSC). It provides staff training to prepare students for staff appointments.

===Parachute Training School===
The force&#x27;s parachute airborne school is based at the Grootfontein Air Force Base. Here students from all service branches are training to qualify as Parachute specialists. The school was set up with help by the South African private military parachute training company Chute Systems who are training Namibia&#x27;s airborne forces and associated staff e.g. parachute riggers.

===Naval Training School===

Established on 22 November 2009, the Naval Training School was commissioned by President Hage Geingob on 22 July 2016. It is administratively divided into two sections, Sailors Training Wing and Marine Training Wing. It offers the following courses:
* Basic Seamanship Course
*Specialization Course
*Section Commander Course
*Marine Petty Officers Course
*Sailors Petty Officers Course

===School of Air Power Studies===
The School of Air Power Studies is run in conjunction with the Namibia Aviation Training Academy, which trains pilots and technicians.

===School of Military Science===
The School of Military Science, run in conjunction with the University of Namibia, offers officers in the Defence force qualifications ranging from Bachelor of Science Honors degrees in the field of nautical, Army and Aeronautical, to a post-graduate diploma in Security and Strategic studies, and a Master of Arts in Security and Strategic Studies (MA-SSS).

===School of Signals===

The School of Signals provides training to all personnel wishing to specialize in the communications field. The signals school was formed in 2015 from the old Signals Training Wing and Computer Training Centre of the military school. The school is co-located with the military school. It consists of four wings, one administration wing, and three training wings. The school offers the following courses:
*Communication Courses
*Signal Officers Courses
*Computer Courses

==See also==
*List of Namibian generals
*List of Namibian admirals
*List of Namibian Air Officers

==References==
===Notes===
===Further reading===
* Stephen F. Burgess, &#x27;Fashioning Integrated Security Forces after Conflict&#x27;, African Security, 1: 2, 69–91 (2008)
* Greg Mills, BMATT and Military Integration in South Africa, South African Defence Review, Issue 2, 1992 Covers reformation of Namibian Defence Force and British involvement
* Case studies in war-to-peace transition: the demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in Ethiopia, Namibia, and Uganda
* Thomas Jan Lambert, Criminal Justice in the Namibian Defence Force, LAP Lambert Academic Publishing, 2010
* Peter Batchelor, Kees Kingma, Guy Lamb, Demilitarisation and Peace-building in Southern Africa: The role of the military in state formation and nation-building, Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2004
* Donna Pankhurst, &quot;Namibia,&quot; in Peacekeeping in Africa, eds. Oliver Furley and Roy May (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 1998)
* Informante, Marine Corps commander accused of favouritism, 3 October 2012

==External links==
*Namibian Defence Force camouflage patterns </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q514711" start="4" end="26" title="Namibian Defence Force" label="Namibian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q514711" start="28" end="31" title="Namibian Defence Force" label="NDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="56" end="70" title="military force" label="military force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="75" end="82" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="131" end="148" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="175" end="184" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="185" end="197" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515410" start="225" end="248" title="Constitution of Namibia" label="Constitution of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165607" start="465" end="505" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="535" end="580" title="South West African People&amp;#x27;s Organization" label="South West African People&amp;#x27;s Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568829" start="590" end="626" title="South West African Territorial Force" label="South West African Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004902" start="846" end="890" title="United Nations Transitional Assistance Group" label="United Nations Transitional Assistance Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q720033" start="906" end="912" title="Military of Kenya" label="Kenyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776574" start="1043" end="1056" title="Martin Shalli" label="Martin Shalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065611" start="1061" end="1100" title="Charles Namoloh" label="Charles &amp;#x27;Ho Chi Minh&amp;#x27; Namoloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="1788" end="1806" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1873" end="1885" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="4470" end="4485" title="general officer" label="general officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="4488" end="4499" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q977459" start="4505" end="4517" title="flag officer" label="flag officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41531164" start="4869" end="4883" title="Martin Pinehas" label="Martin Pinehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124858795" start="4916" end="4931" title="Aktofel Nambahu" label="Aktofel Nambahu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4972" end="4989" title="Teofilus Shaende " label="Teofilus Shaende "/>
<link wikidata="Q131939261" start="5021" end="5036" title="Sacheus !Gonteb" label="Sacheus !Gonteb"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384708" start="5056" end="5072" title="Joint Operations Directorate (Namibia)" label="Joint Operations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5117" end="5132" title="Human Resources Directorate (Namibia)" label="Human Resources"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5179" end="5199" title="Defence Intelligence Directorate (Namibia)" label="Defence Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376133" start="5221" end="5244" title="Defence Health Services (Namibia)" label="Defence Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5295" end="5337" title="Defence Information &amp;amp; Communication Technology Directorate (Namibia)" label="Information &amp;amp; Communication Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376135" start="5358" end="5367" title="Defence Logistics Directorate (Namibia)" label="Logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376134" start="5389" end="5414" title="Defence Inspectorate (Namibia)" label="Defence Inspector General"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607330" start="5450" end="5486" title="Chief of the Defence Force (Namibia)" label="Chief of the Defence Force (Namibia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="5512" end="5522" title="Lieutenant General" label="three star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277727" start="5622" end="5635" title="Dimo Hamaambo" label="Dimo Hamaambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558634" start="5694" end="5708" title="Solomon Huwala" label="Solomon Huwala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776574" start="5854" end="5867" title="Martin Shalli" label="Martin Shalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176047" start="6182" end="6199" title="Peter Nambundunga" label="Peter Nambundunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382044" start="6320" end="6343" title="Epaphras Denga Ndaitwah" label="Epaphras Denga Ndaitwah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277727" start="6505" end="6518" title="Dimo Hamaambo" label="Dimo Hamaambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="6520" end="6533" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558634" start="6565" end="6579" title="Solomon Huwala" label="Solomon Huwala"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="6581" end="6594" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776574" start="6626" end="6639" title="Martin Shalli" label="Martin Shalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="6641" end="6654" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382044" start="6686" end="6709" title="Epaphras Denga Ndaitwah" label="Epaphras Denga Ndaitwah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="6711" end="6724" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733079" start="6756" end="6766" title="John Mutwa" label="John Mutwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="6768" end="6781" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q41531164" start="6825" end="6839" title="Martin Pinehas" label="Martin Pinehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961783" start="6841" end="6859" title="Namibian Air Force" label="Namibian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="7215" end="7228" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="7272" end="7285" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="7322" end="7335" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961790" start="7372" end="7385" title="Namibian Navy" label="Namibian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961783" start="7423" end="7441" title="Namibian Air Force" label="Namibian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961783" start="7472" end="7490" title="Namibian Air Force" label="Namibian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="7523" end="7536" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961783" start="7575" end="7593" title="Namibian Air Force" label="Namibian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384708" start="7635" end="7663" title="Joint Operations Directorate (Namibia)" label="Joint Operations Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376133" start="7964" end="7987" title="Defence Health Services (Namibia)" label="Defence Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376135" start="8146" end="8167" title="Defence Logistics Directorate (Namibia)" label="Logistics Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176047" start="8269" end="8286" title="Peter Nambundunga" label="Peter Nambundunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376134" start="8320" end="8345" title="Defence Inspectorate (Namibia)" label="Defence Inspector General"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077043" start="9347" end="9360" title="Namibian Army" label="Namibian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="9805" end="9811" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q914118" start="10110" end="10118" title="Oshivelo" label="Oshivelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981789" start="10689" end="10734" title="Namibian Defence Force Training Establishment" label="Namibian Defence Force Training Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394810" start="11070" end="11103" title="Namibia Command and Staff College" label="Namibia Command and Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431411" start="11352" end="11379" title="Grootfontein Air Force Base" label="Grootfontein Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q96419048" start="11742" end="11763" title="Naval Training School" label="Naval Training School"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405159" start="12130" end="12157" title="School of Air Power Studies" label="School of Air Power Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632690" start="12299" end="12325" title="School of Military Science (Namibia)" label="School of Military Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q220226" start="12355" end="12376" title="University of Namibia" label="University of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754767" start="13165" end="13190" title="List of Namibian generals" label="List of Namibian generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754762" start="13192" end="13217" title="List of Namibian admirals" label="List of Namibian admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617297" start="13219" end="13248" title="List of Namibian Air Officers" label="List of Namibian Air Officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q571831" start="13799" end="13830" title="LAP Lambert Academic Publishing" label="LAP Lambert Academic Publishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21301" wikidata="Q5468519" url="?curid=21301" title="Foreign relations of Namibia">
<text>Namibia follows a largely independent foreign policy, with strong affiliations with states that aided the independence struggle, including Nigeria, Libya, and Cuba.

In Africa, Namibia has been involved in conflicts in neighbouring Angola as well as Democratic Republic of the Congo.

==International organizations==

Namibia is a member of 47 international organizations. These are:

===United Nations===

Namibia became the 160th member of the United Nations on 23 April 1990 upon independence.

==International disputes==

Namibia is involved in several minor international disputes.
* Commission established with Botswana to resolve small residual disputes along the Caprivi Strip, including the Situngu marshlands along the Linyanti River
* Botswana residents protest Namibia&#x27;s planned construction of the Okavango hydroelectric dam on Popa Falls
* Managed dispute with South Africa over the location of the boundary in the Orange River
* Dormant dispute remains where Botswana, Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe boundaries converge

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Namibia maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==

===Africa===

===Americas===

===Asia===

===Europe===

===Namibia and the Commonwealth of Nations===

Namibia has been a Commonwealth republic since 1990, when South West Africa became independent of South Africa.

== See also ==

* List of diplomatic missions in Namibia
* List of diplomatic missions of Namibia

==Notes and references==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="0" end="7" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="38" end="52" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="139" end="146" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="148" end="153" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="159" end="163" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="232" end="238" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="250" end="282" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="344" end="370" title="international organization" label="international organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="617" end="625" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q832222" start="671" end="684" title="Caprivi Strip" label="Caprivi Strip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="700" end="718" title="Situngu marshlands" label="Situngu marshlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q182942" start="729" end="743" title="Cuando River" label="Linyanti River"/>
<link wikidata="Q188773" start="816" end="824" title="Okavango River" label="Okavango"/>
<link wikidata="Q188773" start="846" end="856" title="Okavango River" label="Popa Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="934" end="946" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="979" end="987" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="989" end="996" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="998" end="1004" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="1010" end="1018" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216856" start="1283" end="1304" title="Republics in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="1322" end="1339" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592897" start="1395" end="1433" title="List of diplomatic missions in Namibia" label="List of diplomatic missions in Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203954" start="1436" end="1474" title="List of diplomatic missions of Namibia" label="List of diplomatic missions of Namibia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21302" wikidata="Q697" url="?curid=21302" title="Nauru">
<text>Nauru, officially the Republic of Nauru, formerly known as Pleasant Island, is an island country and microstate in Micronesia, part of the Oceania region in the Central Pacific. Its nearest neighbour is Banaba of Kiribati about to the east.

It lies northwest of Tuvalu, northeast of the Solomon Islands, east-northeast of Papua New Guinea, southeast of the Federated States of Micronesia and south of the Marshall Islands. With an area of only , Nauru is the third-smallest country in the world, larger than only Vatican City and Monaco, making it the smallest republic and island nation, as well as the smallest member state of the Commonwealth of Nations by area. Its population of about 10,800 is the world&#x27;s third-smallest (not including colonies or overseas territories). Nauru is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, and the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States.

Settled by Micronesians circa 1000 BCE, Nauru was annexed and claimed as a colony by the German Empire in the late 19th century. After World War I, Nauru became a League of Nations mandate administered by Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. During World War II, Nauru was occupied by Japanese troops, and was bypassed by the Allied advance across the Pacific. After the war ended, the country entered into United Nations trusteeship. Nauru gained its independence in 1968. At various points since 2001, it has accepted aid from the Australian Government in exchange for hosting the Nauru Regional Processing Centre, a controversial offshore Australian immigration detention facility. As a result of heavy dependence on Australia, some sources have identified Nauru as a client state of Australia.

Nauru is a phosphate-rock island with rich deposits near the surface, which allowed easy strip mining operations for over a century. However, this has seriously harmed the country&#x27;s environment, causing the island nation to suffer from what is often referred to as the &quot;resource curse&quot;. The phosphate was exhausted in the 1990s, and the remaining reserves are not economically viable for extraction. A trust established to manage the island&#x27;s accumulated mining wealth, set up for the day the reserves would be exhausted, has diminished in value. To earn income, Nauru briefly became a tax haven and illegal money laundering centre.

== History ==

Nauru was first settled by Micronesians at least 3,000 years ago, and there is evidence of possible Polynesian influence. Comparatively little is known of Nauruan prehistory, although the island is believed to have had a long period of isolation, which accounts for the distinct language that developed among the inhabitants. There were traditionally 12 clans or tribes on Nauru, which are represented in the twelve-pointed star on the country&#x27;s flag. Traditionally, Nauruans traced their descent matrilineally. Inhabitants practised aquaculture: they caught juvenile milkfish (known as &quot;Ibija&quot; in Nauruan), acclimatised them to freshwater, and raised them in Buada Lagoon, providing a reliable food source. The other locally grown components of their diet included coconuts and pandanus fruit. The name &quot;Nauru&quot; may derive from the Nauruan word &quot;&quot;, which means &#x27;I go to the beach.&#x27;

In 1798, the British sea captain John Fearn, on his trading ship &quot;Hunter&quot; (300 tons), became the first Westerner to report sighting Nauru, calling it &quot;Pleasant Island&quot;, because of its attractive appearance. From at least 1826, Nauruans had regular contact with Europeans on whaling and trading ships who called for provisions and fresh drinking water. The last whaler to call during the Age of Sail visited in 1904.

Around this time, deserters from European ships began to live on the island. The islanders traded food for alcoholic palm wine and firearms. The firearms were used during the 10-year Nauruan Civil War that began in 1878.

After an agreement with Great Britain, Germany annexed Nauru in 1888 and incorporated it into the Marshall Islands Protectorate for administrative purposes. The arrival of the Germans ended the civil war, and kings were established as rulers of the island. King Auweyida was the most widely known. Christian missionaries from the Gilbert Islands arrived in 1888. The German settlers called the island &quot;Nawodo&quot; or &quot;Onawero&quot;. The Germans ruled Nauru for almost three decades. Robert Rasch, a German trader who married a 15-year-old Nauruan girl, was the first administrator, appointed in 1890.

Phosphate was discovered on Nauru in 1900 by the prospector Albert Fuller Ellis. The Pacific Phosphate Company began to exploit the reserves in 1906 by agreement with Germany, exporting its first shipment in 1907. In 1914, following the outbreak of World War I, Nauru was captured by Australian troops. In 1919, it was agreed by the Allied and Associated Powers that George V of the United Kingdom should be the administering authority under a League of Nations mandate. The Nauru Island Agreement forged in 1919 among the governments of the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand provided for the administration of the island and extraction of the phosphate deposits by an intergovernmental British Phosphate Commission (BPC). The terms of the League of Nations mandate were drawn up in 1920.

The island experienced an influenza epidemic and ongoing colonial strife through the early 20th century, with a mortality rate of 18 per cent among native Nauruans. In 1923, the League of Nations gave Australia a trustee mandate over Nauru, with the United Kingdom and New Zealand as co-trustees. On 6 and 7 December 1940, the German auxiliary cruisers &quot;Komet&quot; and &quot;Orion&quot; sank five supply ships in the vicinity of Nauru. &quot;Komet&quot; then shelled Nauru&#x27;s phosphate mining areas, oil storage depots, and the shiploading cantilever.
Japanese troops occupied Nauru on 25 August 1942. The Japanese built 2 airfields which were bombed for the first time on 25 March 1943, preventing food supplies from being flown to Nauru. The Japanese deported 1,200 Nauruans to work as labourers in the Chuuk Islands, which was also occupied by Japan. As part of the Allied strategy of island hopping from the Pacific islands towards the main islands of Japan, Nauru was bypassed and left to &quot;wither on the vine&quot;. Nauru was finally taken back from the Japanese on 13 September 1945, when commander Hisayaki Soeda surrendered the island to the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Navy. The surrender was accepted by Brigadier J. R. Stevenson, who represented Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee, the commander of the First Australian Army, aboard the warship HMAS &quot;Diamantina&quot;. Arrangements were made to repatriate from Chuuk the 745 Nauruans who survived Japanese captivity there. They were returned to Nauru by the BPC ship &quot;Trienza&quot; in January 1946.

In 1947, a trusteeship was established by the United Nations, with Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom as trustees. Under those arrangements, the UK, Australia, and New Zealand were a joint administering authority. The Nauru Island Agreement provided for the first administrator to be appointed by Australia for five years, leaving subsequent appointments to be decided by the three governments. However, in practice, administrative power was exercised by Australia alone.

The 1948 Nauru riots occurred when Chinese guano mining workers went on strike over pay and conditions. The Australian administration imposed a state of emergency with Native Police and armed volunteers of locals and Australian officials being mobilised. This force, using sub-machine guns and other firearms, opened fire on the Chinese workers killing two and wounding sixteen. Around 50 of the workers were arrested and two of these were bayoneted to death while in custody. The trooper who bayoneted the prisoners was charged but later acquitted on grounds that the wounds were &quot;accidentally received.&quot; The governments of the Soviet Union and China made official complaints against Australia at the United Nations over this incident.

In 1964, it was proposed to relocate the population of Nauru to Curtis Island off the coast of Queensland, Australia. By that time, Nauru had been extensively mined for phosphate by companies from Australia, Britain, and New Zealand, damaging the landscape so much that it was thought the island would be uninhabitable by the 1990s. Rehabilitating the island was seen as financially impossible. In 1962, Australian Prime Minister Robert Menzies said that the three countries involved in the mining had an obligation to provide a solution for the Nauruan people, and proposed finding a new island for them. In 1963, the Australian Government proposed to acquire all the land on Curtis Island (which was considerably larger than Nauru) and then offer the Nauruans freehold title over the island and that the Nauruans would become Australian citizens. The cost of resettling the Nauruans on Curtis Island was estimated to be (A$ in ), which included housing and infrastructure and the establishment of pastoral, agricultural, and fishing industries. However, the Nauruan people did not wish to become Australian citizens and wanted to be given sovereignty over Curtis Island to establish themselves as an independent nation, which Australia would not agree to. Nauru rejected the proposal to move to Curtis Island, instead choosing to become an independent nation operating their mines in Nauru.

Nauru became self-governing in January 1966, and following a two-year constitutional convention, it became independent on 31 January 1968 under founding president Hammer DeRoburt. In 1967, the people of Nauru purchased the assets of the British Phosphate Commissioners, and in June 1970, control passed to the locally owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC). Income from the mines made Nauruans among the richest people in the world. In 1989, Nauru took legal action against Australia in the International Court of Justice over Australia&#x27;s administration of the island, in particular, Australia&#x27;s failure to remedy the environmental damage caused by phosphate mining. &quot;Certain Phosphate Lands: Nauru v. Australia&quot; led to an out-of-court settlement to rehabilitate the mined-out areas of Nauru.

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a state of emergency was declared in Nauru on 17 March 2020. The declaration to minimize the outbreak was signed by President Lionel Aingimea during a period of 30 days.

== Geography ==

Nauru is a , oval-shaped island in the southwestern Pacific Ocean, south of the Equator. The island is surrounded by a fringing coral reef, which is exposed at low tide and dotted with pinnacles. The presence of the reef has prevented the establishment of a seaport, although channels in the reef allow small boats access to the island. A fertile coastal strip wide lies inland from the beach.
Coral cliffs surround Nauru&#x27;s central plateau. The highest point of the plateau, called the Command Ridge, is above sea level.

The only fertile areas on Nauru are on the narrow coastal belt, where coconut palms flourish. The land around Buada Lagoon supports bananas, pineapples, vegetables, pandanus trees, and indigenous hardwoods, such as the tamanu tree.

Nauru was one of three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific Ocean, along with Banaba (Ocean Island), in Kiribati, and Makatea, in French Polynesia. The phosphate reserves on Nauru are now almost entirely depleted. Phosphate mining in the central plateau has left a barren terrain of jagged limestone pinnacles up to high. Mining has stripped and devastated about 80 per cent of Nauru&#x27;s land area, leaving it uninhabitable and has also affected the surrounding exclusive economic zone; 40% of marine life is estimated to have been killed by silt and phosphate runoff.

The island has no rivers, and there is no inflow or outflow from the Buada Lagoon; it is an endorheic basin.

=== Climate ===
Nauru&#x27;s climate is hot and very humid year-round because of its proximity to the equator and the ocean. Nauru is hit by monsoon rains between November and February. Annual rainfall is highly variable and is influenced by the El Niño–Southern Oscillation, with several significant recorded droughts. The temperature on Nauru ranges between during the day and is quite stable at around at night.

Streams and rivers do not exist in Nauru. Water is gathered from roof catchment systems or brought to Nauru as ballast on ships returning for loads of phosphate.

=== Ecology ===

Fauna is sparse on the island because of a lack of vegetation and the consequences of phosphate mining. Many indigenous birds have disappeared or become rare owing to the destruction of their habitat. There are about 60 recorded vascular plant species native to the island, none of which are endemic. Coconut farming, mining, and introduced species have seriously disturbed the native vegetation.

There are no native land mammals, but there are native insects, land crabs, and birds, including the endemic Nauru reed warbler. The Polynesian rat, cats, dogs, pigs, and chickens have been introduced to Nauru from ships. The diversity of the reef marine life makes fishing a popular activity for tourists on the island; also popular are scuba diving and snorkelling.

== Politics ==


The president of Nauru is David Adeang, who heads a 19-member unicameral parliament. The country is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, and the Asian Development Bank. Nauru also participates in the Commonwealth and Olympic Games. Recently, Nauru became a member country of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). The Republic of Nauru became the 189th member of the International Monetary Fund in April 2016.

Nauru is a republic with a parliamentary system of government. The president is both head of state and head of government and is dependent on parliamentary confidence to remain president. All 19 parliament seats are elected every three years. The parliament elects the president from its members, and the president appoints a cabinet of five to six members. As a result of a referendum in 2021, naturalised citizens and their descendants are barred from becoming parliamentarians.

Nauru lacks any formal structure for political parties, and candidates typically stand for office as independents; fifteen of the 19 members of the current parliament are independents. Four parties that have been active in Nauruan politics are the Nauru Party, the Democratic Party, Nauru First and the Centre Party. However, alliances within the government are often formed based on extended family ties rather than party affiliation.

From 1992 to 1999, Nauru had a local government system known as the Nauru Island Council (NIC). It was a successor to the Nauru Local Government Council, established in 1951. This nine-member council was designed to provide municipal services. The NIC was dissolved in 1999 and all assets and liabilities became vested in the national government. Land tenure on Nauru is unusual: all Nauruans have certain rights to all land on the island, which is owned by individuals and family groups. Government and corporate entities do not own any land, and they must enter into a lease arrangement with landowners to use land. Non-Nauruans cannot own land on the island.

Nauru&#x27;s Supreme Court, headed by the Chief Justice, is paramount on constitutional issues. Other cases can be appealed to the two-judge Appellate Court. Parliament cannot overturn court decisions. Historically, Appellate Court rulings could be appealed to the High Court of Australia, though this happened only rarely and the Australian court&#x27;s appellate jurisdiction ended entirely on 12 March 2018 after the Government of Nauru unilaterally ended the arrangement. Lower courts consist of the District Court and the Family Court, both of which are headed by a Resident Magistrate, who also is the Registrar of the Supreme Court. There are two other quasi-courts: the Public Service Appeal Board and the Police Appeal Board, both of which are presided over by the Chief Justice.

=== Foreign relations ===
Following independence in 1968, Nauru joined the Commonwealth of Nations as a Special Member; it became a full member in 1999. The country was admitted to the Asian Development Bank in 1991 and the United Nations in 1999. Nauru is a member of the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme, the Pacific Community, and the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission. In February 2021, Nauru announced it would be formally withdrawing from the Pacific Islands Forum in a joint statement with Marshall Islands, Kiribati, and the Federated States of Micronesia after a dispute regarding Henry Puna&#x27;s election as the Forum&#x27;s secretary-general.
Nauru has no armed forces, though there is a small police force under civilian control. Australia is responsible for Nauru&#x27;s defence under an informal agreement between the two countries. The September 2005 memorandum of understanding between Australia and Nauru provides the latter with financial aid and technical assistance, including a Secretary of Finance to prepare the budget, and advisers on health and education. This aid is in return for Nauru&#x27;s housing of asylum seekers while their applications for entry into Australia are processed. Nauru uses the Australian dollar as its official currency.

Nauru has used its position as a member of the United Nations to gain financial support from both Taiwan (officially the Republic of China or ROC) and China (officially the People&#x27;s Republic of China or PRC) by changing its recognition from one to the other under the One-China policy. On 21 July 2002, Nauru signed an agreement to establish diplomatic relations with the PRC, accepting US$130 million from the PRC for this action (US$ in ). In response, the ROC severed diplomatic relations with Nauru two days later. Nauru later re-established links with the ROC on 14 May 2005, and diplomatic ties with the PRC were officially severed on 31 May 2005. On 15 Jan 2024, Nauru severed ties with the ROC and re-established diplomatic ties with the PRC.

In 2008, Nauru recognised Kosovo as an independent country, and in 2009 Nauru became the fourth country, after Russia, Nicaragua, and Venezuela, to recognise Abkhazia and South Ossetia, two breakaway autonomous republics of Georgia. Russia was reported to be giving Nauru US$50 million in humanitarian aid as a result of this recognition (US$ in ). On 15 July 2008, the Nauruan government announced a port refurbishment programme, financed with US$9 million of development aid received from Russia (US$ in ). The Nauru government claimed this aid is not related to its recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

The US Atmospheric Radiation Measurement program operates a climate-monitoring facility on the island.

A significant portion of Nauru&#x27;s income has been in the form of aid from Australia. In 2001, the MV &quot;Tampa&quot;, a Norwegian ship that had rescued 438 refugees from a stranded boat, was seeking to dock in Australia. In what became known as the &quot;Tampa&quot; affair, the ship was refused entry and boarded by Australian troops. The refugees were eventually taken to Nauru to be held in detention facilities which later became part of the Howard government&#x27;s Pacific Solution. Nauru operated two detention centres known as State House and Topside for these refugees in exchange for Australian aid. By November 2005, only two refugees remained on Nauru from those first sent there in 2001. The Australian government sent further groups of asylum-seekers to Nauru in late 2006 and early 2007. The refugee centre was closed in 2008, but, following the Australian government&#x27;s re-adoption of the Pacific Solution in August 2012, it has re-opened it. Amnesty International has since described the conditions of the refugees of war living in Nauru as a &quot;horror&quot;, with reports of children as young as eight attempting suicide and engaging in acts of self-harm. In 2018, the situation gained attention as a &quot;mental health crisis&quot;, with an estimated thirty children suffering from traumatic withdrawal syndrome, also known as resignation syndrome. By the middle of 2023, the camp was finally totally emptied for the first time since it opened, with 4183 people having been detained there since it opened in 2012. In 2024 a few dozen refugees were again being held there while their claims are being processed.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Nauru is divided into fourteen administrative districts, which are grouped into eight electoral constituencies and are further divided into villages. The most populous district is Denigomodu, with 1,804 residents, of which 1,497 reside in a Republic of Nauru Phosphate Corporation settlement called &quot;Location&quot;. The following table shows population by district according to the 2011 census.
== Economy ==

Before a resurgence in the 2010s, the Nauruan economy was strongest in the 1970s, with GDP peaking in 1981. This trend came from phosphate mining, which accounted for a majority of its economic output. Mining declined starting in the early 1980s. There are few other resources, and most necessities are imported. Small-scale mining is still conducted by RONPhos, formerly known as the Nauru Phosphate Corporation. The government places a percentage of RONPhos&#x27;s earnings into the Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust. The trust manages long-term investments, which were intended to support the citizens after the phosphate reserves were exhausted.

Because of mismanagement, the trust&#x27;s fixed and current assets were reduced considerably and may never fully recover. The failed investments included financing &quot;Leonardo the Musical&quot; in 1993. The Mercure Hotel in Sydney, Australia and Nauru House in Melbourne, Australia were sold in 2004 to finance debts and Air Nauru&#x27;s only Boeing 737 was repossessed in December 2005. Normal air service resumed after the aircraft was replaced with a Boeing 737-300 airliner in June 2006. In 2005, the corporation sold its remaining real estate in Melbourne, the vacant Savoy Tavern site, for A$7.5 million (US$ in ).

The value of the trust is estimated to have shrunk from A$1.3 billion in 1991 to A$138 million in 2002 (A$ to A$ in dollars). Nauru currently lacks money to perform many of the basic functions of government; for example, the National Bank of Nauru is insolvent. The CIA World Factbook estimated a GDP per capita of US$5,000 in 2005. The Asian Development Bank 2007 economic report on Nauru estimated GDP per capita at US$2,400 to US$2,715.

There are no personal taxes in Nauru. The unemployment rate is estimated to be 23% and the government employs 95% of those who have jobs. The Asian Development Bank notes that, although the administration has a strong public mandate to implement economic reforms, in the absence of an alternative to phosphate mining, the medium-term outlook is for continued dependence on external assistance. Tourism is not a major contributor to the economy.
In the 1990s, Nauru became a tax haven and offered passports to foreign nationals for a fee. The inter-governmental Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) identified Nauru as one of 15 &quot;non-cooperative&quot; countries in its fight against money laundering. During the 1990s, it was possible to establish a licensed bank in Nauru for only US$25,000 (US$ in ) with no other requirements. Under pressure from FATF, Nauru introduced anti-avoidance legislation in 2003, after which foreign hot money left the country. In October 2005, after satisfactory results from the legislation and its enforcement, FATF lifted the non-cooperative designation.

From 2001 to 2007, the Nauru detention centre provided a significant source of income for the country. Nauruan authorities reacted with concern to its closure by Australia. In February 2008, Foreign Affairs Minister Kieren Keke, stated that the closure would result in 100 Nauruans losing their jobs, and would affect 10% of the island&#x27;s population directly or indirectly: &quot;We have got a huge number of families that are suddenly going to be without any income. We are looking at ways we can try and provide some welfare assistance but our capacity to do that is very limited. Literally we have got a major unemployment crisis in front of us.&quot; The detention centre was re-opened in August 2012.

In July 2017, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) upgraded its rating of Nauru&#x27;s standards of tax transparency. Previously Nauru had been listed alongside fourteen other countries that had failed to show that they could comply with international tax transparency standards and regulations. The OECD subsequently put Nauru through a fast-tracked compliance process and the country was given a &quot;largely compliant&quot; rating.

The Nauru 2017–2018 budget, delivered by Minister of Finance David Adeang, forecast A$128.7 million in revenues and A$128.6 million in expenditures and projected modest economic growth for the nation over the next two years. In 2018, the Nauru government partnered with the deep sea mining company DeepGreen, now Nauru Ocean Resources Inc (NORI), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Canadian The Metals Company. They planned to harvest manganese nodules whose minerals and metals can be used in the development of sustainable energy technology.

== Demographics ==
Nauru had  residents as of July . The population was previously larger, but in 2006 the island saw 1,500 people leave during a repatriation of immigrant workers from Kiribati and Tuvalu. The repatriation was motivated by significant layoffs in phosphate mining.

Nauru is one of the most densely populated Westernized countries in the South Pacific.

The official languages of Nauru are Nauruan and English. Nauruan is a distinct Micronesian language, which is spoken by 96% of ethnic Nauruans at home. English is widely spoken and is the language of government and commerce.

The main religion practised on the island is Christianity: the main denominations are Nauru Congregational Church (35.71%), Catholic Church (32.96%), Assemblies of God (12.98%), and Baptist (1.48%). The Constitution provides for freedom of religion. However, the government has restricted the religious practices of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, most of whom are foreign workers employed by the government-owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation. The Catholics are pastorally served by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarawa and Nauru, with see at Tarawa in Kiribati.

== Public services ==

=== Education ===
Literacy on Nauru is 96%. Education is compulsory for children from six to sixteen years old, and two more non-compulsory years are offered (years 11 and 12). The island has three primary schools and two secondary schools. The secondary schools are Nauru Secondary School and Nauru College. There is a campus of the University of the South Pacific on Nauru. Before this campus was built in 1987, students would study either by distance or abroad. Since 2011, the University of New England, Australia has established a presence on the island with around 30 Nauruan teachers studying for an associate degree in education. These students will continue on to the degree to complete their studies. This project is led by Associate Professor Pep Serow and funded by the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

The previous community public library was destroyed in a fire. , a new one had not yet been built, and no bookmobile services were available as of that year. Sites with libraries include the University of the South Pacific campus, Nauru Secondary, Kayser College, and Aiwo Primary. The Nauru Community Library is in the new University of the South Pacific Nauru Campus building, which was officially opened in May 2018.

=== Health ===
Nauru has one of the highest child mortality rates in the Pacific Island Countries and Territories (PICTs) region at 2.9% in 2020, according to a UNICEF study.
Life expectancy in Nauru in 2009 was 60.6 years for males and 68.0 years for females.

By measure of mean body mass index (BMI), Nauruans are the most overweight people in the world; 97% of men and 93% of women are overweight or obese. In 2012, the obesity rate was 71.7%. Obesity on the Pacific islands is common.

Nauru has the world&#x27;s highest level of type 2 diabetes, with more than 40% of the population affected. Other significant dietary-related problems on Nauru include kidney disease and heart disease.

Nauru has the world&#x27;s highest tobacco smoking rate (48.3% in 2022).

==Transport==

The island is solely served by Nauru International Airport. Passenger service is provided by Nauru Airlines. Flights operate four days a week to Brisbane, Australia, with limited service to other destinations including Nadi (Fiji) and Bonriki (Kiribati).

The island has about 30 km (18 miles) of road, and it has about 4 km of railway that was built for mining use a century ago. Nauru is accessible by sea via the Nauru International Port. The modernization and expansion project of the former Aiwo Boat Harbor was expected to be completed in 2021 but has been delayed due to technical and logistics issues caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

==Effects of mining==

==Food, farming, and diet==
=== Plants and farming ===
Historically, Indigenous Nauruans kept household gardens that provided much of the food that they needed through subsistence farming, with the most common food plants including coconuts, breadfruit, bananas, pandanus, papaya, and guavas. Because of the large immigrant population that would work in the phosphate mines, there were many types of fruits and vegetables grown that were staples in those countries as well. The soil in Nauru was very rich on what citizens call the &quot;Topside&quot;, which is the raised phosphate plateau where the phosphate is mined from, and it was extremely fertile and great for growing crops. However, the area where most Nauruans live now, on the coastal ring on the island that hasn&#x27;t been mined, the soil quality is among the poorest in the world, as it is shallow, alkaline, and has the coarse texture of the coral that surrounds it. In 2011, just 13% of households maintained a garden or were involved in growing crops. Most of the soil that was on Nauru is now gone because of phosphate-mining activities, leaving people to import the soil that they need. Ethnobotanical studies have indicated that the reduction in the types of plants that can be grown due to phosphate mining has significantly impacted the connection that Indigenous Nauruans feel to the land, as plants are a large part of their cultural identity and have many uses in their lives, with each plant having an average of seven uses within Pacific Island cultures.

=== Food ===

For Nauru residents today, all food must also be imported because of the loss of 90% of arable land due to phosphate mining, leaving people with a diet of mainly processed foods, such as rice and sugar. Though residents are trying to salvage the soil that they can, some researchers speculate that there will be no regeneration of soils even after the mining ceases. The country&#x27;s dependence on processed and imported foods along with &quot;cultural, historical, and social factors&quot; have greatly affected the health of its citizens. Despite having all food imported, the Household and Income Expenditure Survey (HIES) conducted for the year of 2012–2013 found that Nauruans have a food poverty incidence rate of 0, based on the Food Poverty Line (FPL) which &quot;includes a daily intake of 2,100 calories per adult per day.&quot;

=== Non-food basic needs ===
While the HIES found that Nauru is doing well in terms of food poverty, 24% of the population and 16.8% of households are below the basic needs (clothing, shelter, education, transport, communication, water, sanitation and health services) poverty line. This is the worst poverty index of all Pacific nations. In 2017, half of Nauruans were living on US$9,000 a year (approx. A$11,700 a year). Water resources are extremely limited, with the island supplying enough for 32 liters of freshwater per person per day despite the WHO&#x27;s recommendation of 50 liters per person per day. Much of the groundwater has been contaminated by mining runoff, toilets, and dumping of other commercial and household wastes, causing Nauruans to rely on imported water, the price of which can vary as it is closely tied to fuel prices for its delivery, and rainfall storage. Access to sanitation facilities is restricted with just 66% of residents having access to reliable toilets, and open defecation is still practiced by 3% of the population. Schools are frequently forced to close because they do not have reliable toilets or drinking water for students to use. There is a long-standing truancy problem, and accessibility of education for refugee and asylum-seeking children, as well as for disabled children, remain areas of concern for Nauru&#x27;s education sector.

== Culture ==
Angam Day, held on 26 October, celebrates the recovery of the Nauruan population after the two world wars and the 1920 influenza epidemic. Colonial and contemporary Western influence has largely displaced the indigenous culture. Few older customs have been preserved, but some forms of traditional music, arts and crafts, and fishing are still practised.

===Music===
Nauruan folk songs existed as of 1970, while &quot;Oh Bwio Eben Bwio&quot; is a noticeable folk song. While the traditional culture rapidly gives way to the contemporary, as elsewhere in Micronesia, music and dance are still some of the most popular art forms. Rhythmic singing and traditional &quot;reigen&quot; are performed particularly at celebrations. At least, a historical form of a Nauruan dance called &quot;fish dance&quot; in English was recorded in a form of photographs. Known contemporary dances are the frigate bird dance and the dogoropa.

The national anthem of Nauru is &quot;Nauru Bwiema&quot; (&quot;Song of Nauru&quot;). Margaret Hendrie wrote the words; Laurence Henry Hicks composed the music.

=== Media ===

There are no daily news publications on Nauru, although there is one fortnightly publication, &quot;Mwinen Ko&quot;. There is a state-owned television station, Nauru Television (NTV), which broadcasts programs from New Zealand and Australia, and a state-owned non-commercial radio station, Radio Nauru, which carries programs from Radio Australia and the BBC.

=== Sport ===
Australian rules football is the most popular sport in Nauru; it is considered the country&#x27;s national team sport. There is an Australian rules football league with eight teams. Nauru has several national Australian rules teams that consistently rank among the top eight teams in the world.

Other sports popular in Nauru include weightlifting (considered a national pastime), volleyball, netball, fishing and tennis. Nauru participates in the Commonwealth Games and has participated in the Summer Olympic Games in weightlifting and judo.

Nauru&#x27;s national basketball team competed at the 1969 Pacific Games, where it defeated Solomon Islands and Fiji.

Rugby union in Nauru has a growing following. The Nauru national rugby sevens team made its international debut at the 2015 Pacific Games. Nauru competed in the 2015 Oceania Sevens Championship in New Zealand.

Soccer in Nauru is a minor sport which has long been dormant in due to the popularity of Australian rules and rugby; however, a Nauru national soccer team was in formation as of 2024.

== See also ==

*Index of Nauru-related articles
*Outline of Nauru

== Notes ==


== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
*
== Further reading ==
*Morris, J. (2023). Asylum and Extraction in the Republic of Nauru. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
*Storr, C. (2020). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*

==External links==
*Government of Nauru
*Government of Nauru (archived site)
*Nauru. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
*Nauru from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
*Nauru profile from the &quot;BBC News Online&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="0" end="5" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="22" end="39" title="Nauru" label="Republic of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="59" end="74" title="Nauru" label="Pleasant Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="82" end="96" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q244381" start="101" end="111" title="microstate" label="microstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="115" end="125" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="139" end="146" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="161" end="176" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Central Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="203" end="209" title="Banaba" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="213" end="221" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="263" end="269" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="288" end="303" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="323" end="339" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="358" end="388" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="406" end="422" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="460" end="474" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="third-smallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="514" end="526" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="531" end="537" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="562" end="570" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="634" end="657" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044070" start="685" end="697" title="Demographics of Nauru" label="about 10,800"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="718" end="732" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="third-smallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="808" end="822" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="828" end="851" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="861" end="914" title="Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States" label="Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="928" end="940" title="Micronesians" label="Micronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="952" end="955" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="967" end="974" title="annexation" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1006" end="1019" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1052" end="1063" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="1080" end="1105" title="League of Nations mandate" label="League of Nations mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1122" end="1131" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1133" end="1144" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1154" end="1168" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1177" end="1189" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072172" start="1201" end="1209" title="Japanese occupation of Nauru" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="1213" end="1221" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q646500" start="1238" end="1246" title="leapfrogging (strategy)" label="bypassed"/>
<link wikidata="Q985073" start="1335" end="1361" title="United Nations trust territories" label="United Nations trusteeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="1461" end="1482" title="Australian Government" label="Australian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550420" start="1511" end="1543" title="Nauru Regional Processing Centre" label="Nauru Regional Processing Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825026" start="1561" end="1611" title="Australian immigration detention facilities" label="offshore Australian immigration detention facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="1699" end="1711" title="client state" label="client state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424327" start="1738" end="1752" title="Phosphorite" label="phosphate-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="1816" end="1828" title="Surface mining" label="strip mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q72596" start="2007" end="2021" title="resource curse" label="resource curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="2033" end="2042" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="2144" end="2149" title="Trust law" label="trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="2333" end="2342" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="2355" end="2371" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="2496" end="2506" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185277" start="2832" end="2851" title="flag of Nauru" label="country&amp;#x27;s flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266280" start="2868" end="2876" title="Nauruans" label="Nauruans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="2898" end="2911" title="Matrilineality" label="matrilineally"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="2935" end="2946" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q465261" start="2969" end="2977" title="milkfish" label="milkfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="3009" end="3016" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauruan"/>
<link wikidata="Q419763" start="3019" end="3031" title="acclimatization" label="acclimatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q997345" start="3071" end="3083" title="Buada Lagoon" label="Buada Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="3177" end="3184" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q312736" start="3190" end="3204" title="pandanus tectorius" label="pandanus fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="3337" end="3344" title="British people" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974182" start="3357" end="3367" title="John Fearn (whaler)" label="John Fearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q973740" start="3705" end="3711" title="whaler" label="whaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667474" start="3731" end="3742" title="Age of Sail" label="Age of Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="3779" end="3788" title="desertion" label="deserters"/>
<link wikidata="Q839492" start="3878" end="3887" title="palm wine" label="palm wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q519546" start="3944" end="3961" title="Nauruan Civil War" label="Nauruan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28310551" start="3992" end="4020" title="Anglo-German Declarations about the Western Pacific Ocean" label="agreement with Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="4159" end="4166" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q789621" start="4245" end="4253" title="Aweida" label="Auweyida"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="4313" end="4328" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q61708325" start="4477" end="4489" title="Robert Rasch" label="Robert Rasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831199" start="4656" end="4675" title="Albert Fuller Ellis" label="Albert Fuller Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="4929" end="4957" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied and Associated Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="4963" end="4993" title="George V" label="George V of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q598882" start="5292" end="5320" title="British Phosphate Commission" label="British Phosphate Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="5345" end="5362" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="5421" end="5430" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="5431" end="5439" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64059" start="5754" end="5759" title="German auxiliary cruiser Komet" label="Komet"/>
<link wikidata="Q514367" start="5776" end="5781" title="German auxiliary cruiser Orion" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q543099" start="5788" end="5810" title="German attacks on Nauru" label="sank five supply ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593555" start="6210" end="6223" title="Chuuk Islands" label="Chuuk Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="6584" end="6605" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41685" start="6637" end="6646" title="Brigadier" label="Brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q21535743" start="6647" end="6662" title="John Rowlstone Stevenson" label="J. R. Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544462" start="6680" end="6698" title="Lieutenant general (Australia)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959069" start="6699" end="6713" title="Vernon Sturdee" label="Vernon Sturdee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061684" start="6778" end="6805" title="HMAS Diamantina (K377)" label="HMAS &amp;quot;Diamantina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q107087972" start="7482" end="7498" title="1948 Nauru riots" label="1948 Nauru riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="7513" end="7520" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="7521" end="7526" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="7622" end="7640" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q864079" start="7646" end="7659" title="Native Police" label="Native Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q178550" start="7751" end="7767" title="Submachine gun" label="sub-machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148" start="8117" end="8129" title="Government of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="8134" end="8139" title="Government of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593052" start="8290" end="8303" title="Curtis Island (Queensland)" label="Curtis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="8321" end="8331" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="8630" end="8655" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Australian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="8656" end="8670" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="9054" end="9073" title="Australians" label="Australian citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="9149" end="9151" title="Australian dollar" label="A$"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="9225" end="9233" title="Pastoralism" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="9235" end="9247" title="Agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="9253" end="9260" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q336231" start="9783" end="9798" title="Hammer DeRoburt" label="Hammer DeRoburt"/>
<link wikidata="Q637322" start="9944" end="9971" title="Republic of Nauru Phosphate Corporation" label="Nauru Phosphate Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="10112" end="10142" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="10454" end="10471" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q89277064" start="10475" end="10532" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Nauru" label="state of emergency was declared in Nauru on 17 March 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q628102" start="10589" end="10598" title="President of Nauru" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q66765492" start="10599" end="10614" title="Lionel Aingimea" label="Lionel Aingimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="10741" end="10748" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999990" start="10780" end="10799" title="fringing coral reef" label="fringing coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q683031" start="10846" end="10854" title="pinnacle" label="pinnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="10877" end="10881" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="10919" end="10926" title="port" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031098" start="10937" end="10945" title="canals in Nauru" label="channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667931" start="11152" end="11165" title="Command Ridge" label="Command Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="11258" end="11265" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q997345" start="11298" end="11310" title="Buada Lagoon" label="Buada Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="11320" end="11326" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="11329" end="11338" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="11341" end="11350" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q312736" start="11353" end="11367" title="pandanus tectorius" label="pandanus trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="11384" end="11392" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q311471" start="11407" end="11418" title="calophyllum inophyllum" label="tamanu tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="11506" end="11527" title="Banaba" label="Banaba (Ocean Island)"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904" start="11546" end="11553" title="Makatea" label="Makatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="11558" end="11574" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="11893" end="11916" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="11973" end="11977" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="12093" end="12108" title="endorheic basin" label="endorheic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="12252" end="12259" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="12357" end="12385" title="El Niño–Southern Oscillation" label="El Niño–Southern Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252768" start="12816" end="12832" title="List of birds of Nauru" label="indigenous birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="12936" end="12950" title="vascular plant" label="vascular plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="12999" end="13006" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="13130" end="13136" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="13160" end="13166" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703543" start="13169" end="13179" title="Terrestrial crab" label="land crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="13185" end="13189" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585503" start="13214" end="13232" title="Nauru reed warbler" label="Nauru reed warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q339418" start="13238" end="13252" title="Polynesian rat" label="Polynesian rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137280" start="13295" end="13325" title="History of navigation" label="introduced to Nauru from ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="13443" end="13455" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471422" start="13460" end="13471" title="Snorkeling" label="snorkelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q58096" start="13517" end="13529" title="David Adeang" label="David Adeang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972029" start="13543" end="13574" title="Parliament of Nauru" label="19-member unicameral parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="13660" end="13682" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="13715" end="13727" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="13732" end="13745" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q392739" start="13794" end="13831" title="International Renewable Energy Agency" label="International Renewable Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="13894" end="13921" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="13965" end="13985" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="14023" end="14036" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="14041" end="14059" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637805" start="14264" end="14271" title="Cabinet of Nauru" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q112106978" start="14313" end="14331" title="2021 Nauruan constitutional referendum" label="referendum in 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186291" start="14685" end="14701" title="Democratic Party of Nauru" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964815" start="14703" end="14714" title="Nauru First" label="Nauru First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934307" start="14723" end="14735" title="Centre Party (Nauru)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="14804" end="14854" title="nepotism" label="extended family ties rather than party affiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18431653" start="14979" end="15009" title="Nauru Local Government Council" label="Nauru Local Government Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="15204" end="15215" title="Land tenure" label="Land tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644949" start="15533" end="15546" title="Supreme Court of Nauru" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771526" start="15593" end="15614" title="constitution of Nauru" label="constitutional issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q123487746" start="15651" end="15676" title="Nauru Court of Appeal" label="two-judge Appellate Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="15785" end="15808" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="16633" end="16650" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568102" start="16660" end="16703" title="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission" label="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="16781" end="16802" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569345" start="16922" end="16932" title="Henry Puna" label="Henry Puna"/>
<link wikidata="Q667685" start="16998" end="17013" title="list of countries without armed forces" label="no armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837739" start="17039" end="17051" title="Nauru Police Force" label="police force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="17200" end="17227" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="17703" end="17709" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="17756" end="17761" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="17878" end="17894" title="One-China policy" label="One-China policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38886644" start="17913" end="17985" title="China–Nauru relations" label="Nauru signed an agreement to establish diplomatic relations with the PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="17997" end="18000" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q19854808" start="18069" end="18112" title="Nauru–Taiwan relations" label="ROC severed diplomatic relations with Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q23052" start="18371" end="18420" title="International recognition of Kosovo" label="Nauru recognised Kosovo as an independent country"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="18473" end="18479" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="18481" end="18490" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="18496" end="18505" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="18520" end="18528" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="18533" end="18546" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="18586" end="18593" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817103" start="18982" end="19015" title="Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Climate Research Facility" label="Atmospheric Radiation Measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q325935" start="19181" end="19201" title="MV Tampa" label="MV &amp;quot;Tampa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="19205" end="19214" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681747" start="19330" end="19358" title="Tampa affair" label="the &amp;quot;Tampa&amp;quot; affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="19402" end="19419" title="Australian Army" label="Australian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919788" start="19531" end="19548" title="Howard government" label="Howard government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416504" start="19556" end="19572" title="Pacific Solution" label="Pacific Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="20048" end="20069" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="20223" end="20230" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q55736393" start="20439" end="20459" title="resignation syndrome" label="resignation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712218" start="20838" end="20868" title="constituencies of Nauru" label="eight electoral constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187200" start="20938" end="20948" title="Denigomodu District" label="Denigomodu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="21260" end="21263" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783572" start="21658" end="21689" title="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust" label="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q730884" start="21875" end="21888" title="current asset" label="current asset"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21993" end="22013" title="Leonardo the Musical: A Portrait of Love" label="Leonardo the Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="22050" end="22056" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q960951" start="22072" end="22083" title="Nauru House" label="Nauru House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="22087" end="22096" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q192459" start="22147" end="22156" title="Air Nauru" label="Air Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22169" end="22179" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="22280" end="22294" title="Boeing 737-300" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="22714" end="22732" title="The World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="22745" end="22759" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829186" start="23283" end="23290" title="Tourism in Nauru" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055030" start="23385" end="23394" title="Nauruan passport" label="passports"/>
<link wikidata="Q681487" start="23450" end="23497" title="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering" label="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q607466" start="23541" end="23556" title="FATF Blacklist" label="non-cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211001" start="23840" end="23849" title="hot money" label="hot money"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="24191" end="24215" title="Ministry of foreign affairs" label="Foreign Affairs Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391207" start="24216" end="24227" title="Kieren Keke" label="Kieren Keke"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="24729" end="24790" title="OECD" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078668" start="24791" end="24810" title="Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes" label="upgraded its rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q113860018" start="25218" end="25237" title="Minister of Finance of Nauru" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q58096" start="25238" end="25250" title="David Adeang" label="David Adeang"/>
<link wikidata="Q939183" start="25451" end="25466" title="deep sea mining" label="deep sea mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q107503601" start="25562" end="25580" title="The Metals Company" label="The Metals Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q939579" start="25606" end="25622" title="manganese nodule" label="manganese nodule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962383" start="25684" end="25702" title="sustainable energy" label="sustainable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462531" start="25968" end="25974" title="layoff" label="layoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="26041" end="26052" title="Westernization" label="Westernized"/>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="26122" end="26129" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauruan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="26134" end="26141" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q420591" start="26165" end="26185" title="Micronesian languages" label="Micronesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965836" start="26321" end="26353" title="Religion in Nauru" label="religion practised on the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="26357" end="26369" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981329" start="26398" end="26425" title="Nauru Congregational Church" label="Nauru Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="26436" end="26451" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="26462" end="26479" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="26494" end="26501" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="26541" end="26560" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="26628" end="26675" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="26684" end="26708" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q877143" start="26848" end="26890" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarawa and Nauru" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarawa and Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="26904" end="26910" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="26966" end="26974" title="Literacy" label="Literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624835" start="27215" end="27237" title="Nauru Secondary School" label="Nauru Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="27282" end="27313" title="University of the South Pacific" label="University of the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814435" start="27429" end="27454" title="University of New England (Australia)" label="University of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055310" start="27730" end="27780" title="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade" label="Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q720920" start="27889" end="27899" title="bookmobile" label="bookmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="28365" end="28371" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q25214343" start="28480" end="28506" title="List of countries by body mass index" label="mean body mass index (BMI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="28608" end="28613" title="Obesity" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074868" start="28652" end="28682" title="Obesity in the Pacific" label="Obesity on the Pacific islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="28739" end="28754" title="diabetes mellitus type 2" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="28863" end="28877" title="Kidney failure" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="28882" end="28895" title="Cardiovascular disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q534251" start="29018" end="29045" title="Nauru International Airport" label="Nauru International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192459" start="29080" end="29094" title="Nauru Airlines" label="Nauru Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q45523" start="29132" end="29140" title="Brisbane Airport" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150557" start="29206" end="29210" title="Nadi International Airport" label="Nadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q522496" start="29222" end="29229" title="Bonriki International Airport" label="Bonriki"/>
<link wikidata="Q108314943" start="29403" end="29427" title="Nauru International Port" label="Nauru International Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="29821" end="29840" title="Subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="29895" end="29905" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="29916" end="29924" title="pandanus" label="pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="29926" end="29932" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="29938" end="29943" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="32598" end="32601" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q530453" start="33447" end="33456" title="Angam Day" label="Angam Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="33561" end="33584" title="Spanish flu" label="1920 influenza epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="34375" end="34390" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q209951" start="34409" end="34421" title="Nauru Bwiema" label="Nauru Bwiema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481188" start="34457" end="34473" title="Margaret Hendrie" label="Margaret Hendrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564957" start="34491" end="34511" title="Laurence Henry Hicks" label="Laurence Henry Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981334" start="34708" end="34724" title="Nauru Television" label="Nauru Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909839" start="34838" end="34849" title="Radio Nauru" label="Radio Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q164921" start="34879" end="34894" title="Radio Australia" label="Radio Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="34903" end="34906" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="34923" end="34948" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q781430" start="35054" end="35086" title="Australian rules football in Nauru" label="Australian rules football league"/>
<link wikidata="Q113649337" start="35123" end="35154" title="Nauru national Australian rules football team" label="national Australian rules teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q114397581" start="35257" end="35270" title="weightlifting" label="weightlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="35304" end="35314" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="35316" end="35323" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q283534" start="35325" end="35332" title="recreational fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="35337" end="35343" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q729290" start="35394" end="35438" title="Nauru at the Olympics" label="has participated in the Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="35460" end="35464" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q785637" start="35467" end="35504" title="Nauru national basketball team" label="Nauru&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q11744270" start="35521" end="35539" title="Basketball at the 1969 South Pacific Games" label="1969 Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873752" start="35559" end="35574" title="Solomon Islands national basketball team" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590520" start="35579" end="35583" title="Fiji national basketball team" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378436" start="35586" end="35606" title="Rugby union in Nauru" label="Rugby union in Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712915" start="35636" end="35668" title="Nauru national rugby sevens team" label="Nauru national rugby sevens team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178364" start="35705" end="35723" title="2015 Pacific Games" label="2015 Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648524" start="35747" end="35779" title="2015 Oceania Sevens Championship" label="2015 Oceania Sevens Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q41785326" start="35797" end="35812" title="Soccer in Nauru" label="Soccer in Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q634290" start="35925" end="35951" title="Nauru national soccer team" label="Nauru national soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648895" start="35999" end="36030" title="Index of Nauru-related articles" label="Index of Nauru-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004645" start="36032" end="36048" title="Outline of Nauru" label="Outline of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="36393" end="36411" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="36419" end="36446" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704926" start="36524" end="36539" title="BBC News Online" label="BBC News Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21303" wikidata="Q775327" url="?curid=21303" title="History of Nauru">
<text>History of Nauru, is about Nauru, an island country in the Pacific Ocean. Human activity is thought to have begun roughly 3,000 years ago when clans settled the island. A people and culture developed on the island, the Nauru which had 12 tribes. At the end of the 1700s, a British ship came, and this was the first known contact with the outside world. The British ship called it &quot;pleasant island&quot; and it was a friendly greeting; the British sailed on. Thirty years later, in 1830, an escaped Irish convict took over the island and was finally evicted in 1841. There were scattered interactions with passing vessels and trade. In the mid-to-late 19th century, a devastating civil war started, which took the lives of many Nauru. This war was ended when Germany annexed the island in 1888, and negotiations ended the fighting. In the 1900s, phosphate mining started, and the Germans built some modern facilities on the island. German control ended at the end of World War I, and it was passed to Australia as protectorate. This continued until WW2, when the Empire of Japan invaded the island. Although it was occupied for a few years, many Nauru died at this time, and much of the population was deported from the island and/or used for slave labor. With the surrender of Japan, the Nauru were returned to the island, and it was put under Australian administration again, under the condition it would become independent. This happened in 1968, and Nauru has been a stable democracy since that time. In the last three decades of the 20th century, Nauru had enormous per capita wealth from the phosphate mining, to the point they were some of the richest people on the planet. However, when this ended and the investments were depleted, it has had a harder time, and international aid is important in the 21st century.

== Early history ==

Nauru was settled by Micronesians around 3,000 years ago, and there is evidence of possible
Polynesian influence. Nauruans subsisted on coconut and pandanus fruit, and engaged in aquaculture by catching juvenile &quot;ibija&quot; fish, acclimated them to freshwater conditions, and raised them in Buada Lagoon, providing an additional reliable source of food. Traditionally only men were permitted to fish on the reef, and did so from canoes or by using trained man-of-war hawks.

There were traditionally 12 clans or tribes on Nauru, which are represented in the 12-pointed star in the nation&#x27;s flag. Nauruans traced their descent on the female side. The first Europeans to encounter the island were on the British whaling ship &quot;Hunter&quot;, in 1798. When the ship approached, &quot;many canoes ventured out to meet the ship. The &quot;Hunter&quot;″s crew did not leave the ship nor did Nauruans board, but Captain John Fearn&#x27;s positive impression of the island and its people&quot; led to its English name, Pleasant Island. This name was used until Germany annexed the island 90 years later.

From around 1830, Nauruans had contact with Europeans from whaling ships and traders who replenished their supplies (such as fresh water) at Nauru. The islanders traded food for alcoholic toddy and firearms. The first Europeans to live on the island, starting perhaps in 1830, were Patrick Burke and John Jones, Irish convicts who had escaped from Norfolk Island, according to &quot;Paradise for Sale&quot;. Jones became &quot;Nauru&#x27;s first and last dictator,&quot; who killed or banished several other beachcombers who arrived later, until the Nauruans banished Jones from the island in 1841.

The introduction of firearms and alcohol destroyed the peaceful coexistence of the 12 tribes living on the island. A 10-year civil war began in 1878 and resulted in a reduction of the population from 1,400 (1843) to around 900 (1888). Ultimately, alcohol was banned and some arms were confiscated.
==German protectorate==
In 1886 Germany was granted the island under the Anglo-German Declaration. The island was annexed by Germany in 1888 and incorporated into Germany&#x27;s New Guinea Protectorate. Nauru was occupied on 16 April 1888 by German troops, which ended the Nauruan Civil War. On 1 October 1888 the German gunboat SMS &quot;Eber&quot; landed 36 men on Nauru. Accompanied by William Harris the German marines marched around the island and returned with the twelve chiefs, the white settlers and a Gilbertese missionary. The chiefs were kept under house arrest until the morning of 2 October, when the annexation ceremony began with the raising of the German flag. The Germans told the chiefs that they had to surrender all weapons and ammunition within 24 hours or the chiefs would be taken prisoner. By the morning of 3 October 765 guns and 1,000 rounds of ammunition had been turned over. The Germans called the island Nawodo or Onawero. The arrival of the Germans ended the war, and social changes brought about by the war established kings as rulers of the island, the most widely known being King Auweyida. Christian missionaries from the Gilbert Islands also arrived in 1888. The Germans ruled Nauru for almost three decades. Robert Rasch, a German trader who married a native woman, was the first administrator, appointed in 1888.

At the time there were twelve tribes on Nauru: Deiboe, Eamwidamit, Eamwidara, Eamwit, Eamgum, Eano, Emea, Eoraru, Irutsi, Iruwa, Iwi and Ranibok. Today the twelve tribes are represented by the twelve-pointed star in the flag of Nauru.

Phosphate was discovered on Nauru in 1900 by the prospector Albert Ellis. The Pacific Phosphate Company started to exploit the reserves in 1906 by agreement with Germany. The company exported its first shipment in 1907.

==World War I to World War II==
In 1914, following the outbreak of World War I, Nauru was captured by Australian troops, which held control until 1920. Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom signed the Nauru Island Agreement in 1919, creating a board known as the British Phosphate Commission (BPC). This took over the rights to phosphate mining.
According to the Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics (now the Australian Bureau of Statistics), &quot;In common with other natives, the islanders are very susceptible to tuberculosis and influenza, and in 1921 an influenza epidemic caused the deaths of 230 islanders.&quot; In 1923, the League of Nations gave Australia a trustee mandate over Nauru, with the United Kingdom and New Zealand as co-trustees. In 1932, the first Angam Baby was born.

==World War II==

During World War II, Nauru was subject to significant damage from both Axis (German and Japanese) and Allied forces.

On 6 and 7 December 1940 the Nazi German auxiliary cruisers &quot;Orion&quot; and &quot;Komet&quot; sank four merchant ships. On the next day, &quot;Komet&quot; shelled Nauru&#x27;s phosphate mining areas, oil storage depots, and the shiploading cantilever. The attacks seriously disrupted phosphate supplies to Australia and New Zealand (mostly used for munition and fertiliser purposes.)

Japanese troops occupied Nauru on 26 August 1942, and executed 7 Europeans. The native Nauruans were badly treated by the occupying forces. On one occasion, thirty-nine people with leprosy were reputedly loaded onto boats which were towed out to sea and sunk. The Japanese troops built two airfields on Nauru, which were bombed for the first time on 25 March 1943, preventing food supplies from being flown to Nauru. In 1943 the Japanese deported 1,200 Nauruans to work as labourers in the Chuuk islands.

Nauru was liberated from the Japanese on 13 September 1945, when Captain Soeda, the commander of all the Japanese troops on Nauru, surrendered the island to the Royal Australian Navy and Army. This surrender was accepted by Brigadier J. R. Stevenson, who represented Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee, the commander of the First Australian Army, on board the warship HMAS &quot;Diamantina&quot; Arrangements were made to repatriate from Chuuk the 745 Nauruans who survived Japanese captivity there. They were returned to Nauru by the BPC ship &quot;Trienza&quot; on 1 January 1946.

==Trust Territory==
In 1947, a trusteeship was established by the United Nations, Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom became the U.N. trustees of the island, although practical administration was mostly handled by Australia. By 1965 the population reached 5,561, of which just under half were considered Nauruan. In July 1966 the Nauruan Head Chief spoke at the United Nations Trusteeship Council, calling for independence by 31 January 1968. This was supported by the General Assembly in December of that year. Australia and the other administering powers sought to arrange an alternative to independence, such as internal self-government similar to that of the West Indies Associated States, or with Australia retaining a role in foreign affairs. Under these envisioned solutions, the resulting political settlement would be permanent, with no route to independence. This was due to concern over implications for other Pacific territories, and for the implication of such a small community (the size of an &quot;English village&quot;) gaining the full trappings of statehood. These suggestions were however rejected by Nauru, and Australia was concerned that even if they were accepted by Nauru, they might not be accepted by the UN. In June 1967 it was agreed that assets belonging to the British Phosphate Commission on the island would be sold to Nauru for 21 million Australian dollars. Nauru was granted unconditional independence on 31 January 1968.

==Independence==
Nauru became self-governing in January 1966. The Parliament of Australia passed the &quot;Nauru Independence Act 1967&quot; on 10 November 1967, which granted Nauru independence on a date fixed by proclamation by the Governor-General of Australia and authorised the Legislative Council of Nauru to establish a constitutional convention. On 31 January 1968, following a two-year constitutional convention, Nauru became the world&#x27;s smallest independent republic. It was led by founding president Hammer DeRoburt. In 1967, the people of Nauru purchased the assets of the British Phosphate Commissioners, and in June 1970, control passed to the locally owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation. Money gained from the exploitation of phosphate was put into the Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust and gave Nauruans the second highest GDP Per Capita (second only to the United Arab Emirates) and one of the highest standards of living in the Third World.

In 1989, Nauru took legal actions against Australia in the International Court of Justice over Australia&#x27;s actions during its administration of Nauru. In particular, Nauru made a legal complaint against Australia&#x27;s failure to remedy the environmental damage caused by phosphate mining. &quot;Certain Phosphate Lands: Nauru v. Australia&quot; led to an out-of-court settlement to rehabilitate the mined-out areas of Nauru.

By the close of the twentieth century, the finite phosphate supplies were fast running out. Nauru finally joined the UN in 1999.

==Modern-day Nauru==

As its phosphate stores began to run out (by 2006, its reserves were exhausted), the island was reduced to an environmental wasteland. Nauru appealed to the International Court of Justice to compensate for the damage from almost a century of phosphate strip-mining by foreign companies. In 1993, Australia offered Nauru an out-of-court settlement of A$2.5 million annually for 20 years. New Zealand and the UK additionally agreed to pay a one-time settlement of $12 million each. Declining phosphate prices, the high cost of maintaining an international airline, and the government&#x27;s financial mismanagement combined to make the economy collapse in the late 1990s. By the new millennium, Nauru was virtually bankrupt.

In December 1999, four major United States banks banned dollar transactions with four Pacific island states, including Nauru. The United States Department of State issued a report identifying Nauru as a major money laundering centre, used by narcotics traffickers and Russian organized crime figures.

President Bernard Dowiyogo took office in April 2000 for his fourth and, after a minimal hiatus, fifth stints as Nauru&#x27;s top executive. Dowiyogo first served as president from 1976 to 1978. He returned to that office in 1989, and was re-elected in 1992. A vote in parliament, however, forced him to yield power to Kinza Clodumar in 1995. Dowiyogo regained the presidency when the Clodumar government fell in mid-1998.

In 2001, Nauru was brought to world attention by the Tampa affair, a Norwegian cargo ship at the centre of a diplomatic dispute between Australia, Norway and Indonesia. The ship carried asylum seekers, hailing primarily from Afghanistan, who were rescued while attempting to reach Australia. After much debate many of the immigrants were transported to Nauru, an arrangement known in Australia as the &quot;Pacific Solution&quot;. Shortly thereafter, the Nauruan government closed its borders to most international visitors, preventing outside observers from monitoring the refugees&#x27; condition.

In December 2003, several dozen of these refugees, in protest of the conditions of their detention on Nauru, began a hunger strike. The hunger strike was concluded in early January 2004 when an Australian medical team agreed to visit the island. Since then, according to recent reports, all but two of the refugees have been allowed into Australia.

During 2002 Nauru severed diplomatic recognition with Taiwan (Republic of China) and signed an agreement to establish diplomatic relations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China. This move followed China&#x27;s promise to provide more than U.S. $130 million in aid. In 2004, Nauru broke off relations with the PRC and re-established them with the ROC.

Nauru was also approached by the U.S. with a deal to modernize Nauru&#x27;s infrastructure in exchange for suppression of the island&#x27;s lax banking laws that allow activities that are illegal in other countries to flourish. Under this deal, allegedly, Nauru would also establish an embassy in China and perform certain &quot;safehouse&quot; and courier services for the U.S. government, in a scheme codenamed &quot;Operation Weasel&quot;. Nauru agreed to the deal and instituted banking reform, but the U.S. later denied knowledge of the deal. The matter is being pursued in an Australian court, and initial judgments have been in favor of Nauru.

The government is desperately in need of money to pay off salary arrears of civil servants and to continue funding the welfare state built up in the heyday of phosphate mining (Nauruans pay no taxes). Nauru has yet to develop a plan to remove the innumerable coral pinnacles created by mining and make those lands suitable for human habitation.

Following parliamentary elections in 2013, Baron Waqa was elected president. He held the presidential title six years from 2013 to 2019. President Waqa was a strong supporter of Australia keeping refugees in a refugee camp on Nauru soil. The incumbent president lost his parliamentary seat in 2019 Nauruan parliamentary election, meaning he lost his bid for re-election. In August 2019 the parliament elected former human rights lawyer Lionel Aingimea as the new President of Nauru. Following the 2022 Nauruan parliamentary election, Russ Kun was elected president to succeed Aingimea. On 30 October 2023, David Ranibok Adeang was elected President of the Republic of Nauru.

==See also==
* Nauruan Civil War
* Angam Day
* Japanese occupation of Nauru
* History of Oceania
* President of Nauru
* List of colonial governors of Nauru
* Nauru Phosphate Corporation
* Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust
* Politics of Nauru
* 1948 Nauru riots

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==
* Timeline BBC News
* U.S. State Department Background Note: Nauru
* United States Army in World War II – The War in the Pacific – Seizure of the Gilberts and Marshalls</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q775327" start="0" end="16" title="History of Nauru" label="History of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="27" end="32" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="37" end="51" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="59" end="72" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="1870" end="1882" title="Micronesians" label="Micronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="1941" end="1951" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266280" start="1963" end="1971" title="Nauruans" label="Nauruans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="1985" end="1992" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q312736" start="1997" end="2011" title="Pandanus tectorius" label="pandanus fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="2028" end="2039" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q465261" start="2061" end="2083" title="milkfish" label="&amp;quot;ibija&amp;quot; fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q419763" start="2085" end="2095" title="Acclimatization" label="acclimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q997345" start="2146" end="2158" title="Buada Lagoon" label="Buada Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q648494" start="2311" end="2327" title="great frigatebird" label="man-of-war hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q185277" start="2450" end="2454" title="flag of Nauru" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="2493" end="2504" title="matrilineal" label="female side"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974182" start="2776" end="2786" title="John Fearn (whaler)" label="John Fearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q839492" start="3148" end="3153" title="Palm wine" label="toddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="3308" end="3322" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3343" end="3360" title="Paradise for Sale" label="Paradise for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q519546" start="3685" end="3694" title="Nauruan Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q28310551" start="3931" end="3955" title="Anglo-German Declarations about the Western Pacific Ocean" label="Anglo-German Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q165008" start="4036" end="4046" title="German New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q519546" start="4131" end="4148" title="Nauruan Civil War" label="Nauruan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q771216" start="4187" end="4207" title="SMS Eber (1887)" label="SMS &amp;quot;Eber&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q329405" start="4247" end="4261" title="William Harris (beachcomber)" label="William Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="4369" end="4379" title="I-Kiribati" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q519546" start="4849" end="4852" title="Nauruan Civil War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q789621" start="4974" end="4982" title="Auweyida" label="Auweyida"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="5016" end="5031" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q61708325" start="5104" end="5116" title="Robert Rasch" label="Robert Rasch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5234" end="5246" title="Nauruans#Tribes" label="twelve tribe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5258" end="5264" title="Deiboe" label="Deiboe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5266" end="5276" title="Eamwidamit" label="Eamwidamit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5278" end="5287" title="Eamwidara" label="Eamwidara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5289" end="5295" title="Eamwit" label="Eamwit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5297" end="5303" title="Eamgum" label="Eamgum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5305" end="5309" title="Eano" label="Eano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5311" end="5315" title="Emeo" label="Emea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5317" end="5323" title="Eoraru" label="Eoraru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5325" end="5331" title="Irutsi" label="Irutsi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5333" end="5338" title="Iruwa" label="Iruwa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5340" end="5343" title="Iwi (tribe)" label="Iwi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5348" end="5355" title="Ranibok" label="Ranibok"/>
<link wikidata="Q185277" start="5431" end="5444" title="flag of Nauru" label="flag of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831199" start="5507" end="5519" title="Albert Fuller Ellis" label="Albert Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076895" start="5770" end="5787" title="Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force" label="Australian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q598882" start="5940" end="5968" title="British Phosphate Commission" label="British Phosphate Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="6094" end="6125" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="6319" end="6336" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6391" end="6405" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q530453" start="6457" end="6467" title="Angam Day" label="Angam Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6644" end="6655" title="Nazi German" label="Nazi German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569963" start="6656" end="6673" title="auxiliary cruiser" label="auxiliary cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q514367" start="6675" end="6692" title="German auxiliary cruiser Orion" label="&amp;quot;Orion&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q64059" start="6697" end="6714" title="German auxiliary cruiser Komet" label="&amp;quot;Komet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q543099" start="6720" end="6739" title="German attacks on Nauru" label="four merchant ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="7006" end="7014" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920248" start="7022" end="7030" title="Operation Ry" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072172" start="7102" end="7144" title="Japanese occupation of Nauru" label="were badly treated by the occupying forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="7187" end="7194" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593555" start="7496" end="7509" title="Chuuk islands" label="Chuuk islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959069" start="7798" end="7812" title="Vernon Sturdee" label="Vernon Sturdee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452307" start="7835" end="7856" title="First Australian Army" label="First Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061684" start="7879" end="7906" title="HMAS Diamantina (K377)" label="HMAS &amp;quot;Diamantina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q219693" start="8468" end="8502" title="United Nations Trusteeship Council" label="United Nations Trusteeship Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985529" start="8769" end="8798" title="West Indies Associated States" label="West Indies Associated States"/>
<link wikidata="Q244381" start="9082" end="9097" title="Microstate" label="small community"/>
<link wikidata="Q598882" start="9398" end="9426" title="British Phosphate Commission" label="British Phosphate Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="9631" end="9654" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56751247" start="9672" end="9699" title="Nauru Independence Act 1967" label="Nauru Independence Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="9799" end="9828" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="10038" end="10046" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336231" start="10081" end="10096" title="Hammer DeRoburt" label="Hammer DeRoburt"/>
<link wikidata="Q637322" start="10242" end="10269" title="Nauru Phosphate Corporation" label="Nauru Phosphate Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783572" start="10336" end="10367" title="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust" label="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="10440" end="10460" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="10512" end="10523" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="10585" end="10615" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="11268" end="11298" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="11461" end="11463" title="Australian dollar" label="A$"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="12044" end="12060" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q715836" start="12147" end="12163" title="Bernard Dowiyogo" label="Bernard Dowiyogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681747" start="12614" end="12626" title="Tampa affair" label="Tampa affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="12697" end="12706" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="12708" end="12714" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="12719" end="12728" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="12747" end="12761" title="refugees" label="asylum seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="12786" end="12797" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416504" start="12968" end="12984" title="Pacific Solution" label="Pacific Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="13356" end="13365" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="13574" end="13591" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13660" end="13691" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="14153" end="14160" title="embassy" label="embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097707" start="14286" end="14302" title="Operation Weasel" label="Operation Weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431017" start="14889" end="14898" title="2013 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q563297" start="14908" end="14918" title="Baron Waqa" label="Baron Waqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431017" start="14923" end="14930" title="2013 Nauruan presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312645" start="15158" end="15193" title="2019 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="2019 Nauruan parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66765492" start="15301" end="15316" title="Lionel Aingimea" label="Lionel Aingimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q109022759" start="15362" end="15397" title="2022 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="2022 Nauruan parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q109781648" start="15399" end="15407" title="Russ Kun" label="Russ Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q58096" start="15471" end="15491" title="David Adeang" label="David Ranibok Adeang"/>
<link wikidata="Q519546" start="15556" end="15573" title="Nauruan Civil War" label="Nauruan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q530453" start="15576" end="15585" title="Angam Day" label="Angam Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072172" start="15588" end="15616" title="Japanese occupation of Nauru" label="Japanese occupation of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q149509" start="15619" end="15637" title="History of Oceania" label="History of Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q628102" start="15640" end="15658" title="President of Nauru" label="President of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245659" start="15661" end="15696" title="List of colonial governors of Nauru" label="List of colonial governors of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q637322" start="15699" end="15726" title="Nauru Phosphate Corporation" label="Nauru Phosphate Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783572" start="15729" end="15760" title="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust" label="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154005" start="15763" end="15780" title="Politics of Nauru" label="Politics of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q107087972" start="15783" end="15799" title="1948 Nauru riots" label="1948 Nauru riots"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21304" wikidata="Q2387745" url="?curid=21304" title="Geography of Nauru">
<text>Nauru is a tiny phosphate rock island nation located in the South Pacific Ocean south of the Marshall Islands in Oceania. It is only south of the Equator at coordinates . Nauru is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific Ocean—the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and Makatea in French Polynesia.

Its land area is , and it has a . Maritime claims are an Exclusive Economic Zone of with 200-nautical-miles (370 km), and a 12-nautical-mile (22 km) territorial sea.

The climate is tropical with a monsoon rainy season from November to February.

A sandy beach rises to the fertile ring around raised fringing coral reefs. The raised phosphate plateau (&#x27;Topside&#x27;) takes up the central portion of the island. The highest point is 213 ft (65 m) above sea level, along the plateau rim.

Nauru&#x27;s only economically significant natural resources are phosphates, formed from guano deposits by seabirds, and fisheries, particularly for tuna. 

Due to being surrounded by corals and sandy beaches, the island houses no natural harbours, nor any rivers or substantial lakes.

Nauru has a unique navigational system, which is only capable of being used on the island.

==Geology of Nauru==
Nauru is a raised coral atoll positioned in the Nauru Basin of the Pacific Ocean, on a part of the Pacific Plate that formed at a mid-oceanic ridge at 132 Ma. From mid-Eocene (35mya) to Oligocene times, a submarine volcano built up over a hotspot and formed a seamount composed of basalt. The seamount is over 4300 metres high. This hotspot was simultaneous with a major Pacific Plate reorganisation. The volcano was eroded to sea level and a coral atoll grew on top to a thickness of about 500 metres. Coral near the surface has been dated from 5 Mya to 0.3 Mya. The original limestone has been dolomitised by magnesium from seawater. The coral was raised above sea level about 30 metres and is now a dolomite limestone outcrop which was eroded in classic karst style into pinnacles up to 20 metres high. To at least a depth of 55 metres below sea level, the limestone has been dissolved forming cavities, sinkholes, and caves. Holes on the topside of the island were filled up by a phosphate layer up to several metres thick.

Anibare Bay was formed by the underwater collapse of the east side of the volcano.
Buada Lagoon was formed by solution of the limestone when the sea level was lower, followed by collapse.

Nauru is moving at per year to the northwest along with the Pacific Plate.

Freshwater can be found in Buada lagoon, and also in some brackish ponds at the escarpment base in Ijuw and Anabar in the northeast. There is an underground lake in Moqua Cave in the southeast of the island. Since there are no streams or rivers on Nauru, water must be gathered from roof catchment systems. Water is also brought to Nauru as ballast on ships returning for loads of phosphate.

==Environmental issues==
*Periodic droughts, limited natural freshwater resources (roof storage tanks collect rainwater, but mostly dependent on a single, aging desalination plant)
*Extreme soil conditions are caused by high alkalinity, high phosphate levels, and low potassium. Iron, manganese, copper, molybdenum, and zinc are rendered unavailable to plants. Combined with thin or damaged soils this causes low fertility.
*Intensive phosphate mining during the past 90 years has left the central 80% of Nauru a wasteland and threatens limited remaining land resources.

Nauru is a party to the international environmental agreements on biodiversity, climate change, desertification, the law of the sea and marine dumping.

==Climate==

Nauru&#x27;s climate is hot and very humid year-round because of its proximity to the equator and the ocean. Nauru is hit by monsoon rains between November and February, but rarely has cyclones. Annual rainfall is highly variable and is influenced by the El Niño–Southern Oscillation, with several significant recorded droughts. The temperature on Nauru ranges between during the day and is quite stable at around at night.

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of Nauru, the points that are farther north, south, east or west or higher than any other location.

* Northernmost point – Cape Anna, Ewa District.
* Easternmost point – Cape Ijuw, Ijuw District.
* Southernmost point – unnamed headland south of the wireless station, Meneng District.
* Westernmost point – the harbour, Aiwo District.
* Highest point – Command Ridge (65 m, 213 ft).
* Lowest point – Pacific Ocean (sea level).

== References ==
== See also ==
* List of settlements in Nauru</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="0" end="5" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="66" end="79" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="93" end="109" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="113" end="120" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="146" end="153" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="157" end="168" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="262" end="268" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="287" end="295" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904" start="300" end="307" title="Makatea" label="Makatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="311" end="327" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="387" end="410" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="501" end="508" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="512" end="520" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="528" end="535" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999990" start="631" end="650" title="fringing coral reef" label="fringing coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="889" end="898" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="913" end="918" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="973" end="977" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="1008" end="1013" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="1063" end="1070" title="harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="1081" end="1086" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="1103" end="1107" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803129" start="1123" end="1149" title="Nauruan navigational system" label="unique navigational system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285116" start="1235" end="1253" title="raised coral atoll" label="raised coral atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="1323" end="1336" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="1354" end="1371" title="mid oceanic ridge" label="mid-oceanic ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="1379" end="1381" title="mega-annum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="1392" end="1398" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="1410" end="1419" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="1439" end="1446" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="1463" end="1470" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q503269" start="1484" end="1492" title="seamount" label="seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="1505" end="1511" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="1667" end="1672" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="1673" end="1678" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736526" start="1820" end="1831" title="dolomitised" label="dolomitised"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="1835" end="1844" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="1850" end="1858" title="sea water" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="1981" end="1986" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404375" start="1998" end="2006" title="Pinnacle (geology)" label="pinnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="2208" end="2217" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q546234" start="2253" end="2264" title="Anibare Bay" label="Anibare Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q997345" start="2336" end="2348" title="Buada Lagoon" label="Buada Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q328738" start="2617" end="2621" title="Ijuw District" label="Ijuw"/>
<link wikidata="Q328735" start="2626" end="2632" title="Anabar District" label="Anabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="2946" end="2953" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="3072" end="3084" title="desalination" label="desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="3179" end="3188" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="3190" end="3194" title="Iron" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="3196" end="3205" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="3207" end="3213" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="3215" end="3225" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="3231" end="3235" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187432" start="3346" end="3362" title="phosphate mining in Nauru" label="phosphate mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="3549" end="3561" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="3563" end="3577" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q331520" start="3579" end="3594" title="United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="3600" end="3614" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="law of the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156234" start="3619" end="3633" title="Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and Other Matter" label="marine dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="3774" end="3781" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="3904" end="3932" title="El Niño–Southern Oscillation" label="El Niño–Southern Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="4136" end="4141" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4257" end="4266" title="Cape Anna, Nauru" label="Cape Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q274381" start="4268" end="4280" title="Ewa District, Nauru" label="Ewa District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4304" end="4313" title="Cape Ijuw" label="Cape Ijuw"/>
<link wikidata="Q328738" start="4315" end="4328" title="Ijuw District" label="Ijuw District"/>
<link wikidata="Q327788" start="4401" end="4416" title="Meneng District" label="Meneng District"/>
<link wikidata="Q240017" start="4453" end="4466" title="Aiwo District" label="Aiwo District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667931" start="4486" end="4499" title="Command Ridge" label="Command Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4533" end="4546" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q898053" start="4595" end="4623" title="List of settlements in Nauru" label="List of settlements in Nauru"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21305" wikidata="Q3044070" url="?curid=21305" title="Demographics of Nauru">
<text>The demographics of Nauru, an island country in the Pacific Ocean, are known through national censuses, which have been analysed by various statistical bureaus since the 1920s. The Nauru Bureau of Statistics have conducted this task since 1977—the first census since Nauru gained independence in 1968. The most recent census of Nauru was on 30 October 2021, when population had reached 11,680 people. The population density is , and the overall life expectancy is 63.9 years. The population rose steadily from the 1960s until 2006 when the Government of Nauru repatriated thousands of Tuvaluan and I-Kiribati workers from the country. Since 1992, Nauru&#x27;s birth rate has exceeded its death rate; the natural growth rate is positive. In terms of age structure, the population is dominated by the 15–59-year-old segment (57%). The median age of the population is 21.6, and the estimated gender ratio of the population is 101.8 males per 100 females.

Nauru is inhabited mostly by Nauruans (92.1%), while minorities include those from Kiribati (2.4%), Fiji (2.2%), Australia (1.2%) and other (2.1%). The demographic history of Nauru is marked by several migrations: the area was first inhabited by Micronesian people about 3,000 years ago. The first European to find the island was John Fearn in 1798. Then, the country was annexed by Germany in 1888. The next major population change was when Japanese occupied the island during World War II in 1942. During this time, the Japanese deported several thousands of Nauruans to other islands. In the 1960s, the country gained independence, where the percentage of Nauruans started to increase. The most recent demographic switch was in the 2000s, when the government repatriated several groups of non-Nauruans from the country.

The Nauruan language is the official language of Nauru, but English is often used in the country. Nauruan is declared as the primary language of 95.3% of the population. The 2011 census revealed that 66.0% of the population spoke English and 11.9% another language. The main religions of Nauru are Nauru Congregational Church (35.71%) and Roman Catholic (32.96%). The literacy rate in Nauru is 96.5%. The proportion of the country&#x27;s population aged 15 and over attaining academic degrees is one of the lowest in the world, reaching 7.9% in 2011. An estimated 10.7% of the gross domestic product (GDP) is spent on education. Nauru has a universal health care system, and in 2012, an estimated 7.5% of its GDP was spent on healthcare. Nauru has the highest obesity ranking in the world; 97 per cent of men and 93 per cent of women are obese. In 2006, the average net monthly income was A$2,597 (A$ in 2014). The most significant sources of employment are phosphate mining, banking industries, and various coconut products. In 2011, the unemployment rate was 23%. The 2011 census enumerated 1,647 total households, averaging 6.0 persons per house. Average urbanisation rate in Nauru is 100%.

== Population ==
With a population of under twelve thousand in 2021, Nauru ranks around 193rd in the world by population. Its population density is . The overall life expectancy in Nauru at birth is 59.7 years. The total fertility rate of 3.70 children per mother is one of the highest in the Oceania. The United Nations projects the population will stay around 10,000 in the 2020s, and the Nauru Bureau of Statistics estimates the population will increase to 20,000 in 2038.

In Nauru&#x27;s history, there have been six major demographics changes. The island was first inhabited by Micronesian people roughly 3,000 years ago. The first European to find the island was John Fearn in 1798. In 1888, the country was annexed by Germany. The next demographic change came when Japanese occupied the island during World War II in the 1940s. During this time, the Japanese deported several thousands of Nauruans to other islands. The next major demographic change was in the 1960s; the country gained independence, and the percentage of Nauruans started to increase. The last major demographic change was in 2006 when the Government of Nauru repatriated almost all of the remaining Tuvaluan and I-Kiribati workers, following large scale reduction from the Republic of Nauru Phosphate Corporation (RONPhos) and government workers. The census of 2006 stated 9,233 people were in Nauru: down 2.13% per year from the previous census of 2002.

From 2002 to 2011, there has been negative net migration, with an annual 109 net emigrants from 2006 to 2011. In 2009 there were 1,820 arrivals and 1,736 departures, for a positive rate of 84 immigrants. This was the first time since collecting data in 2002, there was a positive rate. Data on arrivals and departures collected by the Nauruan Customs and Immigration Office is not available, so specific immigration data is unavailable. As of the 2011 census, 57% of the population over 15 years old were legally or &quot;de facto&quot; married, 35% were never married, while 7% were either widowed, separated, or divorced. There are 1,647 households in Nauru, making an average household size of 6.0 persons per household.

Nauru is one of the most Westernized regions of the South Pacific.

===Structure of the population===

== Vital statistics ==
For births, deaths, and fertility rates, the Nauru Bureau of Statistics was used. For population, the United States Census Bureau&#x27;s mid-year estimated were used. If a cell is shaded light green and a dagger stands beside a number, it indicates the estimate from &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. In 2013, the number of births (366) and birth rate (38.8) was the second-highest during this period. In 2011, the total fertility rate of 4.2 was the highest since 1992 (4.5). Since 2009, there has been a natural change of at least 200 inhabitants—the first since the reparations of the population in 2006.


2011-2021 data from NAURU 2021 POPULATION AND HOUSING CENSUS - ANALYTICAL REPORT
== Ethnic groups ==
Nauru, as of 2011, is mainly inhabited by Nauruans (94%), while the main minority groups include Fijians (1%), Chinese (1%), and Solomon Islanders (1%). This shows a major change from the previous major census of 2002, when Nauruans represented 75% of the population. According to the Constitution Nauru does not exclude any ethnic group to become a citizen.

The recent sizable immigration event of Chinese people happened in 1993.

== Languages ==
The Nauruan language is the official language of Nauru. English is widely understood and is used for most government and commercial purposes, and is official. According to the 2011 census, 95.3% of the population speaks Nauruan, 66.0% speak English, and 11.9% speak another language. Nauruan is an Austronesian language, however, no adequate written grammar of the language has been compiled, and its relationships to other Micronesian languages are not well understood.

== Religions ==


The main religions in Nauru are Nauru Congregational (35.71%), Roman Catholic (32.96%), Assemblies of God (12.98%), and Nauruan indigenous religion (9.50%). The biggest changes from 2002 to 2011 were an increase from 0 to 1,291 (Assemblies of God) and 1,417 to 282 (Other). Public holidays include New Year&#x27;s Day (1 January), Independence Day (31 January), Good Friday, Easter Monday, Easter Tuesday, Constitution Day (17 May), National Youth Day (25 September), Christmas Day, and Boxer Day.

The indigenous religion was the predominant religion in Nauru before the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when foreign missionaries introduced Christianity to the island. It is still practised by 9.5% of the population, according to 2011 census. There are a few active Christian missionary organisations, including representatives of Anglicanism, Methodism, and Catholicism. The Constitution provides for freedom of religion; however, the Government restricted this right in some circumstances. The government has restricted the religious practices of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, most of whom are foreign workers employed by RONPhos.

== Education ==

Literacy rate in Nauru, defined as &quot;people who are currently enrolled in school and/or have reached at least grade 5 of primary education&quot;, is 96.5%, as of 2011. There are 3,190 students and 104 teachers, as of 2013. The 2011 census stated 4 percent of the population aged 15 years or older have a primary education, 91 percent have a secondary education, and 5 percent have a tertiary education. Education is based on the British system, which requires attendance from 5 to 16 years old. Students spend three years at preschool, six years of primary education, and four years of secondary school. Tertiary school is not required. An estimated 10.7 percent of the GDP was spent on education in 1999. As of 2013, there are five preschools, four primary schools, three secondary schools, and one tertiary school. The lone college, University of South Pacific, opened in the 1970s via distance courses, and in 1987 a campus was built on the island. It offers accounting, management, primary education, and English studies as majors.

The education system had a near-collapse in 2000–2005. During this time, exams were not held, teachers were not paid, and schools did not have enough funding to continue. As a result, over half of the schools closed. In 2009, the Australian Government partnered with the Nauruan Department of Education to help. This agreement resulted in a 5.7% increase in students, teachers with a degree increased from 30% to 93%, and over A$11 million was used to construct a new secondary school.

== Health ==
A universal healthcare system is present in Nauru, which is provided to all citizens of Nauru without charge. There is only one hospital in Nauru, being the Republic of Nauru Hospital in Yaren, which offers basic surgical and medical care. However, patients who would need more advanced care would typically travel to Australian hospitals. In 2012, an estimated 7.5% of its GDP was spent on healthcare. In 2004, 149 physicians and 557 nurses per 100,000 people were present. Nauru has the world&#x27;s highest obesity rate, with an obesity rate of 71.7%. Nauru&#x27;s population has a life expectancy of 66 years at birth, ranking it 169th in the world.

== Economic indicators ==
Net monthly income in 2006 averaged A$2,597 (A$ in 2014). In the same year, gross monthly income averaged A$9,554 (A$ in 2014). This was calculated during the mini-census of 2006, which featured 54.4% response rate of the population. The income was calculated using the following factors: first job salary, subsistence, other business income, second job salary, services to other households, benefits, house gifts consumed and received, and other income. Compared to other countries that use the Australian dollar—Kiribati, Australia, and Tuvalu—Nauru ranks number one in terms of income. Since 2013, Nauru does not have a minimum wage.

Nauru&#x27;s number of employed people has steadily risen and fallen. According to the 2011 census, there are 2,883 employed persons and 908 unemployed persons, making an unemployment rate of 23%. The Nauru Bureau of Statistics predicted the unemployment rate will decrease to 22% in FY2014/15. The gross domestic product of Nauru was A$69.55 million in 2009, an increase of 40% increase from 2008. The GDP is broken down into three categories: primary (18.7%—agriculture, hunting, forestry, fishing, mining, and quarrying), secondary (36.5%—manufacturing, electric, gas, water, and construction), and tertiary (44.8%—trade, hotel, restaurants, and various services) industries.

A majority of the population are employed in phosphate mining, public administration, education, and transportation. A detention centre was closed in 2008, which caused the unemployment rate to rise to 30%, and approximately ten percent of the population relied on working at the centre. The centre reopened in 2012 and currently serves 1,162 prisoners, as of May 2014. During the 1990s, Nauru was famous for operating offshore banks, helping with money laundering. The United States State Department&#x27;s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report estimated there were 400 offshore finance centres laundering an estimated $70 billion.

Phosphate mining in Nauru originally made Nauru the richest per capita nation in the world. In 1968, the Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust (NPRT) was created to invest profits from mining, so Nauru would have money after the mining was exhausted. The owners of the trust purchased a fleet of ships and aircraft, a brewery in the Solomon Islands, hotels around the world, and real estate in Australia, the United States and Britain, which caused the trust to go bankrupt. Phosphate exports peaked in 1973 with 2.3 million tonnes, but has decreased to 0.2 million tonnes in 2001. In 2006, mining of a secondary layer of phosphate began.

== Notes ==

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3044070" start="4" end="25" title="Demographics of Nauru" label="demographics of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="30" end="44" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="52" end="65" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="94" end="100" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="181" end="207" title="Nauru Bureau of Statistics" label="Nauru Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="267" end="272" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="445" end="460" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="598" end="608" title="I-Kiribati" label="I-Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="660" end="670" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="688" end="698" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266280" start="982" end="990" title="Nauruan people" label="Nauruans"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="1199" end="1217" title="Micronesian people" label="Micronesian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974182" start="1283" end="1293" title="John Fearn (whaler)" label="John Fearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1431" end="1443" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="1781" end="1797" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauruan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965836" start="2052" end="2061" title="Religion in Nauru" label="religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981329" start="2075" end="2102" title="Nauru Congregational Church" label="Nauru Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2116" end="2130" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="2145" end="2158" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="2253" end="2268" title="academic degree" label="academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="2418" end="2439" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="2537" end="2544" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="2666" end="2668" title="Australian dollar" label="A$"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187432" start="2735" end="2751" title="Phosphate mining in Nauru" label="phosphate mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="2785" end="2792" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="2816" end="2833" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="2935" end="2952" title="Urbanization" label="urbanisation rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="3047" end="3092" title="List of countries by population" label="ranks around 193rd in the world by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="3134" end="3149" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="3187" end="3207" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075150" start="3250" end="3272" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by fertility rate" label="highest in the Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974182" start="3642" end="3652" title="John Fearn (whaler)" label="John Fearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072172" start="3745" end="3773" title="Japanese occupation of Nauru" label="Japanese occupied the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3781" end="3793" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044350" start="4148" end="4156" title="Tuvaluan people" label="Tuvaluan"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="4161" end="4171" title="I-Kiribati" label="I-Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q637322" start="4222" end="4261" title="Nauru Phosphate Corporation" label="Republic of Nauru Phosphate Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5358" end="5385" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="5529" end="5547" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266280" start="6007" end="6014" title="Nauruan people" label="Nauruan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794439" start="6062" end="6069" title="Fijians" label="Fijians"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="6094" end="6108" title="Solomon Island" label="Solomon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="6419" end="6435" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauruan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="6713" end="6725" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q420591" start="6839" end="6860" title="Micronesian languages" label="Micronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981329" start="6937" end="6957" title="Nauru Congregational Church" label="Nauru Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6968" end="6982" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="6993" end="7010" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q653912" start="7025" end="7052" title="Nauruan indigenous religion" label="Nauruan indigenous religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q653912" start="7408" end="7427" title="Nauruan indigenous religion" label="indigenous religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="7823" end="7842" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="7970" end="8017" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="8026" end="8050" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="8124" end="8137" title="Literacy rate" label="Literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="8963" end="8990" title="University of South Pacific" label="University of South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="9395" end="9416" title="Australian Government" label="Australian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="9667" end="9687" title="Universal health care" label="universal healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q64098422" start="9822" end="9848" title="Republic of Nauru Hospital" label="Republic of Nauru Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q31026" start="9852" end="9857" title="Yaren District" label="Yaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="9983" end="9992" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="10382" end="10384" title="Australian dollar" label="A$"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="10969" end="10981" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550420" start="11783" end="11799" title="Nauru detention centre" label="detention centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="12112" end="12128" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187432" start="12308" end="12333" title="Phosphate mining in Nauru" label="Phosphate mining in Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783572" start="12413" end="12444" title="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust" label="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="12635" end="12650" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21306" wikidata="Q1154005" url="?curid=21306" title="Politics of Nauru">
<text>The politics of [[Nauru]] take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Nauru is the head of government of the executive branch. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the parliament. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

==Political conditions==

===Economy===
Nauru&#x27;s economic viability has historically rested on its phosphate reserves. Phosphate has been mined on the island since 1906. After its independence in 1968, this small Pacific nation generated healthy revenues from this lucrative—but finite—resource. The phosphate supply has been largely exhausted in recent years, and the economy has declined since its peak near 1980.

===Offshore banking===
In this regard, the government has tried to develop the island into an offshore financial centre, imitating the success of the Bahamas and other island nations around the world that have emerged as major offshore banking centres. The government has also invested in property on other islands and the United States through its Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust.

Over the course of recent years, however, offshore banking institutions and instruments have come under increasing scrutiny by international bodies seeking to make international finance a more transparent system. Nauru, as a result, has been a casualty of this movement.

In December 1999, four major international banks banned dollar transactions with Nauru. The United States Department of State issued a report identifying Nauru as a major money laundering centre, used by narcotics traffickers and organized crime figures.

===Shifting governments===
Nauru had 17 changes of administration between 1989 and 2003. President Bernard Dowiyogo was first elected in 1976 and served as President till 1978, he returned to that office in 1989, and was re-elected again in 1992.

A vote in parliament, however, forced him to yield power to Kinza Clodumar in 1995. Dowiyogo regained the presidency when the Clodumar government fell in mid-1998.

In April 2000, René Harris, former chairman of the Nauru Phosphate Corporation, became president as he briefly assembled support in parliament. Harris&#x27; attempt to put together an administration lasted for only a few days of parliamentary maneuvering. In the end, Harris proved unable to secure parliament&#x27;s confidence, and Dowiyogo returned yet again to the presidency by the end of the month, taking office in April 2000 for his fourth and, after a minimal hiatus, fifth stints as Nauru&#x27;s top executive.

Bernard Dowiyogo died in office in March 2003 and Ludwig Scotty was elected as the president, later being re-elected to serve a full term in October 2004. 

Following a vote of no confidence on 19 December 2007, Scotty was replaced by Marcus Stephen. Stephen resigned in November 2011, and Freddie Pitcher became president. Sprent Dabwido then filed a motion of no confidence in Pitcher, resulting in him becoming president. Following parliamentary elections in 2013, Baron Waqa was elected president. He held the presidential title six years from 2013 to 2019, but in January 2014 an institutional crisis occurred when the President started a systematic campaign of repression against the opposition and the judicial branch of the government.

President Waqa was a strong supporter of Australia keeping refugees in a refugee camp on Nauru soil. He lost his parliamentary seat in the 2019 Nauruan parliamentary election, meaning he could not be re-elected. 

In August 2019 the parliament elected former human rights lawyer Lionel Aingimea as the new president of Nauru.
===Environmental concerns===
Phosphate depletion will likely be one of the most important considerations for the government in the next few years as the supply was forecast to be exhausted by 2023. Since Nauru imports almost everything it consumes (including food, water and fuel) the need to diversify the economy and to generate other sources of revenue is of paramount importance.

As noted above, offshore banking has been one arena into which Nauru has traversed, however, the rewards are limited by growing concern about the ethical parameters of this business. Tourism is another industry that is also being gradually built.

Yet another concern is the ecological damage that resulted from a century of phosphate mining by the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand were responsible for the large scale and indiscriminate mining of phosphate on the tiny island for most of the 20th century.

The mining left an ecological and economic disaster for Nauru to handle when the country achieved independence in 1968. Not only was the country&#x27;s principal resource and employment generating activity almost entirely depleted by the rapid mining done by the three countries, the mining companies had also failed to follow the basic principles of restoring and regenerating the lands where mining had been completed. Thus, Nauru was left to handle the immense and expensive task of restoring large chunks of land which were destroyed by the mining.

Nauru demanded compensation from the three nations, but was refused. Finally, in 1993, Nauru was forced to turn to the International Court of Justice at The Hague in The Netherlands. It filed a claim of $73 million against the three countries. The case was soon afterwards settled out of court by Australia, with Britain and New Zealand also contributing to the reparations sought by Nauru.

Today, Nauru is almost totally dependent on trade with New Zealand, Australia and Fiji. Arable land is very limited as are all other natural resources, now that its long-time economic base of phosphate mines has been almost completely depleted.

===Foreign policy===
On the international front, in late July 2002, Taiwan cut its diplomatic ties with Nauru. Taiwan and Nauru had shared diplomatic ties for 22 years; Taiwan has enjoyed diplomatic ties with several Pacific countries even in the face of the &quot;One China policy&quot; by Beijing. Nevertheless, this particular 22-year-long legacy was broken when Nauru&#x27;s president decided to change its allegiance and establish formal relations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China. The move effectively shifted diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing, thus angering the government of Taiwan, which described the shift in policy as &quot;reckless.&quot; 

Nauru&#x27;s decision to recognise Beijing via the signing of diplomatic papers and a joint communique ultimately resulted in the cessation of Taiwanese aid. Nauru instead received a US$150 million aid package from Beijing.

In April 2005, during a state visit to the Marshall Islands, President Chen Shui-bian of Taiwan met and spoke with the Nauruan President Ludwig Scotty. On 14 May 2005, the two countries signed the necessary documents to restore formal ties and reopen embassies. The People&#x27;s Republic of China consequently severed ties two weeks later on 31 May.

===Internal disputes===
In early 2003, a fight for power emerged between President Rene Harris and former President Bernard Dowiyogo. The power struggle occurred following a non-confidence vote in parliament, which effectively ejected Harris from the position of president. Reports suggested that Harris was ousted because of rising anxieties regarding economic mismanagement. At the time, Dowiyogo referred to Nauru&#x27;s political scenario as being &quot;critical.&quot;

It was reported that Dowiyogo became the president replacing Harris, however, information surrounding the shift in power was sparse. There was very little international coverage of the matter. Regardless, Dowiyogo&#x27;s tenure did not last for long. In March 2003, Dowiyogo underwent heart surgery in the United States and died.

===2003 – present===
In May 2003, elections were held within the parliament to select a new president. In those elections, Ludwig Scotty gained the most support and became the new president. The actual results of the parliamentary vote were as follows: Ludwig Scotty—10 parliamentary votes, Kinza Clodumar—7 parliamentary votes. President Scotty became president on 29 May 2003. He served only until August 2003 when he was ousted in a non-confidence measure. Rene Harris was elected as president.

Meanwhile, in parliamentary elections held in May 2003, Nauru First Party won 3 seats and independents garnered 15 in total.

In late June 2004, Nauru&#x27;s former parliament speaker Ludwig Scotty became the country&#x27;s new president. His presidency followed the exit of outgoing President Rene Harris following yet another non-confidence measure.

For his part, Scotty had resigned as parliamentary speaker in April 2004 in protest of the Nauru&#x27;s financial crisis which included the commencement of receivership proceedings by corporate giant, General Electric. During that period, Nauru faced the seizure of its assets if the country failed to honour its debt payments. 

After Scotty&#x27;s resignation as parliamentary speaker, the parliament was unable to convene as members of parliament could not decide whom to appoint as his replacement. The scenario led to a political crisis, the financial crisis notwithstanding.

In mid-2004, the government of Australia sent envoys to help Nauru deal with its financial crisis. By August 2004, a report by the Australian Centre for Independent Studies suggested that Nauru might consider relinquishing its independent status in favor of becoming an Australian territory. The report called for radical economic reform as well as the restructuring of both governmental instruments and public service. The author of the report has offered Nauru economic advice in the past.

Scotty was re-elected to serve a full term in October 2004. Following a vote of no confidence by Parliament against President Scotty on 19 December 2007, Marcus Stephen became the President. Following Stephen&#x27;s resignation in November 2011, Freddie Pitcher became president. Sprent Dabwido then moved a motion of no confidence in Pitcher, and Dabwido was duly elected president by the parliament, with nine votes supporting his nomination and eight votes opposing.

Elections for Parliament were held in 2013, after which Baron Waqa was elected by Parliament as president. He held the presidential title six years from 2013 to 2019. President Waqa was a strong supporter of Australia keeping refugees in a refugee camp on Nauru soil. The incumbent president lost his parliamentary seat in 2019 Nauruan parliamentary election, meaning he lost his bid for re-election. In August 2019 the parliament elected former human rights lawyer Lionel Aingimea as the new president of Nauru. Following the 2022 Nauruan parliamentary election, Russ Kun was elected president to succeed Aingimea. On 30 October 2023, David Ranibok Adeang was elected President of the Republic of Nauru.

===Crackdowns on Opposition politicians===

In January 2014, Nauru&#x27;s President Baron Waqa fired the country&#x27;s only magistrate Peter Law and its Chief Justice Geoffrey Eames (both Australian-based justices). Eames, himself, was fired after issuing an injunction to temporarily halt Law&#x27;s deportation.

In May and June 2014, Waqa suspended 5 of the 7 members of Nauru&#x27;s Opposition from Parliament indefinitely.

Three of the MPs, Mathew Batsiua, Kieren Keke and Roland Kun, were suspended in May 2014 for making comments to international media critical of the government and the alleged breakdown of the rule of law. Another two, Sprent Dabwido (a former president) and Squire Jeremiah were suspended a month later for behaving in an unruly manner.

In June 2015, Jeremiah, Dabwido, and Batsiua were arrested and Kun had his passport cancelled amid claims that they had been trying to destabilize the Government by talking to foreign media.

==Executive branch==

|President of Nauru
|David Adeang
|Nonpartisan
|30 October 2023
The Parliament elects a president from amongst its members, who appoints Cabinet of Nauru of 5–6 people. The President is both the head of state and head of government.

A series of no-confidence votes, resignations and elections between 1999 and 2003 saw René Harris and Bernard Dowiyogo as President for numerous short periods during a period of political instability. Dowigoyo died in office on 10 March 2003, in Washington, D.C., after heart surgery. Ludwig Scotty was elected President on 29 May 2003, but this did not bring to an end the years of political uncertainty as he was replaced by Harris a few months later. Scotty regained the presidency in 2004, only to be ousted in a vote of no confidence in 2007.

==Legislative branch==

Parliament has 19 members, elected for a three-year term in multi-seat constituencies. Each constituency returns 2 members to the Nauruan Parliament, except for Meneng and Ubenide which returns 3 and 4 respectively.
Voting is compulsory for all citizens aged 20 or more.

==Political parties and elections==

Nauru does not have a formal structure for political parties; candidates typically stand as independents. 15 of the 18 members of the current parliament are independents, and alliances within the government are often formed on the basis of extended family ties. Four parties that have been active in Nauruan politics are the Nauru Party, the Democratic Party, Nauru First and the Centre Party.

==Judicial branch==
For its size, Nauru has a complex legal system. The Supreme Court, headed by the Chief Justice, is paramount on constitutional issues. Other cases can be appealed to the two-judge Appellate Court. Parliament cannot overturn court decisions, but Appellate Court rulings can be appealed to the High Court of Australia; in practice, this rarely happens. Lower courts consist of the District Court and the Family Court, both of which are headed by a Resident Magistrate, who also is the Registrar of the Supreme Court. Finally, there also are two quasi-courts: the Public Service Appeal Board and the Police Appeal Board, both of which are presided over by the Chief Justice.

==Local government==
Since 1992, local government has been the responsibility of the Nauru Island Council (NIC). The NIC has limited powers and functions as an advisor to the national government on local matters. The role of the NIC is to concentrate its efforts on local activities relevant to Nauruans. An elected member of the Nauru Island Council cannot simultaneously be a member of parliament. Land tenure in Nauru is unusual: all Nauruans have certain rights to all land on the island, which is owned by individuals and family groups; government and corporate entities do not own land and must enter into a lease arrangement with the landowners to use land. Non-Nauruans cannot own lands.

==Armed forces==
Australia is responsible for Nauru&#x27;s defense under an informal agreement between the two countries. However, there is a 100-person regular police force under civilian command, backed by volunteer reservists trained to provide support in the event of serious unrest. While officers are typically unarmed while on routine patrol, the Nauruan police force does possess 60 firearms.

==See also==
* Naoero Amo
* Commonwealth
* Nauruan diplomatic missions

==References==
==External links==
* Nauru laws and case law</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154005" start="4" end="25" title="Politics of Nauru" label="politics of [[Nauru]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="57" end="70" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="71" end="96" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q628102" start="119" end="137" title="President of Nauru" label="President of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="145" end="163" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="171" end="187" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="189" end="206" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="264" end="273" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="277" end="288" title="separation of powers" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="296" end="305" title="executive branch" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="314" end="325" title="legislative branch" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="368" end="373" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187432" start="431" end="449" title="Phosphate mining in Nauru" label="phosphate reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="451" end="460" title="Phosphate" label="Phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="843" end="868" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593736" start="976" end="992" title="offshore banking" label="offshore banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783572" start="1098" end="1129" title="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust" label="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="1496" end="1529" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q715836" start="1759" end="1775" title="Bernard Dowiyogo" label="Bernard Dowiyogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q888025" start="1968" end="1982" title="Kinza Clodumar" label="Kinza Clodumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q560557" start="2088" end="2099" title="René Harris" label="René Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q637322" start="2124" end="2151" title="Nauru Phosphate Corporation" label="Nauru Phosphate Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q715836" start="2594" end="2610" title="Bernard Dowiyogo" label="Bernard Dowiyogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313003" start="2644" end="2657" title="Ludwig Scotty" label="Ludwig Scotty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="2763" end="2784" title="Motion of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q274174" start="2829" end="2843" title="Marcus Stephen" label="Marcus Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q917601" start="2884" end="2899" title="Freddie Pitcher" label="Freddie Pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q57543" start="2918" end="2932" title="Sprent Dabwido" label="Sprent Dabwido"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431017" start="3029" end="3060" title="2013 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections in 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q563297" start="3062" end="3072" title="Baron Waqa" label="Baron Waqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20635414" start="3179" end="3199" title="Nauru government crackdown on opposition (2014–2015)" label="institutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312645" start="3478" end="3513" title="2019 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="2019 Nauruan parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66765492" start="3618" end="3633" title="Lionel Aingimea" label="Lionel Aingimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="4325" end="4342" title="Environmental degradation" label="ecological damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="5827" end="5833" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="6024" end="6040" title="One China policy" label="One China policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249614" start="8329" end="8369" title="2003 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections held in May 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="9815" end="9836" title="vote of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431017" start="10252" end="10256" title="2013 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q563297" start="10270" end="10280" title="Baron Waqa" label="Baron Waqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312645" start="10537" end="10572" title="2019 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="2019 Nauruan parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66765492" start="10680" end="10695" title="Lionel Aingimea" label="Lionel Aingimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q109022759" start="10741" end="10776" title="2022 Nauruan parliamentary election" label="2022 Nauruan parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q109781648" start="10778" end="10786" title="Russ Kun" label="Russ Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q58096" start="10850" end="10870" title="David Adeang" label="David Ranibok Adeang"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="10981" end="10986" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q563297" start="11004" end="11014" title="Baron Waqa" label="Baron Waqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699610" start="11088" end="11102" title="Geoffrey Eames" label="Geoffrey Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298531" start="11368" end="11382" title="Mathew Batsiua" label="Mathew Batsiua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391207" start="11384" end="11395" title="Kieren Keke" label="Kieren Keke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162897" start="11400" end="11410" title="Roland Kun" label="Roland Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q57543" start="11568" end="11582" title="Sprent Dabwido" label="Sprent Dabwido"/>
<link wikidata="Q13453817" start="11608" end="11623" title="Squire Jeremiah" label="Squire Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q628102" start="11903" end="11921" title="President of Nauru" label="President of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q58096" start="11923" end="11935" title="David Adeang" label="David Adeang"/>
<link wikidata="Q637217" start="11937" end="11948" title="Non-partisan democracy" label="Nonpartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637805" start="12039" end="12055" title="Cabinet of Nauru" label="Cabinet of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="12097" end="12110" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="12115" end="12133" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q560557" start="12222" end="12233" title="René Harris" label="René Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q715836" start="12238" end="12254" title="Bernard Dowiyogo" label="Bernard Dowiyogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313003" start="12421" end="12434" title="Ludwig Scotty" label="Ludwig Scotty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="12653" end="12674" title="vote of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972029" start="12709" end="12719" title="Parliament of Nauru" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712218" start="12780" end="12794" title="Constituencies of Nauru" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13343" end="13354" title="Nauru Party" label="Nauru Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186291" start="13360" end="13376" title="Democratic Party of Nauru" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964815" start="13378" end="13389" title="Nauru First" label="Nauru First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934307" start="13398" end="13410" title="Centre Party (Nauru)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644949" start="13485" end="13498" title="Supreme Court of Nauru" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644949" start="13514" end="13527" title="Chief Justice of Nauru" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771526" start="13545" end="13566" title="Constitution of Nauru" label="constitutional issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="13725" end="13748" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="14506" end="14517" title="Land tenure" label="Land tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964815" start="15220" end="15230" title="Naoero Amo" label="Naoero Amo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="15233" end="15245" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433608" start="15248" end="15275" title="Nauruan diplomatic missions" label="Nauruan diplomatic missions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21307" wikidata="Q974648" url="?curid=21307" title="Economy of Nauru">
<text>The economy of Nauru is tiny, based on a population in 2019 of only 11,550 people. The economy has historically been based on phosphate mining. With primary phosphate reserves exhausted by the end of the 2010s, Nauru has sought to diversify its sources of income. In 2020, Nauru&#x27;s main sources of income were the sale of fishing rights in Nauru&#x27;s territorial waters, and revenue from the Regional Processing Centre (an offshore Australian immigration detention facility).

Nauru is dependent on foreign aid, chiefly from Australia, Taiwan and New Zealand.

== Economic performance ==
In the years after independence in 1968, Nauru possessed the highest GDP per capita in the world due to its rich phosphate deposits. In anticipation of the exhaustion of phosphate deposits, a substantial amount of the income from phosphates was invested in trust funds aiming to help cushion the transition and provide for Nauru&#x27;s economic future. However, because of heavy spending, including poor foreign investment, the government is now facing bankruptcy. To cut costs the government called for a freeze on wages, a reduction in public service staffing, privatization of numerous government agencies, and closure of some of Nauru&#x27;s overseas consulates. Economic uncertainty caused by financial mismanagement and corruption, combined with shortages of basic goods, resulted in domestic unrest. In 2004 Nauru was faced with chaos amid political strife and the collapse of the island&#x27;s telecommunications system. Moreover, the deterioration of housing and hospitals has continued.

Few comprehensive statistics on the Nauru economy exist, with estimates of Nauru&#x27;s GDP varying widely. According to the U.S. State Department, Nauru&#x27;s GDP volume was US$1 million in 2004. Nauru receives about US$20 million foreign aid a year from Australia.

The nation&#x27;s economy has grown significantly since 2012, with help from the reopening of the Nauru Regional Processing Centre, funded by Australia.

The most recent 2022-23 Nauru Budget recognized expected revenues of $252.5 million and expenditure of $251.9 million (20% increase from Budget 2021–2022) with a $549,000 surplus balance. The surplus will provide cash reserves at the bank and help Nauru manage future economic uncertainties.

== Balance of payments ==
Phosphate is Nauru&#x27;s only export product, although the government also receives relatively significant foreign exchange income from licensing its rich skipjack tuna fishing grounds to foreign fishing vessels, which land an annual average of 50,000 tonnes of Nauru zone-caught tuna overseas. In 2004 income from phosphate export was US$640,000, with Australia, New Zealand and Japan serving as the country&#x27;s major export markets. In the same year the Nauru government budget shows that income from licensing foreign fishing vessels was over US$3,000,000.

Nauru needs to import almost all basic and capital goods, including food, water, fuel, and manufactured goods, with Australia and New Zealand as its major import sources. In 2004 Nauru&#x27;s imports totaled about US$19.8 million.

==Finance==
Nauru has been a cash economy since at least 2004, after the Bank of Nauru and the Republic of Nauru Finance Corporation went bankrupt and ceased operations in the early 2000s and the licenses of all offshore banks were revoked by the Nauru government in 2004. Nauru uses the Australian dollar for its currency. Most government payments are executed through electronic funds transfer. Electronic funds transfer at point of sale was introduced in 2020. The government is required to periodically fly in Australian currency to maintain liquidity.

On 2 June 2015, an agency of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, Australia&#x27;s fifth largest bank, was established in Nauru by the Department of Finance. Effective from the end of April 2016, Westpac, one of Australia&#x27;s largest banks, ceased to have any dealings with the Nauru government. On 21 April 2016, it was announced that the Bendigo Bank was facing pressure also to close its operation in Nauru.

On 14 November 2023, Bendigo and Adelaide Bank announced its intention to cease operation in Nauru by December 2024. On 24 January 2024, Nauru formally re-established diplomatic ties with the People&#x27;s Republic of China after withdrawing recognition of Taiwan. In early March 2024, the Bank of China sent a delegation to Nauru to discuss its banking problems. On 18 March, Bendigo and Adelaide Bank announced its intention to delay its exit from Nauru, from December 2024 to July 2025.

== Taxation ==
On October 1, 2014, an income tax was imposed in Nauru for the first time, with high income earners paying a flat rate of 10%. The government spending in 2015 was forecast to be under US$92 million. Taxes include an airport departure tax and a bed tax at the Meneñ Hotel. The 2007–08 Budget saw the increase of existing excises on cigarettes and duty on imports. A tax on sugary foods was also introduced, chiefly to help combat Nauru&#x27;s diabetes epidemic.

==Tax haven status==
Historically Nauru was regarded as a tax haven due to the operation of its international financial centre, which offered amongst other things offshore banking services. In 2001, Nauru was blacklisted internationally over concerns it had become a haven for money laundering. Amendments made in 2004 abolished Nauru&#x27;s Offshore Banking sector and, as recognised in Nauru&#x27;s latest anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) review, Nauru&#x27;s offshore sector is now limited to a small offshore company register.

In July 2017 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) upgraded its rating of Nauru&#x27;s standards of tax transparency. Nauru had been listed alongside fourteen other countries that had failed to show that they could comply with international tax transparency standards and regulations. The OECD subsequently put Nauru through a fast-tracked compliance process and the country was given a &quot;largely compliant&quot; rating.

== Relationship with Australia ==
Currently, Nauru is heavily dependent on Australia as its major source of financial support. In 2001 Nauru signed an agreement with Australia to accommodate asylum seekers (mostly from Iraq and Afghanistan) on the island, in return for millions of dollars in aid. This agreement, referred to as the &quot;Pacific Solution&quot;, came to an end in 2007, prompting Nauruan concerns about the future of the island&#x27;s revenue. Australia has also sent financial experts to Nauru to help the tiny nation overcome its economic problems. However, serious questions remain about the long-term viability of Nauru&#x27;s economy, with uncertainties about the rehabilitation of mined land and the replacement of income from phosphates.

In 2008, talks began between Australia and Nauru regarding the future of the former&#x27;s economic development aid to the latter. Nauruan Foreign and Finance Minister Dr. Kieren Keke stated that his country did not want aid handouts. One possible solution currently being explored would be for Australia to assist Nauru in setting up a &quot;boat repair industry&quot; for regional fishing vessels.

=== Nauru detention centre ===

The Nauru detention centre was established by the Australian government, with Nauruan agreement, in 2001 to cater for up to 800 refugees and asylum seekers under Australia&#x27;s Pacific solution. The centre is seen by Nauruans as an important source of employment opportunities, in addition to the pledge of A$20 million for development activities.

== Economic statistics ==

* GDP: purchasing power parity - US$60 million (2001 est.)
* GDP per capita: purchasing power parity - US$5,000 (2001 est.)
* Inflation rate (consumer prices): -3.6% (1993)
* Budget: revenues: US$23.4 million; expenditures: US$ million (1995/96)
* External debt: US$33.3 million
* Economic aid - receives around US$2.25 million from Australia (1996/97 est.)
* Currency: Australian dollar

The fiscal year runs from July 1 to June 30.

== Employment ==

* Labour force are mainly employed in mining phosphates, public administration by RONPhos, education and transport
* In 2004, the unemployment rate was close to 90%. In February 2008, foreign affairs minister Dr. Kieren Keke stated: &quot;We have got a major unemployment crisis in front of us.&quot; By 2011, the unemployment rate had decreased to 23%.
* Main industries are phosphate mining, offshore banking, coconut products
* Electricity production (fossil fuels) and consumption are around 30 GWh (2000)
* Agriculture is not a major employer, coconuts are the main produce

== Data ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 2004–2022 (with IMF staff estimates for 2019–2027). Inflation below 3% is in green.
== Trade ==

*Exports - valued at US$30 million (2018). Fish, calcium phosphates, low-voltage protection equipment, air conditioners, leather apparel. Major trading partners include Thailand 34%, Australia 16%, United States 13%, and South Korea 10%.
*Imports - valued at US$90 million (2018). Refined petroleum, construction vehicles, tug boats, poultry meats, cars. Major partners are Taiwan 52% and Australia 28%.

== See also ==
* Phosphate mining in Nauru
* Nauru Phosphate Corporation
* Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust
* Ministry of Finance of Nauru
* Tourism in Nauru

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;Nauru seeks to regain lost fortunes&quot;, Nick Squires, BBC, March 15, 2008
* &quot;Nauru&#x27;s riches to rags decline&quot;, Dan Nolan, Al Jazeera, March 17, 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974648" start="4" end="20" title="Economy of Nauru" label="economy of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="126" end="142" title="phosphate mining" label="phosphate mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="211" end="216" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="326" end="340" title="Exclusive economic zone" label="fishing rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550420" start="398" end="424" title="Nauru Regional Processing Centre" label="Regional Processing Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="542" end="548" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550420" start="1959" end="1991" title="Nauru Regional Processing Centre" label="Nauru Regional Processing Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887077" start="3718" end="3743" title="Bendigo and Adelaide Bank" label="Bendigo and Adelaide Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q113860018" start="3814" end="3835" title="Ministry of Finance of Nauru" label="Department of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031726" start="3875" end="3882" title="Westpac" label="Westpac"/>
<link wikidata="Q790068" start="4384" end="4397" title="Bank of China" label="Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="4623" end="4633" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260593" start="4824" end="4837" title="departure tax" label="departure tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="5339" end="5355" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007303" start="5470" end="5491" title="anti-money laundering" label="anti-money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703925" start="5496" end="5532" title="combating the financing of terrorism" label="combating the financing of terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518331" start="5606" end="5622" title="offshore company" label="offshore company"/>
<link wikidata="Q564811" start="6279" end="6292" title="asylum seeker" label="asylum seeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416504" start="6427" end="6443" title="Pacific Solution" label="Pacific Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391207" start="7023" end="7034" title="Kieren Keke" label="Kieren Keke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550420" start="7288" end="7310" title="Nauru detention centre" label="Nauru detention centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416504" start="7463" end="7479" title="Pacific solution" label="Pacific solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="7669" end="7692" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="7723" end="7737" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="7739" end="7762" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q461319" start="7910" end="7923" title="External debt" label="External debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="7952" end="7955" title="aid" label="aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="8055" end="8066" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="8160" end="8169" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="8172" end="8193" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q637322" start="8197" end="8204" title="RONPhos" label="RONPhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391207" start="8328" end="8339" title="Kieren Keke" label="Kieren Keke"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="8527" end="8534" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="9030" end="9038" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="9082" end="9093" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187432" start="9283" end="9308" title="Phosphate mining in Nauru" label="Phosphate mining in Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q637322" start="9311" end="9338" title="Nauru Phosphate Corporation" label="Nauru Phosphate Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783572" start="9341" end="9372" title="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust" label="Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q113860018" start="9375" end="9403" title="Ministry of Finance of Nauru" label="Ministry of Finance of Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829186" start="9406" end="9422" title="Tourism in Nauru" label="Tourism in Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="9527" end="9530" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="9609" end="9619" title="Al Jazeera Media Network" label="Al Jazeera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21308" wikidata="Q5621014" url="?curid=21308" title="Telecommunications in Nauru">
<text>Nauru has one government-owned radio station and two television stations, one of which is government owned. The island has telephone service under country code 674. The island&#x27;s Internet service is provided by CenPacNet and Digicel Nauru. The country&#x27;s ccTLD is .nr. 

== Telephones ==
In 1994, there were 2,000 telephone land lines in use. There were 450 mobile cellular phones in use at the time. There were adequate local and international radiotelephone communications provided via Australian facilities. There is one satellite earth station, provided by Intelsat.

=== Telephone numbers in Nauru ===
The country code is +674, and the international call prefix is 00. There are seven other numbers in the system, with the format of numbers being +0067433724411. 

==== Telephone ranges ====
In August 2011, Criden Appi, the Director of Telecommunications (Regulatory), said that Nauru advises &quot;only 556xxxx [x being any number from 1-9], 557xxxx, 558xxxx are in use for mobiles and there are no landlines in service&quot;. 

===== Mobile telephone number ranges =====
===== Fixed line area codes =====
===== Special Numbers =====
== Radio and television ==
As of 1998, there was 1 FM station, and no shortwave or AM stations. The FM station, Radio Nauru FM 105, is owned by the government. In 1997, there were 7,000 radios. 

As of that year, there were 500 television sets. There are two television stations. One station is government-owned Nauru Television and mainly rebroadcasts British Broadcasting Corporation, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and Television New Zealand, while the other is a private sports network. 

== Internet ==

The country&#x27;s ccTLD is .nr. Internet service in the country is provided by CenPacNet. Domains must be paid, and can be ordered from CenPacNet. The original configuration of the .nr TLD domain was performed by Shaun Moran of Australian ComTech Communications in 1998 as part of the first Internet connectivity on the island. There was a lengthy process with IANA to get the .nr domain approved and assigned at the time. The setup of .nr was done in 2002 by Franck Martin using specific custom code. 

=== Internet censorship ===

In 2015, the Nauruan government blocked websites including Facebook as part of a crackdown on Internet pornography, especially child pornography. Opposition MP Matthew Batsiua has said that the Facebook ban is actually intended to stifle criticism of the government. The ban has now been lifted as of 2018.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="0" end="5" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="263" end="268" title="Country code top-level domain" label="ccTLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q42689" start="272" end="275" title=".nr" label=".nr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="322" end="331" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="496" end="505" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="532" end="541" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="569" end="577" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="619" end="631" title="Country calling code" label="country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242551" start="649" end="674" title="International Call Prefix" label="international call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273341" start="698" end="711" title="E.164" label="other numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909839" start="1261" end="1279" title="Radio Nauru" label="Radio Nauru FM 105"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981334" start="1461" end="1477" title="Nauru Television" label="Nauru Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1502" end="1534" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="1540" end="1575" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186424" start="1580" end="1602" title="Television New Zealand" label="Television New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="1686" end="1691" title="Country code top-level domain" label="ccTLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q42689" start="1695" end="1698" title=".nr" label=".nr"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1896" end="1906" title="Australia" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="2260" end="2268" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376252" start="2295" end="2315" title="Internet pornography" label="Internet pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="2328" end="2345" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298531" start="2361" end="2376" title="Matthew Batsiua" label="Matthew Batsiua"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21309" wikidata="Q751243" url="?curid=21309" title="Transport in Nauru">
<text>Transportation in [[Nauru]] includes pedestrian, bicycle, automobile, train, and airplane. There is no harbor/port as of the 2020s, as the island is surrounded by a rocky coral reef, however an international port is currently under construction.

==Ocean==

The Nauru international port which is currently under construction on Nauru in the Pacific Ocean. It will become the country&#x27;s first international seaport and improve commerce and connectivity for the island nation.

==Air==
Nauru has one airport, Nauru International Airport. Nauru Airlines, which flies to Brisbane, Australia; Majuro, Marshall Islands; Kiritimati; Palau; Nadi, Fiji; Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia and Tarawa, Kiribati, is the only airline to fly to the airport. There are seven airplanes in service, three of which are reserved for freight.

==Rail==

Rail transport is used for moving phosphate from the island&#x27;s interior to the cantilever jetties on the island&#x27;s western coast, in Aiwo District. For this purpose, a long, narrow-gauge railway was built by the Pacific Phosphate Company in 1907.

== Road ==
The island has about 30 km (18 miles) of road, and traffic drives on left side of road. Island Ring Road is the main Road on the island, going around the entire exterior of the island.

== References ==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751243" start="0" end="27" title="Transport in Nauru" label="Transportation in [[Nauru]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="37" end="47" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="49" end="56" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="58" end="68" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="70" end="75" title="train" label="train"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="81" end="89" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q534251" start="511" end="538" title="Nauru International Airport" label="Nauru International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192459" start="540" end="554" title="Our Airline" label="Nauru Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="571" end="579" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12919" start="592" end="616" title="Majuro, Marshall Islands" label="Majuro, Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="618" end="628" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="630" end="635" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q619443" start="637" end="647" title="Nadi, Fiji" label="Nadi, Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q319836" start="649" end="688" title="Pohnpei" label="Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="693" end="709" title="Tarawa, Kiribati" label="Tarawa, Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="770" end="778" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="878" end="887" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="927" end="937" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082251" start="938" end="945" title="jetty" label="jetties"/>
<link wikidata="Q240017" start="985" end="998" title="Aiwo District" label="Aiwo District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="1026" end="1046" title="narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259912" start="1064" end="1089" title="Pacific Phosphate Company" label="Pacific Phosphate Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1199" end="1215" title="Island Ring Road (Nauru)" label="Island Ring Road"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21312" wikidata="Q25359" url="?curid=21312" title="Navassa Island">
<text>Navassa Island (; ; , sometimes ) is a small uninhabited island in the Caribbean Sea. Located east of Jamaica, south of Cuba, and west of Jérémie on the Tiburon Peninsula of Haiti, it is subject to an ongoing territorial dispute between Haiti and the United States, which administers the island through the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

The U.S. has claimed the island as an appurtenance since 1857, based on the Guano Islands Act of 1856. Haiti&#x27;s claim over Navassa goes back to the Treaty of Ryswick in 1697 that recognized French, rather than Spanish, control of the western portion of the island of Hispaniola and other specifically named nearby islands. However, there was no mention of Navassa in the treaty detailing terms. Haiti&#x27;s claimed several nearby islands by name, among which Navassa was not listed, but also laid claim to &quot;other adjacent islands&quot;, which Haiti maintains included Navassa. The U.S. claim to the island, first made in 1857, asserts that Navassa was not included among the unnamed &quot;other adjacent islands&quot; in the 1801 Haitian Constitution. Since the Haitian Constitution of 1874, Haiti has explicitly named &quot;la Navase&quot; as one of the territories it claims. It maintains that it has continuously been claimed as part of Haiti since 1801.
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) code for the island, as part of the US Minor Outlying Islands, is ISO 3166-2:UM-76.

==History==
===1504 to 1901===
In 1504, Christopher Columbus, stranded on Jamaica during his fourth voyage, sent some crew members by canoe to Hispaniola for help. En route, they landed on the island, which had no water. They called it Navaza (from ), and mariners largely avoided it for the next 350 years. In 1798, Médéric Louis Élie Moreau de Saint-Méry, a member of the French Parliament best known for his publications on Saint-Domingue, referred to &quot;la Navasse&quot; as a &quot;small island between Saint-Domingue and Jamaica&quot;.

From 1801 to 1867, the successive constitutions of Haiti claimed sovereignty over adjacent islands, both named and unnamed, although Navassa was not specifically enumerated until 1874. Navassa Island was claimed for the United States on September 19, 1857, by Peter Duncan, an American sea captain, under the Guano Islands Act of 1856, for the rich guano deposits found on the island and for not being within the lawful jurisdiction of any other government, nor occupied by another government&#x27;s citizens.

Haiti protested the annexation, but on July 7, 1858, U.S. President James Buchanan issued an Executive Order supporting the American claim, calling for military action to enforce it. Navassa Island has since been maintained by the United States as an unincorporated territory (according to the Insular Cases). The United States Supreme Court on November 24, 1890, in &quot;Jones v. United States&quot;, , Id. at 224, found that Navassa Island must be considered as appertaining to the United States, creating a legal history for the island under U.S. law, unlike many other islands initially claimed under the Guano Islands Act. Haiti&#x27;s 1987 constitution maintains its claim to the island, which is considered part of the department of Grand&#x27;Anse.

==== Guano mining and the Navassa Island Rebellion of 1889 ====

Guano phosphate is a superior organic fertilizer that became a mainstay of American agriculture in the mid-19th century. In November 1857, Duncan transferred his discoverer&#x27;s rights to his employer, an American guano trader in Jamaica, who sold them to the newly formed Navassa Phosphate Company of Baltimore. After an interruption for the American Civil War, the company built larger mining facilities on Navassa with barrack housing for 140 black contract laborers from Maryland, houses for white supervisors, a blacksmith shop, warehouses, and a church.

Mining began in 1865. The workers dug out the guano by dynamite and pick-axe and hauled it in rail cars to the landing point at Lulu Bay, where it was put into sacks and lowered onto boats for transfer to the Company barque, the S.S. &quot;Romance&quot;. The living quarters at Lulu Bay were referred to as &#x27;Lulu Town&#x27;, as appears on old maps. Railway tracks eventually extended inland. In September 1875, the fierce 1875 Indianola hurricane swept over the island, destroying much of the company&#x27;s infrastructure, including the rail line and workers&#x27; homes. In total, the storm caused an estimated $25,000 () in damage on the island.

Hauling guano by muscle power in the fierce tropical heat, combined with general disgruntlement with conditions on the island, eventually contributed to a riot in 1889, in which five supervisors died. A U.S. warship returned 18 of the workers to Baltimore for three separate trials on murder charges. A black fraternal society, the Order of Galilean Fishermen, raised money to defend the miners in federal court. The defense tried to build a case on the contention that the men acted in self-defense or the heat of passion and even claimed that the United States did not have jurisdiction over the island. E. J. Waring, the first black lawyer called to the Maryland bar, was a part of the defense&#x27;s legal team. The cases, including &quot;Jones v. United States&quot;, went to the U.S. Supreme Court in October 1890, which ruled the Guano Act constitutional. Three of the miners were scheduled for execution in the spring of 1891. A grass-roots petition driven by black churches around the country, also signed by white jurors from the three trials, reached President Benjamin Harrison, who mentioned the case in the 1891 State of the Union Address. Among other things, he said:

Guano mining resumed on Navassa at a much-reduced level.

In 1898, during the Spanish–American War, the Phosphate Company had to abandon its operations on Navassa due to its proximity to Spanish Cuba and Puerto Rico. Company president John H. Fowler noted that the war made it impossible to find ships to deliver supplies to the island and expected his workers to be evacuated by June. Maryland senator Arthur Pue Gorman called for a naval warship to escort supply ships to the island to help evacuate workers. In July 1898, abrogating an agreement with Haitian Naval Admiral Hammerton Killick that would have allowed the Phosphate Company to withdraw equipment and supplies left on Navassa, a group of Haitians occupied the island and seized the company&#x27;s assets. They were unable to operate the machinery, and mining ceased. The Navassa Phosphate Company went bankrupt and the island was sold at auction in the United States in September 1900. A dispute over the sale hampered efforts to restart mining on the island and left four contract workers virtually abandoned on Navassa from December 1900 to May 1901. Between 1857 and 1898, approximately of phosphate deposits were removed from the island.

===1901 to present===

In 1905, the U.S. Lighthouse Service identified Navassa Island as a good location for a new lighthouse. However, plans for the light moved slowly. With the opening of the Panama Canal in 1914, shipping between the American eastern seaboard and the Canal through the Windward Passage between Cuba and Haiti increased in the area of Navassa, which proved a hazard to navigation. Congress appropriated $125,000 in 1913 to build a lighthouse on Navassa, and in 1917 the Lighthouse Service built the Navassa Island Light on the island, above sea level. At the same time, a wireless telegraphy station was established on the island. A keeper and two assistants were assigned to live there until the Lighthouse Service installed an automatic beacon in 1929.

After absorbing the Lighthouse Service in 1939, the U.S. Coast Guard serviced the light twice yearly. The U.S. Navy set up an observation post for the duration of World War II. The island has been uninhabited since then. Fishermen, mainly from Haiti, fish the waters around Navassa.

As part of the Parish–Smithsonian Expedition to Haiti in 1930, Smithsonian naturalists Alexander Wetmore and Waston Perrygo stopped at Navassa to document and collect examples of the island&#x27;s birds and other terrestrial and marine wildlife.

From 1917 to 1996, Navassa was under the administration of the United States Coast Guard. In 1996, the Coast Guard dismantled the light on Navassa, which ended its interest in the island. Consequently, the Department of the Interior assumed responsibility for the civil administration of the area, and placed the island under its Office of Insular Affairs. For statistical purposes, Navassa was grouped with the now-obsolete term United States Miscellaneous Caribbean Islands and is now grouped with other islands claimed by the U.S. under the Guano Islands Act as the United States Minor Outlying Islands.

In 1997, an American salvager, Bill Warren, claimed Navassa to the Department of State based on the Guano Islands Act. On March 27, 1997, the Department of the Interior rejected the claim on the basis that the Guano Islands Act applies only to islands which, at the time of the claim, are not &quot;appertaining to&quot; the United States. The department&#x27;s opinion said that Navassa is and remains a U.S. possession &quot;appertaining to&quot; the United States and is &quot;unavailable to be claimed&quot; under the Guano Islands Act.

A 1998 scientific expedition led by the Center for Marine Conservation in Washington, D.C., described Navassa as &quot;a unique preserve of Caribbean biodiversity.&quot; Aside from a few extinctions, the island&#x27;s land and offshore ecosystems have mostly survived the 20th century.

==== National Wildlife Refuge ====
In September 1999, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service established the Navassa Island National Wildlife Refuge, which encompasses of land and a 12 nautical mile (22.2 km) radius of marine habitat around the island. Later that year, full administrative responsibility for Navassa was transferred from the Office of Insular Affairs to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

The National Wildlife Refuge protects coral reef ecosystems, native wildlife, and plants and provides opportunities for scientific research on and around Navassa Island. Navassa Island features large seabird colonies, including over 5,000 nesting red-footed booby (&quot;Sula sula&quot;). Navassa is home to four endemic lizard species. Two other endemic lizards, &quot;Cyclura cornuta onchiopsis&quot; and &quot;Leiocephalus eremitus,&quot; are extinct.

Navassa Island NWR is administered as part of the Caribbean Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex. Due to hazardous coastal conditions and to preserve species habitat, the refuge is closed to the general public, and visitors need permission from the Fish and Wildlife Service to enter its territorial waters or land.

After World War II, amateur radio operators occasionally visited to operate from the territory. Navassa is accorded &quot;entity&quot; (country) status by the American Radio Relay League. The callsign prefix is KP1.

Since it became a National Wildlife Refuge, amateur radio operators have repeatedly been denied entry. In October 2014, permission was granted for a two-week DX-pedition in February 2015. The operation, designated K1N, made 138,409 contacts.

==Geography, topography and ecology==

Navassa Island is about in area. It is located west of Haiti&#x27;s southwest peninsula, south of the U.S. naval base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, and about one-quarter of the way from mainland Haiti to Jamaica in the Jamaica Channel.

Navassa reaches an elevation of at Dunning Hill south of the lighthouse, Navassa Island Light. This location is from the southwestern coast or east of Lulu Bay.

The terrain of Navassa Island consists mostly of exposed coral and limestone, the island being ringed by vertical white cliffs high, but with enough grassland to support goat herds. The island is covered in a forest of four tree species: short-leaf fig (&quot;Ficus populnea&quot; var. &quot;brevifolia&quot;), pigeon plum (&quot;Coccoloba diversifolia&quot;), mastic (&quot;Sideroxylon foetidissimum&quot;), and poisonwood (&quot;Metopium brownei&quot;).
===Ecology===
Navassa Island&#x27;s topography, ecology, and modern history are similar to those of Mona Island, a small limestone island located in the Mona Passage between Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic. These islands were once centers of guano mining and are now nature reserves for the United States.

Transient Haitian fishermen and others camp on Navassa Island. Still, it is uninhabited. Navassa has no ports or harbors, only offshore anchorages, and its only natural resource is guano. Economic activity consists of subsistence fishing and commercial trawling activities. A 2009 survey of fishermen in southwestern Haiti estimated some 300 fishermen, primarily from Anse d&#x27;Hainault Arrondissement, regularly fished near the island.

There were eight species of native reptiles, all of which are believed to be, or to have been, endemic to Navassa Island: &quot;Comptus badius&quot; (an anguid lizard), &quot;Aristelliger cochranae&quot; (a gecko), &quot;Sphaerodactylus becki&quot; (a gecko), &quot;Anolis longiceps&quot; (an anole), &quot;Cyclura cornuta onchiopsis&quot; (an endemic subspecies of the rhinoceros iguana), &quot;Leiocephalus eremitus&quot; (a curly-tailed lizard), &quot;Tropidophis bucculentus&quot; (a dwarf boa), and &quot;Typhlops sulcatus&quot; (a tiny snake). Of these, the first four remain common, with the next three likely extinct, and the last being possibly extirpated due to feral cats, dogs and pigs inhabiting the island.

In 2012, &quot;Acropora palmata&quot; (elkhorn coral), a common reef-building coral of the Caribbean, was located underwater near the island. The remaining coral was found to be in good condition.

===Birds===
The island, with its surrounding marine waters, has been recognized as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports breeding colonies of red-footed boobies and magnificent frigatebirds, as well as hundreds of white-crowned pigeons.

==Maritime boundary disputes==
The dispute has prevented the definitive delimitation of the maritime zones between the United States and Jamaica, Cuba, and Haiti, as well as determining the maritime frontier at the point of confluence between Jamaica, Cuba, and Haiti. The island was disregarded for the purposes of determining equidistant boundary calculation with Cuba during the signing of the Cuba–Haiti Maritime Boundary Agreement in 1977; Cuba backs Haiti&#x27;s claim to the island.

==See also==
* List of Guano Island claims
* United States and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea

==References==

* &quot;The Navassa Island Riot. Illustrated.&quot; Published by the National Grand Tabernacle, Order of Fishermen, Baltimore, Md.

==External links==
* A 2014 dissertation entitled &quot;Haiti&#x27;s Claim over Navassa Island: A Case Study&quot;
* Navassa Island National Wildlife Refuge
* State of Navaza 
* The Mails of Navassa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25359" start="0" end="14" title="Navassa Island" label="Navassa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065592" start="45" end="63" title="uninhabited island" label="uninhabited island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="71" end="84" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="102" end="109" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="120" end="124" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q986301" start="138" end="145" title="Jérémie" label="Jérémie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372161" start="153" end="170" title="Tiburon Peninsula" label="Tiburon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="209" end="228" title="territorial dispute" label="territorial dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="237" end="242" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="307" end="337" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q227505" start="378" end="390" title="appurtenance" label="appurtenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="416" end="433" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q164393" start="492" end="509" title="Treaty of Ryswick" label="Treaty of Ryswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="611" end="621" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q16645" start="1401" end="1426" title="US Minor Outlying Islands" label="US Minor Outlying Islands"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1431" end="1447" title="ISO 3166-2:UM" label="ISO 3166-2:UM-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="1490" end="1510" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="1524" end="1531" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144073" start="1767" end="1806" title="Médéric Louis Élie Moreau de Saint-Méry" label="Médéric Louis Élie Moreau de Saint-Méry"/>
<link wikidata="Q632552" start="1824" end="1841" title="French Parliament" label="French Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="1877" end="1891" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="2304" end="2321" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="2344" end="2349" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="2574" end="2588" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="2757" end="2781" title="unincorporated territory" label="unincorporated territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665320" start="2800" end="2813" title="Insular Cases" label="Insular Cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2820" end="2847" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q111943610" start="2879" end="2901" title="Jones v. United States (1890)" label="Jones v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q62127" start="3233" end="3243" title="Departments of Haiti" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q913231" start="3247" end="3262" title="Grand&amp;#x27;Anse (department)" label="Grand&amp;#x27;Anse"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="3330" end="3335" title="Guano" label="Guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="3634" end="3643" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3675" end="3693" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3778" end="3783" title="African Americans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="3807" end="3815" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80728" start="3948" end="3956" title="dynamite" label="dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q216057" start="4110" end="4116" title="barque" label="barque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750668" start="4206" end="4215" title="Lulu Town" label="Lulu Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q85720158" start="4320" end="4344" title="1875 Indianola hurricane" label="1875 Indianola hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q62922098" start="4880" end="4907" title="Order of Galilean Fishermen" label="Order of Galilean Fishermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q105683016" start="5154" end="5166" title="Everett J. Waring" label="E. J. Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015569" start="5214" end="5217" title="bar (law)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5333" end="5351" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374308" start="5450" end="5459" title="Capital punishment by the United States federal government" label="execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="5620" end="5637" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507565" start="5669" end="5700" title="1891 State of the Union Address" label="1891 State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="5810" end="5830" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q371148" start="6135" end="6152" title="Arthur Pue Gorman" label="Arthur Pue Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895623" start="6308" end="6325" title="Hammerton Killick" label="Hammerton Killick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241355" start="6976" end="6999" title="United States Lighthouse Service" label="U.S. Lighthouse Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q140265" start="7229" end="7245" title="Windward Passage" label="Windward Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982191" start="7458" end="7478" title="Navassa Island Light" label="Navassa Island Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="7494" end="7509" title="above sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="7531" end="7550" title="wireless telegraphy" label="wireless telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34558" start="8086" end="8103" title="Alexander Wetmore" label="Alexander Wetmore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8108" end="8122" title="Waston Perrygo" label="Waston Perrygo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="8309" end="8334" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="8452" end="8478" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q462778" start="8538" end="8542" title="insular area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q462778" start="8676" end="8721" title="United States Miscellaneous Caribbean Islands" label="United States Miscellaneous Caribbean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16645" start="8815" end="8851" title="United States Minor Outlying Islands" label="United States Minor Outlying Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="8954" end="8971" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348656" start="9436" end="9466" title="The Ocean Conservancy" label="Center for Marine Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="9470" end="9486" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="9741" end="9780" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410668" start="10100" end="10124" title="National Wildlife Refuge" label="National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q217122" start="10343" end="10359" title="red-footed booby" label="red-footed booby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199084" start="10466" end="10492" title="Cyclura cornuta onchiopsis" label="Cyclura cornuta onchiopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310820" start="10509" end="10530" title="Navassa curly-tailed lizard" label="Leiocephalus eremitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215020" start="10602" end="10652" title="Caribbean Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex" label="Caribbean Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q466576" start="11032" end="11059" title="American Radio Relay League" label="American Radio Relay League"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="11065" end="11073" title="callsign" label="callsign"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="11074" end="11080" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="11134" end="11147" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206574" start="11248" end="11259" title="DX-pedition" label="DX-pedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="11427" end="11432" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q208035" start="11493" end="11513" title="Guantánamo Bay, Cuba" label="Guantánamo Bay, Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="11571" end="11578" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512419" start="11586" end="11601" title="Jamaica Channel" label="Jamaica Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="12015" end="12018" title="Ficus" label="fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q291763" start="12096" end="12118" title="Coccoloba diversifolia" label="Coccoloba diversifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226444" start="12141" end="12166" title="Sideroxylon foetidissimum" label="Sideroxylon foetidissimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4515301" start="12197" end="12213" title="Metopium brownei" label="Metopium brownei"/>
<link wikidata="Q94899" start="12322" end="12333" title="Mona, Puerto Rico" label="Mona Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418401" start="12375" end="12387" title="Mona Passage" label="Mona Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="12396" end="12407" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="12416" end="12434" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="12471" end="12476" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499823" start="12904" end="12939" title="Anse d&amp;#x27;Hainault Arrondissement" label="Anse d&amp;#x27;Hainault Arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="13071" end="13078" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943929" start="13104" end="13118" title="Comptus badius" label="Comptus badius"/>
<link wikidata="Q191059" start="13129" end="13142" title="Anguidae" label="anguid lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861337" start="13151" end="13173" title="Aristelliger cochranae" label="Aristelliger cochranae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546828" start="13183" end="13188" title="gecko" label="gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493104" start="13197" end="13218" title="Sphaerodactylus becki" label="Sphaerodactylus becki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852100" start="13242" end="13258" title="Anolis longiceps" label="Anolis longiceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011738" start="13269" end="13274" title="anole" label="anole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199084" start="13283" end="13309" title="Cyclura cornuta onchiopsis" label="Cyclura cornuta onchiopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q907252" start="13346" end="13363" title="rhinoceros iguana" label="rhinoceros iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q310820" start="13372" end="13393" title="Leiocephalus eremitus" label="Leiocephalus eremitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529907" start="13403" end="13422" title="curly-tailed lizard" label="curly-tailed lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324455" start="13431" end="13454" title="Tropidophis bucculentus" label="Tropidophis bucculentus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006104" start="13464" end="13473" title="dwarf boa" label="dwarf boa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024779" start="13486" end="13503" title="Typhlops sulcatus" label="Typhlops sulcatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="13593" end="13600" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="13630" end="13640" title="extirpated" label="extirpated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404562" start="13654" end="13658" title="Feral cat" label="cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124833" start="13660" end="13664" title="Free-ranging dog" label="dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q844397" start="13669" end="13673" title="feral pigs" label="pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q163614" start="13713" end="13729" title="Acropora palmata" label="Acropora palmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="13982" end="14001" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="14011" end="14033" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368963" start="14063" end="14071" title="bird colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217122" start="14075" end="14093" title="red-footed booby" label="red-footed boobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q647512" start="14098" end="14121" title="magnificent frigatebird" label="magnificent frigatebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269998" start="14147" end="14167" title="white-crowned pigeon" label="white-crowned pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="14537" end="14541" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192159" start="14568" end="14606" title="Cuba–Haiti Maritime Boundary Agreement" label="Cuba–Haiti Maritime Boundary Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572536" start="14677" end="14704" title="List of Guano Island claims" label="List of Guano Island claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892612" start="14707" end="14776" title="United States and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United States and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14802" end="14825" title=":s:The Navassa Island Riot" label="The Navassa Island Riot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21323" wikidata="Q1648546" url="?curid=21323" title="History of Nepal">
<text>Nepal is a multi-ethnic, multiracial, multicultural, multi-religious, and multilingual country. The most spoken language is Nepali followed by several other ethnic languages.

The modern day Kingdom of Nepal was established in 1768 and started a campaign of unifying what would form the modern territories of Nepal. Some former territories had been lost due to the Anglo-Nepalese War and the Sino-Nepalese War. In the Sino-Nepalese war,the conflict ended with both victories and losses with the kingdom ultimately accepting tributary status with the Qing dynasty of China from 1792 to 1865. The Anglo-Nepalese War ended in British victory and resulted in the ceding some Nepalese territory in the Treaty of Sugauli. In a historical vote for the election of the constituent assembly, the Nepalese parliament voted to abolish the monarchy in June 2006. Nepal became a federal republic on 28 May 2008 and was formally renamed the &#x27;Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal&#x27; ending the 200-year-old reign of the Shah monarchs.

==Toponymy==
Nepal&#x27;s origin remains a mystery despite written records dating back to the fifth century A.D. Classical Indian sources mention Nepal, and Nepali stories delve into mythology, religion, and culture rather than providing a clear historical account.

The derivation of the word Nepal is a subject of various theories:

* Most inhabitants of northern Nepal came from Tibet, where they herded sheep and produced wool. In Tibetan, ne means &quot;wool&quot; and pal means &quot;house&quot;. Thus, Nepal is &quot;house of wool&quot;.
* Newar people in the Kathmandu valley named their homeland Nepal, derived from &quot;Nepa,&quot; meaning &quot;country of the middle zone,&quot; highlighting its central location in the Himalayas.
* A popular theory is that Lepcha people associated Nepal with a &quot;sacred or holy cave.&quot;
* According to Hindu mythology, Nepal derives its name from an ancient Hindu sage called Ne, referred to variously as Ne Muni or Nemi.
* According to Buddhist legend, the deity Manjushri drained the water from Nagadaha (a mythical lake believed to have filled the Kathmandu Valley). The valley became habitable, ruled by Bhuktaman a cow-herder, who took advice from the sage named &quot;Ne&quot;. Pāla means &quot;protector&quot; or &quot;taking care&quot;, so Nepal reflected the name of the sage who took care of the place.

==Ancient history==
===Prehistory===
Prehistoric sites of palaeolithic, mesolithic and neolithic origins have been discovered in the Siwalik hills of Dang district. It is possible that the Dravidian people whose history predates the onset of the Bronze Age in the Indian subcontinent (around 3300 BC) inhabited the area before the arrival of other ethnic groups like the Tibeto-Burmans and long before Indo-Aryans from across the border.The Tibeto-Burman peoples were likely the earliest significant settlers in Nepal, especially in the highlands and hilly regions.The Indo-Aryans arrived later, contributing significantly to the cultural and linguistic framework of Nepal, especially in the Kathmandu Valley and lowlands.The Dravidian presence in Nepal is minimal, as they primarily settled in the southern parts of India after Indo-Aryan expansion pushed them southward. Tharus who were Tibeto-Burmans mixed heavily with Indigenous tibes in the southern regions, are natives of the central Madhesh Province and Terai region of Nepal. The first documented tribes in Nepal are the Kirat people is the record of Kirat Kings from Kirata Kingdom from 800 BC, which shows Kirats were recorded in Nepal last 2000 to 2500 years, with an extensive dominion, possibly reaching at one time to the delta of the Ganges. Other ethnic groups of Indo-Aryan origin later migrated to southern part of Nepal from Indo-Gangetic Plain of northern India.

Emperor Ashoka was responsible for the construction of several significant structures in Nepal. These include the Ramagrama Stupa, Gotihawa Pillar of Ashoka, Nigali-Sagar Ashoka Pillar inscription, and the Lumbini pillar inscription of Ashoka.The Chinese pilgrims Fa-Hien (337 CE – c. 422 CE) and Xuanzang (602–664 CE) describe the Kanakamuni Stupa and the Asoka Pillar of currently Nepal region in their travel accounts. Xuanzang speaks of a lion capital atop the pillar, now lost. A base of a Pillar of Ashoka has been discovered at Gotihawa, a few miles from Nigali Sagar, and it has been suggested that it is the original base of the Nigalar Sagar pillar fragments. In 249 BCE, Emperor Asoka founded Lalitapatan city of Nepal.

===Legends and ancient times===
Although very little is known about the early history of Nepal, legends and documented references reach far back to the 30th century BC. Also, the presence of historical sites such as the Valmiki ashram, indicates the presence of &quot;Sanatana&quot; (ancient) Hindu culture in parts of Nepal at that period.

According to legendary accounts, the early rulers of Nepal were the &quot;Gopālavaṃśi (&quot;Gopal Vansha) or &quot;cowherd dynasty&quot;, who presumably ruled for about five centuries. They are said to have been followed by the &quot;Mahiṣapālavaṃśa&quot; or &quot;buffalo-herder dynasty&quot;, established by a Yadav named Bhul Singh.

The Shakya clan formed an independent oligarchic republican state known as the &quot;Śākya Gaṇarājya&quot; during the late Vedic period (c. 1000 – c. 500 BCE) and the later so-called second urbanisation period (c. 600 – c. 200 BCE). Its capital was Kapilavastu, which may have been located in present-day Tilaurakot, Nepal. Gautama Buddha (c. 6th to 4th centuries BCE), whose teachings became the foundation of Buddhism, was the best-known Shakya.
He was known in his lifetime as &quot;Siddhartha Gautama&quot; and &quot;Shakyamuni&quot; (Sage of the Shakyas). He was the son of Śuddhodana, the elected leader of the Śākya Gaṇarājya.

=== Kirat dynasty ===

The context of Kirat Dynasty ruling in Nepal before Licchavi dynasty and after Mahispal (Ahir) dynasty are depicted in different manuscripts. Kirat dynasty was the longest ruling dynasty in Nepalese history, ruling from the 800 BC–300 AD for about 1,225 years. They ruled kathmandu valley before delineating the area between the Sun Koshi (Pronounced exactly as written) and Tama Koshi (Tāmā Koshi) rivers as their native land, the list of Kirati kings is also given in the Gopal genealogy. The Mahisapala dynasty was a dynasty established by Abhira that ruled the Kathmandu Valley. They took control of Nepal after replacing the Gopala dynasty. Three kings of Mahisapala dynasty ruled the valley before they were overthrown by the Kirats. They were also known as Mahispalbanshi. By defeating the last king of the Avir dynasty Bhuwansingh in a battle, Kirati King Yalung or Yalambar had taken the regime of the valley under his control. In Hindu mythological perspective, this event is believed to have taken place in the final phase of Dvapara Yuga or initial phase of Kali Yuga or around the 6th century BC. Descriptions of 32, 28 and 29 Kirati kings are found according to the Gopal genealogy, language-genealogy and Wright genealogy respectively. By means of the notices contained in the classics of the East and West, the Kiranti people were living in their present whereabouts for the last 2000 to 2500 years, with an extensive dominion, possibly reaching at one time to the delta of the Ganges.

===Under the Guptas===

During the time of the Gupta Empire, the Indian emperor Samudragupta recorded Nepal as a &quot;frontier kingdom&quot; which paid an annual tribute. This was recorded by Samudragupta&#x27;s Allahabad Pillar inscription, which states the following in lines 22–23.

=== Licchavi dynasty ===

The kings of the Lichhavi dynasty (originally from Vaishali in modern-day India) ruled what is the Kathmandu valley in modern-day Nepal after the Kirats. It is mentioned in some genealogies and Puranas that the &quot;Suryavansi Kshetriyas had established a new regime by defeating the Kirats&quot;. The &quot;Pashupati Purana&quot; mentions that &quot;the masters of Vaishali established their own regime by confiding Kiratis with sweet words and defeating them in war&quot;. Similar contexts can be found in &quot;Himbatkhanda&quot;, which also mentions that &quot;the masters of Vaishali had started ruling in Nepal by defeating Kirats&quot;. Different genealogies state different names of the last Kirati king. According to the Gopal genealogy, the Lichhavis established their rule in Nepal by defeating the last Kirati King &#x27;Khigu&#x27;, &#x27;Galiz&#x27; according to the language-genealogy and &#x27;Gasti&#x27; according to Wright genealogy.

==Medieval history==
===Thakuri dynasty===

After Aramudi, who is mentioned in the Kashmirian chronicle, the Rajatarangini of Kalhana (1150 CE), many Thakuri kings ruled over parts of the country up to the middle of the 12th century CE. Raghava Deva is said to have founded a ruling dynasty in 879 CE, when the Lichhavi rule came to an end. To commemorate this important event, Raghava Deva started the &#x27;Nepal Era&#x27; which began on 20 October, 879 CE. After Amshuvarma, who ruled from 605 CE onward; the Thakuris had lost power and they could regain it only in 869 CE.

Gunakama Deva, who ruled from 949 to 994 CE, commissioned the construction of a big wooden shelter, built from the wood of a single tree, called &quot;Kasthamandapa.&quot; The name of the capital, &#x27;Kathmandu&#x27;, is derived from this. Gunakama Deva founded the town Kantipur (modern-day Kathmandu). The tradition of Indra Jatra started during his reign. Bhola Deva succeeded Gunakama Deva. The next ruler was Laxmikama Deva who ruled from 1024 to 1040 CE. He built the Laksmi Vihara and introduced the tradition of worshiping the Kumari; young prepubescent girls believed to be manifestations of the divine female energy or devi. He was succeeded by his son, Vijayakama Deva, who introduced the worship of the &quot;Naga&quot; and &quot;Vasuki&quot;. Vijaykama Deva was the last ruler of this dynasty. After his death, the Thakuri clan of Nuwakot occupied the throne of Nepal.

Bhaskara Deva, a Thakuri from Nuwakot, succeeded Vijayakama. He is said to have built Navabahal and Hemavarna Vihara. After Bhaskara Deva, four kings of this line ruled over the country. They were Bala Deva, Padma Deva, Nagarjuna Deva and Shankara Deva. Shankara Deva (1067–1080 CE) was the most illustrious ruler of this dynasty. He established the image of &#x27;Shantesvara Mahadeva&#x27; and &#x27;Manohara Bhagavati&#x27;. The custom of pasting the pictures of Nagas and Vasuki on the doors of houses on the day of Nagapanchami was introduced by him. During his rule, the Buddhists wreaked vengeance on the Hindu Brahmins (especially the followers of Shaivism) for the harm they had received earlier from the Shankaracharya. Shankara Deva tried to pacify the Brahmins harassed by the Buddhists.

Bama Deva, a descendant of Amshuvarma, defeated Shankar Deva in 1080 CE. He suppressed the Nuwakot-Thankuris with the help of nobles and restored the old Solar Dynasty rule in Nepal for the second time. Harsha Deva, the successor of Bama Deva was a weak ruler. There was no unity among the nobles and they asserted themselves in their respective spheres of influence. Taking that opportunity Nanya Deva, a Karnat dynasty king, attacked Nuwakot from Simraungarh. The army successfully defended and won the battle. After Harsha Deva, Shivadeva the third ruled from 1099 to 1126 CE. He founded the town of Kirtipur and roofed the temple of Pashupatinath with gold. He introduced twenty-five paisa coins. After Sivadeva III, Mahendra Deva, Mana Deva, Narendra Deva II, Ananda Deva, Rudra Deva, Amrita Deva, Ratna Deva II, Somesvara Deva, Gunakama Deva II, Lakmikama Deva III and Vijayakama Deva II ruled Nepal in quick succession. Historians differ about the rule of several kings and their respective times. After the fall of the Thakuri dynasty, a new dynasty was founded by Arideva or Ari Malla, known as the &#x27;Malla dynasty&#x27;.

===Malla dynast&quot;y &quot;===

Early Malla rule started with Ari Malla in the 12th century. Over the next two centuries, his kingdom expanded widely, into much of the Indian subcontinent and western Tibet, before disintegrating into small principalities, which later came to be known as the Baise Rajya.

Jayasthiti Malla, with whom commences the later Malla dynasty of the Kathmandu valley, began to reign at the end of the 14th century.This era in the valley is eminent for the various social and economic reforms such as the &#x27;Sanskritization&#x27; of the valley people, new methods of land measurement and allocation, etc. In this era, new forms of art and architecture was introduced. The monuments in Kathmandu valley which are listed in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites were built during Malla rule. In the 14th century, before Kathmandu was divided into 3 princely states, Araniko was sent to China upon the request of Abhaya Malla for representing the skill of art and architecture, and he introduced the Pagoda style of architecture to China and subsequently, whole of Asia. Yaksha Malla, the grandson of Jayasthiti Malla, ruled the Kathmandu valley until almost the end of the 15th century. After his demise, the valley was divided into four independent kingdoms—Kathmandu, Bhaktapur, Patan, and Banepa—in about 1484 CE. Banepa, however, soon came under the control of Bhaktapur. This division led the Malla rulers into internecine clashes and wars for territorial and commercial gains. Mutually debilitating wars gradually weakened them, which facilitated the conquest of the valley by Prithvi Narayan Shah of Gorkha. The last Malla rulers were Jaya Prakash Malla, Teja Narasingha Malla and Ranjit Malla of Kathmandu, Patan, and Bhaktapur respectively.

===Karnats of Mithila===
The Simroun, Simroon, Karnat or Dev dynasty originated with an establishment of a kingdom in 1097 CE headquartered at the medieval citadel of Simraungadh on the India-Nepal border:
*Nanya Dev, ruled 1097-1147 CE
*Ganga Dev, ruled 1147-1187 CE
*Narsingh Dev, ruled 1187-1227 CE
*Ramsingh Dev, ruled 1227-1285 CE
*Shaktisingh Dev, ruled 1285-1295 CE
*Harisingh Dev, ruled 1295-1324 CE
In 1324 CE, Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq attacked Simroungarh and demolished the fort. The remains are still scattered across the Simroungarh region. The king, Harisingh Dev, fled northwards where his son, Jagatsingh Dev, was married to the widowed princess of Bhaktapur, Nayak Devi.

===Khasa Kingdom (Khas malla kindgom)===

The Khasa Malla kings ruled western parts of Nepal during 11th–14th century. The language of the Khas Kingdom was Khas language and Sanskrit.

After the siege of Chittorgarh in 1303, large immigration of Rajputs into Nepal occurred. Before it, few small groups of Rajputs had been entering into the region from Muslim invasion of India. These immigrants were quickly absorbed into the Khas community due to larger similarities.

===16th-Century===

*1512 in Nepal

==Early modern history==

===Shah dynasty, Unification of Nepal===
Prithvi Narayan Shah (c. 1768–1775) was the ninth generation descendant of Dravya Shah (1559–1570), the founder of the ruling house of Gorkha. Prithvi Narayan Shah succeeded his father Nara Bhupal Shah to the throne of Gorkha in 1743 CE. King Prithvi Narayan Shah was quite aware of the political situation of the valley kingdoms as well as of the Baise and Chaubise principalities. He foresaw the need for unifying the small principalities as an urgent condition for survival in the future and set himself to the task accordingly.

His assessment of the situation among the hill principalities was correct, and the principalities were subjugated fairly easily. King Prithvi Narayan Shah&#x27;s victory march began with the conquest of Nuwakot, which lies between Kathmandu and Gorkha, in 1744. After Nuwakot, he occupied strategic points in the hills surrounding the Kathmandu valley. The valley&#x27;s communications with the outside world were thus cut off. The occupation of the Kuti Pass in about 1756 stopped the valley&#x27;s trade with Tibet. Finally, Prithvi Narayan Shah entered the valley. After the victory in Kirtipur, King Jaya Prakash Malla of Kathmandu sought help from the British and the then East India Company sent a contingent of soldiers under Captain Kinloch in 1767. The British force was defeated in Sindhuli by the Gorkhali army. This defeat of the British completely shattered the hopes of King Jaya Prakash Malla. On 25 September 1768, as the people of Kathmandu were celebrating the festival of Indra Jatra, the Gorkhali army marched into the city. Prithvi Narayan Shah sat on a throne put on the palace courtyard for the king of Kathmandu, proclaiming himself the king. Jaya Prakash Malla somehow managed to escape and took asylum in Patan. When Patan was captured a few weeks later, both Jaya Prakash Malla and Tej Narsingh Malla, the king of Patan took refuge in Bhaktapur, which was captured on the night of 25 November 1769. The Kathmandu valley was thus conquered by King Prithvi Narayan Shah, who proclaimed himself King with Kathmandu as the royal capital of the Kingdom of Nepal.

King Prithvi Narayan Shah was successful in bringing together diverse religious-ethnic groups under one rule. He was a true nationalist in his outlook and was in favour of adopting a closed-door policy against the British. Not only did his social and economic views guide the country&#x27;s socio-economic course for a long time, but his use of the imagery of &quot;a yam between two boulders&quot; in Nepal&#x27;s geopolitical context formed the principal guideline of the country&#x27;s foreign policy for future centuries.

===Senas of Makwanpur===

In the 16th century, a dynasty emerged in the southern parts of Nepal near the border with Bihar which used the Sena surname and claimed descent from the Senas of Bengal. One of their branches formed the Sena dynasty of Makwanpur which ruled from the fort of Makwanpur Gadhi. This branch of the Sena dynasty adopted the local language of the region, Maithili which became their state language.

== Modern history ==

===Kingdom of Nepal===
After decades of rivalry between the medieval kingdoms, modern Nepal was unified in the latter half of the 18th century, when Prithvi Narayan Shah, the ruler of the small principality of Gorkha, formed a unified country from a number of independent hill high states. After the death of Prithvi Narayan Shah, the Shah dynasty began to expand their kingdom into much of the Indian subcontinent. Between 1788 and 1791, during the Sino-Nepalese War, Nepal invaded Tibet and robbed Tashilhunpo Monastery in Shigatse. Alarmed, the Qianlong Emperor of the Chinese Qing dynasty appointed Fuk&#x27;anggan commander-in-chief of the Tibetan campaign; Fuk&#x27;anggan signed a treaty to protect his troops thus attaining a draw.
After 1800, the heirs of Prithvi Narayan Shah proved unable to maintain firm political control over Nepal. A period of internal turmoil followed. The rivalry between Nepal and the British East India Company over the princely states bordering Nepal and British-India eventually led to the Anglo-Nepalese War (1814–16), in which Nepal suffered substantial losses due to lack of guns and ammunitions against the British-Indian forces with advanced weapons. The Treaty of Sugauli was signed in 1816, ceding large parts of the Nepalese controlled territories to the British. In 1860 some parts of western Terai, known as &quot;Naya Muluk&quot; (new country) was restored to Nepal. The four noble families involved largely in the active politics of the kingdom were the Shah rulers, the Thapas, the Basnyats, and the Pandes before the rise of the Rana dynasty. From beginning to the mid of 18th century, the Thapas and Pandes had extreme dominance over Nepalese Darbar politics alternatively contesting for central power amongst each other.

====Rana rule====

Jung Bahadur Rana was the first ruler from this dynasty. Rana rulers were titled &quot;&quot;Shree Teen&quot; and &quot;Maharaja&quot;, whereas Shah kings were &quot;Shree Panch&quot; and &quot;Maharajadhiraja&quot;&quot;. Jung Bahadur codified laws and modernized the state&#x27;s bureaucracy. In the coup d&#x27;état of 1846, the nephews of Jung Bahadur and Ranodip Singh murdered Ranodip Singh and the sons of Jung Bahadur, adopted the name of Jung Bahadur and took control of Nepal. Nine Rana rulers took the hereditary office of Prime Minister. All were styled (self proclaimed) Maharaja of Lamjung and Kaski.

The Rana regime, a tightly centralized autocracy, pursued a policy of isolating Nepal from external influences. This policy helped Nepal maintain its independence during the British colonial era, but it also impeded the country&#x27;s economic development and modernisation. The Ranas were staunchly pro-British and assisted the British during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and later in both World Wars. At the same time, despite Chinese claims, the British supported Nepalese independence at the beginning of the twentieth century. In December 1923, Britain and Nepal formally signed a &quot;treaty of perpetual peace and friendship&quot; superseding the Sugauli Treaty of 1816 and upgrading the British resident in Kathmandu to an envoy.

Slavery was abolished in Nepal in 1924 under premiership of Chandra Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana.

Following the German invasion of Poland, the Kingdom of Nepal declared war on Germany on 4 September 1939. Once Japan entered the conflict, sixteen battalions of the Nepali Army fought on the Burmese front. In addition to military support, Nepal contributed guns, equipment as well as hundreds of thousand of pounds of tea, sugar and raw materials such as timber to the Allied war effort.

====Revolution of 1951====

The revolution of 1951 started when dissatisfaction against the family rule of the Ranas started emerging from among the few educated people, who had studied in various South Asian schools and colleges, and also from within the Ranas, many of whom were marginalized within the ruling Rana hierarchy. Many of these Nepalese in exile had actively taken part in the Indian Independence struggle and wanted to liberate Nepal as well from the autocratic Rana occupation. The political parties such as the Praja Parishad and Nepali Congress were already formed in exile by leaders such as B. P. Koirala, Ganesh Man Singh, Subarna Sumsher Rana, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Girija Prasad Koirala, and many other patriotic-minded Nepalis who urged the military and popular political movement in Nepal to overthrow the autocratic Rana regime. The Nepali Congress also formed a military wing Nepali Congress&#x27;s Liberation Army. Among the prominent martyrs to die for the cause, executed at the hands of the Ranas, were Dharma Bhakta Mathema, Shukraraj Shastri, Gangalal Shrestha, and Dasharath Chand who were the members of the Praja Parisad. This turmoil culminated in King Tribhuvan, a direct descendant of Prithvi Narayan Shah, fleeing from his &quot;palace prison&quot; in 1950, to India, touching off an armed revolt against the Rana administration. This eventually ended in the return of the Shah family to power and the appointment of a non-Rana as prime minister following a tri-partite agreement signed called &#x27;Delhi Compromise&#x27;. A period of quasi-constitutional rule followed, during which the monarch, assisted by the leaders of fledgling political parties, governed the country. During the 1950s, efforts were made to frame a constitution for Nepal that would establish a representative form of government, based on a British model. A 10-member cabinet under Prime Minister Mohan Shumsher with 5 members of the Rana family and 5 of the Nepali Congress was formed. This government drafted a constitution called the &#x27;Interim Government Act&#x27; which was the first constitution of Nepal. But this government failed to work in consensus as the Ranas and Congressmen were never on good terms. So, on 16 November 1951, the king formed a new government of 14 ministers under Matrika Prasad Koirala, which was later dissolved.

====Panchayat system====

The first democratic elections were held in 1959, and B. P. Koirala was elected prime minister. But declaring parliamentary democracy a failure, King Mahendra carried out a royal coup 18 months later, in 1960. He dismissed the elected Koirala government, declared that a &quot;partyless&quot; system would govern Nepal, and promulgated a new constitution on 16 December 1960. Subsequently, the elected prime minister, members of parliament and hundreds of democratic activists were arrested.

The new constitution established a &quot;partyless&quot; Panchayat system which King Mahendra considered to be a democratic form of government, closer to Nepalese traditions. As a pyramidal structure, progressing from village assemblies to the Rastriya Panchayat, the Panchayat system constitutionalized the absolute power of the monarch and kept the King as head of state with sole authority over all governmental institutions, including the cabinet (council of ministers) and the parliament. One-state-one-language became the national policy in an effort to carry out state unification, uniting various ethnic and regional groups into a singular Nepali nationalist bond. The Back to Village Campaign () launched in 1967, was one of the main rural development programs of the Panchayat system.

King Mahendra was succeeded by his 27-year-old son, King Birendra, in 1972. Amid student demonstrations and anti-regime activities in 1979, King Birendra called for a national referendum to decide on the nature of Nepal&#x27;s government; either the continuation of the Panchayat system along with democratic reforms or the establishment of a multiparty system. The referendum was held in May 1980, and the Panchayat system gained a narrow victory. The king carried out the promised reforms, including selection of the prime minister by the Rastriya Panchayat.

====Multiparty democracy====
People in rural areas had expected that their interests would be better represented after the adoption of parliamentary democracy in 1990. The Nepali Congress with the support of the United Left Front decided to launch a decisive agitational movement, the Jana Andolan, which forced the monarchy to accept constitutional reforms and to establish a multiparty parliament. In May 1991, Nepal held its first parliamentary elections in nearly 50 years. The Nepali Congress won 110 of the 205 seats and formed the first elected government in 32 years.

In 1992, in a situation of economic crisis and chaos, with spiraling prices as a result of the implementation of changes in policy of the new Congress government, the radical left stepped up their political agitation. A Joint People&#x27;s Agitation Committee was set up by the various groups. A general strike was called for 6 April. Violent incidents began to occur on the eve of the strike. The Joint People&#x27;s Agitation Committee had called for a 30-minute &#x27;lights out&#x27; in the capital, and violence erupted outside Bir Hospital when activists tried to enforce the &#x27;lights out&#x27;. At dawn on 6 April, clashes between strike activists and police, outside a police station in Pulchowk, Lalitpur, which left two activists dead. Later in the day, a mass rally of the Agitation Committee at Tundikhel in the capital Kathmandu was attacked by police forces. As a result, riots broke out and the Nepal Telecommunications building was set on fire; police opened fire at the crowd, killing several persons. The Human Rights Organisation of Nepal estimated that 14 persons, including several onlookers, had been killed in police firing.

When promised land reforms failed to appear, people in some districts started to organize to enact their own land reform and to gain some power over their lives in the face of usurious landlords. However, this movement was repressed by the Nepali government, in &quot;Operation Romeo&quot; and &quot;Operation Kilo Sera II&quot;, which took the lives of many of the leading activists of the struggle. As a result, many witnesses to this repression became radicalized.

====Nepalese Civil War====

In March 1997, the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) started a bid to replace the parliamentary monarchy with a new people&#x27;s democratic republic, through a Maoist revolutionary strategy known as the people&#x27;s war, which led to the Nepalese Civil War. Led by Dr. Baburam Bhattarai and Pushpa Kamal Dahal (also known as &quot;Prachanda&quot;), the insurgency began in five districts in Nepal: Rolpa, Rukum, Jajarkot, Gorkha, and Sindhuli. The Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) established a provisional &quot;people&#x27;s government&quot; at the district level in several locations.

On 1 June 2001, The Massacre known as &#x27;The royal massacre&#x27; occurred in the royal palace killing the King, Queen, Prince and other people of the family. It is *claimed* that the Prince massacred the family for some claimed reasons. Since the prince was the one surviving, He was declared king but died 2–3 days later and Prince Gyanendra was crowned. Meanwhile, the rebellion escalated, and in October 2002 the king temporarily deposed the government and took complete control of it. A week later he reappointed another government, but the country was still very unstable.

Large parts of Nepal were taken over by the rebellion. The Maoists are driving out representatives of parties close to the government, expropriating local &quot;capitalists&quot; and implementing their own development projects. They also run their own prisons and courts. In addition to coercive measures, the guerrillas are gaining a foothold because of their popularity with large sectors of Nepalese society, particularly women, untouchables and ethnic minorities. Caste discrimination was abolished, women received equal inheritance rights and forced marriages were prohibited. In addition, the Maoists provided free health care and literacy classes.
In the face of unstable governments and a siege on the Kathmandu Valley in August 2004, popular support for the monarchy began to wane. On 1 February 2005, King Gyanendra dismissed the entire government and assumed full executive powers, declaring a state of emergency to quash the revolution. Politicians were placed under house arrest, phone and internet lines were cut, and freedom of the press was severely curtailed.

The king&#x27;s new regime made little progress in his stated aim to suppress the insurgents. Municipal elections in February 2006 were described by the European Union as &quot;a backward step for democracy&quot;, as the major parties boycotted the election and some candidates were forced to run for office by the army. In April 2006 strikes and street protests in Kathmandu forced the king to reinstate the parliament. A seven-party coalition resumed control of the government and stripped the king of most of his powers. On 24 December 2007, seven parties, including the former Maoist rebels and the ruling party, agreed to abolish the monarchy and declare Nepal a federal republic. In the elections held on 10 April 2008, the Maoists secured a simple majority, with the prospect of forming a government to rule the proposed &#x27;Republic of Nepal&#x27;.

From 1996 to 2006, the war resulted in approximately 13,000 deaths. According to the NGO Informal Sector Service Centre, 85 per cent of civilian killings are attributable to government actions.

===Republic===
On 28 May 2008, the newly elected Constituent Assembly declared Nepal a Federal Democratic Republic, abolishing the 240-year-old monarchy. The motion for the abolition of the monarchy was carried by a huge majority: out of 564 members present in the assembly, 560 voted for the motion while 4 members voted against it. On 11 June 2008, the deposed King Gyanendra left the palace. Ram Baran Yadav of the Nepali Congress became the first President of the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal on July 23, 2008. Similarly, the Constituent Assembly elected Pushpa Kamal Dahal (Prachanda) of the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) as the first Prime Minister of the republic on 15 August 2008, favoring him over Sher Bahadur Deuba of the Nepali Congress.

After failing to draft a constitution before the deadline, the existing Constituent Assembly was dissolved by the government on 28 May 2012 and a new interim government was formed under the premiership of the Chief Justice of Nepal, Khil Raj Regmi. In the Constituent Assembly election of November 2013, the Nepali Congress won the largest share of the votes but failed to get a majority. The CPN (UML) and the Nepali Congress negotiated to form a consensus government, and Sushil Koirala of the Nepali Congress was elected as prime minister. The Constitution of Nepal was finally adopted on 20 September 2015.

On 25 April 2015, a devastating earthquake of moment magnitude of 7.8Mw killed nearly 9,000 people and injured nearly 22,000. It was the worst natural disaster to strike the country since the 1934 Nepal–Bihar earthquake. The earthquake also triggered an avalanche on Mount Everest, killing 21. Centuries-old buildings including the UNESCO World Heritage Sites in the Kathmandu valley were destroyed. A major aftershock occurred on 12 May 2015 at 12:50 NST with a moment magnitude (Mw) of 7.3, killing more than 200 people and over 2,500 were injured by this aftershock, and many were left homeless. These events led to a major humanitarian crisis which affected the reconstruction after the earthquake.

Minority ethnic groups like Madhesi and Tharu protested vigorously against the constitution which came into effect on 20 September 2015. They pointed out that their concerns had not been addressed and there were few explicit protections for their ethnic groups in the document. At least 56 civilians and 11 police died in clashes over the constitution. In response to the Madhesi protests, India suspended vital supplies to landlocked Nepal, citing insecurity and violence in border areas. The then prime minister of Nepal, KP Sharma Oli, publicly accused India for the blockade calling the act more inhumane than war. India has denied enacting the blockade. The blockade choked imports of not only petroleum, but also medicines and earthquake relief material. The then United Nations Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, alleged that the denial of petroleum and medicine to Nepal constituted a violation of human rights, adding to the humanitarian crisis.

==== 2017 to present ====

In June 2017, Nepali Congress leader Sher Bahadur Deuba was elected the 40th Prime Minister of Nepal, succeeding Prime Minister and Chairman of CPN (Maoist Centre) Pushpa Kamal Dahal. Deuba had been previously Prime Minister from 1995 to 1997, from 2001 to 2002, and from 2004 to 2005. In November 2017, Nepal had its first general election since the civil war ended and the monarchy was abolished. The main alternatives were centrist Nepali Congress Party and the alliance of former Maoist rebels and the Communist UML party. The alliance of communists won the election, and UML leader Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli was sworn in February 2018 as the new Prime Minister. He had previously been Prime Minister since 2015 until 2016.

In March 2018, President Bidya Devi Bhandari, the candidate of the then-ruling Left alliance of the CPN-UML and CPN (Maoist Centre), was re-elected for a second term. The presidential post is mainly ceremonial.

In July 2021, Prime Minister Oli was replaced by Sher Bahadur Deuba after a constitutional crisis.

In December 2022, former Maoist guerilla chief, Pushpa Kamal Dahal aka Prachanda, became Nepal&#x27;s new prime minister after the general election.

In March 2023, Ram Chandra Paudel of Nepali Congress was elected as Nepal&#x27;s third president to succeed Bidya Devi Bhandari.

On 15 July 2024, K. P. Sharma Oli was sworn in as Nepali Prime minister for fourth time. New coalition was formed between Nepali Congress, led by Sher Bahadur Deuba, and UML, led by Oli. The party leaders will take turns as prime ministers for 18 months each until the next general elections in 2027.

==Literature==
* Munchi Shew Shunker Singh and Pandit Shri Gunanand. &quot;History of Nepal&quot;, translated from the Parbatiya. With an introductory sketch of the &quot;Country and people of Nepal&quot; by the editor, Daniel Wright. Cambridge, at the University Press, 1877. Retrieved 25 January 2023.

==See also==

* History of Asia
* History of India
* History of Kathmandu
* History of Sikkim
* Monarchy of Nepal
* Politics of Nepal

==References==
==Sources==
* Michaels, Axel, et al. &quot;Nepalese History in a European Experience: A Case Study in Transcultural Historiography.&quot; &quot;History and Theory&quot; 55.2 (2016): 210–232.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;A Sanskrit Letter Written by Sylvain Lévi in 1923 to Hemarāja Śarmā Along With Some Hitherto Unknown Biographical Notes (Cultural Nationalism and Internationalism in the First Half of the 21st Cent.: Famous Indologists Write to the Raj Guru of Nepal – no. 1), in &quot;Commemorative Volume for about 30 Years of the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project. Journal of the Nepal Research Centre&quot;, XII (2001), Kathmandu, ed. by A. Wezler in collaboration with H. Haffner, A. Michaels, B. Kölver, M. R. Pant and D. Jackson, pp. 115–149.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;Strage a palazzo, movimento dei Maoisti e crisi di governabilità in Nepal&quot;, in &quot;Asia Major 2002&quot;, pp. 143–160.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;Il nuovo Stato del Nepal: il difficile cammino dalla monarchia assoluta alla democrazia&quot;, in &quot;Asia Major 2005-2006&quot;, pp. 229–251.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;Il Nepal da monarchia a stato federale&quot;, in &quot;Asia Major 2008&quot;, pp. 163–181.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;La fine dell&#x27;isolamento del Nepal, la costruzione della sua identità politica e delle sue alleanze regionali&quot; in &quot;ISPI: Istituto per gli Studi di Politica Internazionali&quot;, CVII (Nov. 2008), pp. 1–7;
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;Le elezioni dell&#x27;Assemblea Costituente e i primi mesi di governo della Repubblica Democratica Federale del Nepal&quot;, in &quot;Asia Maior 2010&quot;, pp. 115–126.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;Nepal, la difficile costruzione della nazione: un paese senza Costituzione e un parlamento senza primo ministro&quot;, in &quot;Asia Maior 2011&quot;, pp. 161–171.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;The Interplay between Gender, Religion and Politics, and the New Violence against Women in Nepal&quot;, in J. Dragsbæk Schmidt and T. Roedel Berg (eds.), &quot;Gender, Social Change and the Media: Perspective from Nepal&quot;, University of Aalborg and Rawat Publications, Aalborg-Jaipur: 2012, pp. 27–91.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;Nepal, stallo politico e lentezze nella realizzazione del processo di pace e di riconciliazione&quot;, in &quot;Asia Maior 2012&quot;, pp. 213–222.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;A Sanskrit Letter Written by Sylvain Lévy in 1925 to Hemarāja Śarmā along with Some Hitherto Unknown Biographical Notes (Cultural Nationalism and Internationalism in the First Half of the 20th Century – Famous Indologists write to the Raj Guru of Nepal – No. 2)&quot;, in &quot;History of Indological Studies. Papers of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference Vol. 11.2&quot;, ed. by K. Karttunen, P. Koskikallio and A. Parpola, Motilal Banarsidass and University of Helsinki, Delhi 2015, pp. 17–53.
* Garzilli, Enrica, &quot;Nepal 2013-2014: Breaking the Political Impasse&quot;, in &quot;Asia Maior 2014&quot;, pp. 87–98.
* 
* Tiwari, Sudarshan Raj (2002). &quot;The Brick and the Bull: An account of Handigaun, the Ancient Capital of Nepal&quot;. Himal Books. .
* Kayastha, Chhatra Bahadur (2003).&quot;Nepal Sanskriti: Samanyajnan&quot;. Nepal Sanskriti. .
* Stiller, Ludwig (1993): &quot;Nepal: growth of a nation&quot;, HRDRC, Kathmandu, 1993, 215pp.

==External links==
* Nepal: An Historical Study of a Hindu Kingdom 
* History of Nepal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="0" end="5" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="124" end="130" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078602" start="191" end="207" title="Kingdom of Nepal" label="Kingdom of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q195378" start="365" end="383" title="Anglo-Nepalese War" label="Anglo-Nepalese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270170" start="392" end="409" title="Sino-Nepalese War" label="Sino-Nepalese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="524" end="533" title="tribute state" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="550" end="562" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q195378" start="595" end="613" title="Anglo-Nepalese War" label="Anglo-Nepalese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003866" start="697" end="714" title="Treaty of Sugauli" label="Treaty of Sugauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274219" start="761" end="781" title="1st Nepalese Constituent Assembly" label="constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="828" end="836" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="866" end="882" title="federal republic" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274200" start="1013" end="1026" title="Shah dynasty" label="Shah monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="1411" end="1416" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q524007" start="1576" end="1588" title="Newar people" label="Newar people"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="1596" end="1612" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q972684" start="1799" end="1812" title="Lepcha people" label="Lepcha people"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="2047" end="2056" title="Manjushri" label="Manjushri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="2455" end="2467" title="Paleolithic" label="palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="2469" end="2479" title="mesolithic" label="mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2484" end="2493" title="neolithic" label="neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q613624" start="2530" end="2543" title="Sivalik Hills" label="Siwalik hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q28066" start="2547" end="2560" title="Dang District, Nepal" label="Dang district"/>
<link wikidata="Q69798" start="2586" end="2595" title="Dravidian peoples" label="Dravidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2643" end="2653" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="2768" end="2781" title="Tibeto-Burman" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267849" start="2799" end="2810" title="Indo-Aryan peoples" label="Indo-Aryans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277626" start="3270" end="3276" title="Tharu people" label="Tharus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104009" start="3389" end="3405" title="Madhesh Province" label="Madhesh Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q25068" start="3478" end="3490" title="Kirat people" label="Kirat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414862" start="3525" end="3539" title="Kirata Kingdom" label="Kirata Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="3698" end="3704" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="3816" end="3830" title="North India" label="northern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="3833" end="3847" title="Emperor Ashoka" label="Emperor Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288751" start="3947" end="3962" title="Ramagrama stupa" label="Ramagrama Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425576" start="3964" end="3989" title="Gotihawa" label="Gotihawa Pillar of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625203" start="3991" end="4029" title="Nigali Sagar" label="Nigali-Sagar Ashoka Pillar inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782651" start="4039" end="4065" title="Lumbini pillar inscription" label="Lumbini pillar inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q312978" start="4097" end="4104" title="Fa-Hien" label="Fa-Hien"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="4130" end="4138" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153371" start="4328" end="4344" title="Pillar of Ashoka" label="Pillar of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425576" start="4368" end="4376" title="Gotihawa" label="Gotihawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845865" start="4785" end="4799" title="Valmiki Ashram" label="Valmiki ashram"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357315" start="5000" end="5012" title="Gopal Bansa" label="Gopal Vansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194596" start="5220" end="5225" title="Yadav" label="Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="5249" end="5255" title="Shakya" label="Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="5368" end="5380" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5428" end="5447" title="History of India#Second urbanisation (c. 600 – 200 BCE)" label="second urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610827" start="5494" end="5505" title="Kapilavastu (ancient city)" label="Kapilavastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417973" start="5550" end="5560" title="Tilaurakot" label="Tilaurakot"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="5562" end="5567" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="5569" end="5583" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="5656" end="5664" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q226488" start="5824" end="5834" title="Śuddhodana" label="Śuddhodana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414862" start="5918" end="5931" title="Kirata Kingdom" label="Kirat Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638365" start="6232" end="6241" title="Sunkoshi River" label="Sun Koshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20748289" start="6278" end="6288" title="Tamakoshi River" label="Tama Koshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376963" start="6398" end="6416" title="Mahisapala dynasty" label="Mahisapala dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667447" start="6446" end="6452" title="Abhira tribe" label="Abhira"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="6468" end="6484" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357315" start="6533" end="6547" title="Gopala Dynasty" label="Gopala dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414862" start="6635" end="6641" title="Kirata Kingdom" label="Kirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682829" start="6777" end="6785" title="Yalambar" label="Yalambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12928623" start="6940" end="6952" title="Dvapara Yuga" label="Dvapara Yuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q228409" start="6973" end="6982" title="Kali Yuga" label="Kali Yuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q25068" start="7230" end="7244" title="Kirati people" label="Kiranti people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="7397" end="7403" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="7453" end="7465" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133363" start="7486" end="7498" title="Samudragupta" label="Samudragupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730345" start="7619" end="7647" title="Allahabad Pillar inscription" label="Allahabad Pillar inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242360" start="7736" end="7752" title="Licchavi (kingdom)" label="Lichhavi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509463" start="7770" end="7778" title="Vaishali (ancient city)" label="Vaishali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844526" start="9140" end="9150" title="Amshuverma" label="Amshuvarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374805" start="9403" end="9415" title="Kasthamandap" label="Kasthamandap"/>
<link wikidata="Q301339" start="9575" end="9586" title="Yenya" label="Indra Jatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064555" start="9789" end="9795" title="Kumari (goddess)" label="Kumari"/>
<link wikidata="Q494511" start="9883" end="9887" title="devi" label="devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427232" start="10657" end="10669" title="Naga Panchami" label="Nagapanchami"/>
<link wikidata="Q376730" start="10851" end="10865" title="Shankaracharya" label="Shankaracharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366229" start="12114" end="12119" title="Malla dynasty (Nepal)" label="Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790682" start="12138" end="12147" title="Arimalla" label="Ari Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848669" start="12368" end="12379" title="Baise Rajya" label="Baise Rajya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167681" start="12382" end="12398" title="Jayasthiti Malla" label="Jayasthiti Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296474" start="12605" end="12632" title="Sanskritisation" label="&amp;#x27;Sanskritization&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="12829" end="12835" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="12836" end="12855" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q626019" start="12961" end="12968" title="Araniko" label="Araniko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667341" start="13007" end="13019" title="Abhaya Malla" label="Abhaya Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167707" start="13165" end="13177" title="Jayayakshya Malla" label="Yaksha Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167681" start="13195" end="13211" title="Jayasthitimalla" label="Jayasthiti Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q574450" start="13678" end="13698" title="Prithvi Narayan Shah" label="Prithvi Narayan Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332217" start="13702" end="13708" title="Gorkha Kingdom" label="Gorkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955168" start="13737" end="13755" title="Jaya Prakash Malla" label="Jaya Prakash Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290704" start="13783" end="13795" title="Ranajit Malla" label="Ranjit Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293405" start="14013" end="14024" title="Simraungadh (medieval city)" label="Simraungadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391172" start="14266" end="14285" title="Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq" label="Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q117018117" start="14686" end="14699" title="Khas language" label="Khas language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="14704" end="14712" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724683" start="14725" end="14745" title="Siege of Chittorgarh (1303)" label="siege of Chittorgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="14776" end="14782" title="Rajput" label="Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="14836" end="14843" title="Rajputs" label="Rajputs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566899" start="14883" end="14907" title="Muslim invasion of India" label="Muslim invasion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630408" start="14957" end="14971" title="Khas community" label="Khas community"/>
<link wikidata="Q130360655" start="15022" end="15035" title="1512 in Nepal" label="1512 in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574450" start="15104" end="15124" title="Prithvi Narayan Shah" label="Prithvi Narayan Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q20107430" start="15179" end="15190" title="Dravya Shah" label="Dravya Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965226" start="15289" end="15305" title="Nara Bhupal Shah" label="Nara Bhupal Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848669" start="15452" end="15457" title="Baise rajya" label="Baise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088033" start="15462" end="15470" title="Chaubisi rajya" label="Chaubise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441653" start="16087" end="16096" title="Nyalam Tong La" label="Kuti Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871446" start="16226" end="16234" title="Battle of Kirtipur" label="Kirtipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="16315" end="16333" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078602" start="17204" end="17220" title="Kingdom of Nepal" label="Kingdom of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="17840" end="17845" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="17867" end="17872" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q116507913" start="17980" end="18005" title="Senas of Makwanpur" label="Sena dynasty of Makwanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905451" start="18035" end="18050" title="Makwanpur Gadhi" label="Makwanpur Gadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36109" start="18126" end="18134" title="Maithili language" label="Maithili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078602" start="18279" end="18284" title="Kingdom of Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574450" start="18342" end="18362" title="Prithvi Narayan Shah" label="Prithvi Narayan Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270170" start="18643" end="18660" title="Sino-Nepalese War" label="Sino-Nepalese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="18676" end="18681" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q877445" start="18693" end="18714" title="Tashi Lhunpo Monastery" label="Tashilhunpo Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211183" start="18718" end="18726" title="Shigatse" label="Shigatse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="18741" end="18757" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="18773" end="18785" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q698065" start="18796" end="18811" title="Fuk&amp;#x27;anggan" label="Fuk&amp;#x27;anggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="19113" end="19139" title="East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q195378" start="19221" end="19239" title="Anglo-Nepalese War" label="Anglo-Nepalese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003866" start="19391" end="19408" title="Treaty of Sugauli" label="Treaty of Sugauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q86756704" start="19555" end="19565" title="Naya Muluk" label="Naya Muluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274200" start="19697" end="19708" title="Shah dynasty" label="Shah rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29912873" start="19714" end="19720" title="Thapa dynasty" label="Thapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867809" start="19726" end="19734" title="Basnyat family" label="Basnyats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29996653" start="19744" end="19750" title="Pande family" label="Pandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313700" start="19774" end="19786" title="Rana dynasty" label="Rana dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355896" start="19988" end="20005" title="Jung Bahadur Rana" label="Jung Bahadur Rana"/>
<link wikidata="Q593609" start="20348" end="20361" title="Ranodip Singh Kunwar" label="Ranodip Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29275" start="20584" end="20591" title="Lamjung District" label="Lamjung"/>
<link wikidata="Q28436" start="20596" end="20601" title="Kaski District" label="Kaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="20643" end="20652" title="autocracy" label="autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="20952" end="20976" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="20995" end="21005" title="World war" label="World Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994574" start="21196" end="21236" title="Nepal–Britain Treaty of 1923" label="treaty of perpetual peace and friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061786" start="21404" end="21438" title="Chandra Shumsher Jang Bahadur Rana" label="Chandra Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="21455" end="21480" title="German invasion of Poland" label="German invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994468" start="21503" end="21526" title="Nepal in World War II" label="declared war on Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056518" start="21607" end="21618" title="Nepali Army" label="Nepali Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="21633" end="21646" title="Burma campaign" label="Burmese front"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="21811" end="21828" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605695" start="21863" end="21881" title="revolution of 1951" label="revolution of 1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="22222" end="22250" title="Indian independence movement" label="Indian Independence struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19679769" start="22359" end="22373" title="Nepal Praja Parishad" label="Praja Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="22378" end="22393" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q560515" start="22442" end="22455" title="B. P. Koirala" label="B. P. Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429358" start="22457" end="22473" title="Ganesh Man Singh" label="Ganesh Man Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268121" start="22475" end="22495" title="Subarna Shamsher Rana" label="Subarna Sumsher Rana"/>
<link wikidata="Q380145" start="22497" end="22521" title="Krishna Prasad Bhattarai" label="Krishna Prasad Bhattarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q220991" start="22523" end="22544" title="Girija Prasad Koirala" label="Girija Prasad Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160809" start="22738" end="22776" title="Nepali Congress&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Nepali Congress&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269218" start="22869" end="22890" title="Dharma Bhakta Mathema" label="Dharma Bhakta Mathema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504850" start="22892" end="22909" title="Shukraraj Shastri" label="Shukraraj Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521047" start="22911" end="22928" title="Gangalal Shrestha" label="Gangalal Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226660" start="22934" end="22949" title="Dashrath Chand" label="Dasharath Chand"/>
<link wikidata="Q381928" start="23020" end="23034" title="Tribhuvan of Nepal" label="King Tribhuvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605695" start="23156" end="23171" title="1951 Nepalese revolution" label="an armed revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630481" start="23375" end="23391" title="Delhi Accord" label="Delhi Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268114" start="23746" end="23760" title="Mohan Shumsher Jang Bahadur Rana" label="Mohan Shumsher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398637" start="24147" end="24169" title="Matrika Prasad Koirala" label="Matrika Prasad Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994495" start="24266" end="24273" title="1959 Nepalese legislative election" label="in 1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q313110" start="24370" end="24383" title="Mahendra of Nepal" label="King Mahendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130299" start="24775" end="24791" title="Panchayat (Nepal)" label="Panchayat system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014962" start="24962" end="24980" title="Rastriya Panchayat" label="Rastriya Panchayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839533" start="25395" end="25419" title="Back to the Village National Campaign" label="Back to Village Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q162306" start="25571" end="25579" title="Birendra of Nepal" label="Birendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994490" start="25900" end="25911" title="1980 Nepalese governmental system referendum" label="in May 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="26248" end="26263" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589523" start="26288" end="26305" title="United Left Front (Nepal, 1990)" label="United Left Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783955" start="26361" end="26373" title="1990 Nepalese revolution" label="Jana Andolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994498" start="26504" end="26552" title="1991 Nepalese legislative election" label="first parliamentary elections in nearly 50 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435115" start="26949" end="26963" title="hartal" label="general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184064" start="27186" end="27198" title="Bir Hospital" label="Bir Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647" start="27362" end="27370" title="Lalitpur, Nepal" label="Lalitpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852888" start="27464" end="27473" title="Tundikhel" label="Tundikhel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="27489" end="27498" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338265" start="27567" end="27580" title="Nepal Telecom" label="Nepal Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q108533425" start="28074" end="28089" title="Operation Romeo (Nepal)" label="Operation Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="28322" end="28355" title="Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289477" start="28507" end="28524" title="people&amp;#x27;s war" label="people&amp;#x27;s war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002975" start="28543" end="28561" title="Nepalese Civil War" label="Nepalese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57816" start="28574" end="28591" title="Baburam Bhattarai" label="Baburam Bhattarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="28596" end="28614" title="Pushpa Kamal Dahal" label="Pushpa Kamal Dahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28597" start="28703" end="28708" title="Rolpa District" label="Rolpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28612" start="28710" end="28715" title="Rukum" label="Rukum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29430" start="28717" end="28725" title="Jajarkot" label="Jajarkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="28727" end="28733" title="Gurkha" label="Gorkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q28586" start="28739" end="28747" title="Sindhuli" label="Sindhuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q162306" start="29005" end="29009" title="Birendra of Nepal" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134162" start="29011" end="29016" title="Queen Aishwarya of Nepal" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q311235" start="29018" end="29024" title="Dipendra of Nepal" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q201327" start="29232" end="29241" title="Gyanendra of Nepal" label="Gyanendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="30383" end="30401" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090436" start="30791" end="30813" title="election boycott" label="boycotted the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996861" start="30891" end="30931" title="2006 Nepalese revolution" label="strikes and street protests in Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775917" start="30979" end="31000" title="Seven Party Alliance" label="seven-party coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534989" start="31249" end="31280" title="2008 Nepalese Constituent Assembly election" label="elections held on 10 April 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274219" start="31660" end="31680" title="1st Nepalese Constituent Assembly" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q57441" start="32006" end="32021" title="Ram Baran Yadav" label="Ram Baran Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q153756" start="32062" end="32115" title="President of Nepal" label="President of the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q932168" start="32119" end="32132" title="2008 Nepalese presidential election" label="July 23, 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="32216" end="32257" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre)" label="Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764478" start="32271" end="32285" title="List of prime ministers of Nepal" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="32339" end="32357" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972476" start="32592" end="32614" title="Chief Justice of Nepal" label="Chief Justice of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401600" start="32616" end="32630" title="Khil Raj Regmi" label="Khil Raj Regmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994479" start="32639" end="32668" title="2013 Nepalese Constituent Assembly election" label="Constituent Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="32776" end="32785" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="CPN (UML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q422969" start="32857" end="32871" title="Sushil Koirala" label="Sushil Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="32930" end="32951" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="Constitution of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830062" start="33013" end="33037" title="April 2015 Nepal earthquake" label="a devastating earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="33041" end="33057" title="Moment magnitude scale" label="moment magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="33064" end="33066" title="Moment magnitude scale" label="Mw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492593" start="33187" end="33214" title="1934 Nepal–Bihar earthquake" label="1934 Nepal–Bihar earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q19839023" start="33246" end="33275" title="2015 Mount Everest avalanches" label="an avalanche on Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="33334" end="33353" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898749" start="33395" end="33413" title="May 2015 Nepal earthquake" label="A major aftershock"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906038" start="33616" end="33641" title="Nepal humanitarian crisis (2015-2017)" label="major humanitarian crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601861" start="33727" end="33734" title="Madhesi people" label="Madhesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277626" start="33739" end="33744" title="Tharu people" label="Tharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070574" start="34089" end="34139" title="2015 Nepal blockade" label="India suspended vital supplies to landlocked Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="34223" end="34236" title="KP Sharma Oli" label="KP Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="34469" end="34501" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="United Nations Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="34503" end="34514" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="34693" end="34708" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="34716" end="34734" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="34823" end="34842" title="CPN (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="34843" end="34861" title="Pushpa Kamal Dahal" label="Pushpa Kamal Dahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776360" start="34997" end="35019" title="2017 Nepalese general election" label="first general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="35185" end="35198" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="Communist UML"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="35266" end="35290" title="Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli" label="Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193958" start="35432" end="35451" title="Bidya Devi Bhandari" label="Bidya Devi Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="35668" end="35686" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="35767" end="35785" title="Pushpa Kamal Dahal" label="Pushpa Kamal Dahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="35790" end="35799" title="Prachanda" label="Prachanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q84080733" start="35850" end="35866" title="2022 Nepalese general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183124" start="35884" end="35902" title="Ram Chandra Poudel" label="Ram Chandra Paudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026062" start="35926" end="35933" title="2023 Nepalese presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="36420" end="36429" title="Nepali language" label="Parbatiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q627531" start="36622" end="36637" title="History of Asia" label="History of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="36640" end="36656" title="History of India" label="History of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865102" start="36659" end="36679" title="History of Kathmandu" label="History of Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765321" start="36682" end="36699" title="History of Sikkim" label="History of Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q60107" start="36702" end="36719" title="Monarchy of Nepal" label="Monarchy of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155916" start="36722" end="36739" title="Politics of Nepal" label="Politics of Nepal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21324" wikidata="Q2398928" url="?curid=21324" title="Geography of Nepal">
<text>Nepal measures about along its Himalayan axis by across. It has an area of .

Nepal is landlocked by China&#x27;s Tibet Autonomous Region to the north and India on other three sides. West Bengal&#x27;s narrow &quot;Siliguri Corridor&quot; separate Nepal and Bangladesh. To the east are Bhutan and India.

Nepal has a very high degree of geographic diversity and can be divided into three main regions: Terai, Hilly, and Himal. The Terai region, covering 17% of Nepal&#x27;s area, is a lowland region with some hill ranges and is culturally more similar to parts of India. The Hilly region, encompassing 68% of the country&#x27;s area, consists of mountainous terrain without snow and is inhabited by various indigenous ethnic groups. The Himal region, covering 15% of Nepal&#x27;s area, contains snow and is home to several high mountain ranges, including Mount Everest, the world&#x27;s highest peak.
Nepal, with elevations ranging from less than 100 meters to over 8,000 meters, has eight climate zones from tropical to perpetual snow. The majority of the country&#x27;s population resides in the tropical and subtropical climate zones. The tropical zone, below 1,000 meters, experiences frost less than once per decade and is suitable for growing various fruits and crops. The subtropical climate zone, from 1,000 to 2,000 meters, is the most prevalent and suitable for growing rice, maize, millet, wheat, and other crops. The temperate climate zone, from 2,000 to 3,000 meters, occupies 12% of Nepal&#x27;s land area and is suitable for cold-tolerant crops. The subalpine, alpine, and nival zones have progressively fewer human settlements and agricultural activities.

Seasons are divided into a wet season from June to September and a dry season from October to June. The summer monsoon can cause flooding and landslides, while the winter monsoon is marked by occasional rainfall and snowfall. The diverse elevation results in various biomes, including tropical savannas, subtropical and temperate forests, montane grasslands, and shrublands.

Nepal has three categories of rivers: the largest systems (Koshi, Gandaki/Narayani, Karnali/Goghra, and Mahakali), second category rivers (rising in the Middle Hills and Lower Himalayan Range), and third category rivers (rising in the outermost Siwalik foothills and mostly seasonal). These rivers can cause serious floods and pose challenges to transportation and communication networks. River management involves addressing flooding, sedimentation, and sustainable water sources for irrigation. Building dams in Nepal is controversial due to seismic activity, glacial lake formation, sedimentation rates, and cross-border equity issues between India and Nepal.

Nepal&#x27;s land cover is dominated by forests, which cover 39.09% of the country&#x27;s total geographical area, followed by agriculture areas at 29.83%. The hill region constitutes the largest portion of Nepal, with significant cultivated lands and natural vegetation. Forests in Nepal face deforestation due to over-harvesting of firewood, illegal logging, clearing for agriculture, and infrastructure expansion. As of 2010, 64.8% of the forested area in Nepal is covered by core forests of more than 500 ha in size. Deforestation and degradation are driven by multiple processes, including firewood harvesting, construction, urban expansion, and illegal logging.

Nepal has consistently been ranked as one of the most polluted countries in the world.

== Landform regions ==
For a country of its size, Nepal has tremendous geographic diversity. It rises from as low as elevation in the tropical Terai—the northern rim of the Gangetic Plain, through beyond the perpetual snow line to 90 peaks over including Earth&#x27;s highest ( Mount Everest or &quot;Sagarmatha&quot;). In addition to the continuum from tropical warmth to cold comparable to polar regions, average annual precipitation varies from as little as in its narrow proportion of the rainshadow north of the Himalayas to as much as on windward slopes, the maximum mainly resting on the magnitude of the South Asian monsoon.

Forming south-to-north transects, Nepal can be divided into three belts: Terai, Pahad and Himal. In the other direction, it is divided into three major river systems, east to west: Koshi, Gandaki/Narayani and Karnali (including the Mahakali along the western border), all tributaries of the Ganges river. The Ganges-Yarlung Zangbo/Brahmaputra watershed largely coincides with the Nepal-Tibet border, save for certain tributaries rising beyond it.

=== Himal ===

Himal Region is a mountainous region containing snow.
The Mountain Region begins where high ridges (Nepali: लेक; lekh) begin substantially rising above into the subalpine and alpine zone which are mainly used for seasonal pasturage. By geographical view, it covers 15% of the total area of Nepal. A few tens kilometers further north the high Himalaya abruptly rise along the Main Central Thrust fault zone above the snow line at . Some 90 of Nepal&#x27;s peaks exceed and eight exceed including Mount Everest at and Kanchenjunga at .

There are some 20 subranges including the Kanchenjunga massif along with the Mahalangur Himal around Mount Everest. Langtang north of Kathmandu, Annapurna and Manaslu north of Pokhara, then Dhaulagiri further west with Kanjiroba north of Jumla and finally Gurans Himal in the far west.

==== Trans-Himalayan ====
The main watershed between the Brahmaputra (called &quot;Yarlung Tsangpo&quot; in Tibet) and the Ganges system (including all of Nepal) actually lies north of the highest ranges. Alpine, often semi-arid valleys—including Humla, Jumla, Dolpo, Mustang, Manang and Khumbu—cut between Himalayan sub ranges or lie north of them.

Some of these valleys historically were more accessible from Tibet than Nepal and are populated by people with Tibetan affinities called &quot;Bhotiya&quot; or &quot;Bhutia&quot; including the famous Sherpas in Kumbu valley near Mount Everest. With Chinese cultural hegemony in Tibet itself, these valleys have become repositories of traditional ways. Valleys with better access from the hill regions to the south are culturally linked to Nepal as well as Tibet, notably the Kali Gandaki Gorge where Thakali culture shows influences in both directions.

Permanent villages in the mountain region stand as high as with summer encampments even higher. Bhotiyas graze yaks, grow cold-tolerant crops such as potatoes, barley, buckwheat and millet. They traditionally traded across the mountains, e.g., Tibetan salt for rice from lowlands in Nepal and India. Since trade was restricted in the 1950s they have found work as high altitude porters, guides, cooks and other accessories to tourism and alpinism.

=== Hilly ===

Hilly Region is a mountain region which does not generally contain snow. It is situated to the south of the Himal Region (the snowy mountain region). This region begins at the Lower Himalayan Range, where a fault system called the &quot;Main Boundary Thrust&quot; creates an escarpment high, to a crest between . It covers 68% of the total area of Nepal.

These steep southern slopes are nearly uninhabited, thus an effective buffer between languages and culture in the Terai and Hilly. Paharis mainly populate river and stream bottoms that enable rice cultivation and are warm enough for winter/spring crops of wheat and potato. The increasingly urbanized Kathmandu and Pokhara valleys fall within the Hill region. Newars are an indigenous ethnic group with their own Tibeto-Burman language. The Newar were originally indigenous to the Kathmandu valley but have spread into Pokhara and other towns alongside urbanized Pahari.

Other indigenous Janajati ethnic groups -— natively speaking highly localized Tibeto-Burman languages and dialects -— populate hillsides up to about . This group includes Magar and Kham Magar west of Pokhara, Gurung south of the Annapurnas, Tamang around the periphery of Kathmandu Valley and Rai, Koinch Sunuwar and Limbu further east. Temperate and subtropical fruits are grown as cash crops. Marijuana was grown and processed into &quot;Charas&quot; (hashish) until international pressure persuaded the government to outlaw it in 1976. There is increasing reliance on animal husbandry with elevation, using land above for summer grazing and moving herds to lower elevations in winter. Grain production has not kept pace with population growth at elevations above where colder temperatures inhibit double cropping. Food deficits drive emigration out of the Pahad in search of employment.

The Hilly ends where ridges begin substantially rising out of the temperate climate zone into subalpine zone above .

=== Terai ===

Terai is a low land region containing some hill ranges. Looking out for its coverage, it covers 17% of the total area of Nepal. The Terai (also spelt Tarai) region begins at the Indian border and includes the southernmost part of the flat, intensively farmed Gangetic Plain called the &quot;Outer Terai&quot;. By the 19th century, timber and other resources were being exported to India. Industrialization based on agricultural products such as jute began in the 1930s and infrastructure such as roadways, railways and electricity were extended across the border before it reached Nepal&#x27;s Pahad region.

The Outer Terai is culturally more similar to adjacent parts of India&#x27;s Bihar and Uttar Pradesh than to the Pahad of Nepal. Nepali is taught in schools and often spoken in government offices, however, the local population mostly uses Maithali, Bhojpuri and Tharu languages.

The Outer Terai ends at the base of the first range of foothills called the &quot;Chure Hills&quot; or &quot;Churia&quot;. This range has a densely forested skirt of coarse alluvium called the &quot;Bhabar&quot;. Below the Bhabhar, finer, less permeable sediments force groundwater to the surface in a zone of springs and marshes. In Persian, &quot;terai&quot; refers to wet or marshy ground. Before the use of DDT this was dangerously malarial. Nepal&#x27;s rulers used this for a defensive frontier called the &quot;char kose jhadi&quot; (four &quot;kos&quot; forest, one kos equaling about three kilometers or two miles).

Above the Bhabar belt, the Chure Hills rise to about with peaks as high as , steeper on their southern flanks because of faults are known as the Main Frontal Thrust. This range is composed of poorly consolidated, coarse sediments that do not retain water or support soil development so there is virtually no agricultural potential and sparse population.

In several places beyond the Chure, there are dūn valleys called Inner Terai. These valleys have productive soil but were dangerously malarial except to indigenous Tharu people who had genetic resistance. In the mid-1950s DDT came into use to suppress mosquitos and the way was open to settlement from the land-poor hills, to the detriment of the Tharu.

The Terai ends and the Pahad begin at a higher range of foothills called the Lower Himalayan Range.

==Climate==
===Altitudinal belts===

Nepal&#x27;s latitude is about the same as that of the United States state of Florida, however with elevations ranging from less than to over and precipitation from to over the country has eight climate zones from tropical to perpetual snow.

The tropical zone below experiences frost less than once per decade. It can be subdivided into lower tropical (below 300 meters or 1,000 ft.) with 18% of the nation&#x27;s land area) and upper (18% of land area) tropical zones. The best mangoes and well as papaya and banana are largely confined to the lower zone. Other fruit such as litchee, jackfruit, citrus and mangoes of lower quality grow in the upper tropical zone as well. Winter crops include grains and vegetables typically grown in temperate climates. The Outer Terai is virtually all in the lower tropical zone. Inner Terai valleys span both tropical zones. The Sivalik Hills are mostly upper tropical. Tropical climate zones extend far upriver valleys across the Middle Hills and even into the Mountain regions.

The subtropical climate zone from occupies 22% of Nepal&#x27;s land area and is the most prevalent climate of the Middle Hills above river valleys. It experiences frost up to 53 days per year, however, this varies greatly with elevation, proximity to high mountains and terrain either draining or ponding cold air drainage. Crops include rice, maize, millet, wheat, potato, stone fruits and citrus.

The great majority of Nepal&#x27;s population occupies the tropical and subtropical climate zones. In the Middle Hills, &quot;upper-caste&quot; Hindus are concentrated in tropical valleys which are well suited for rice cultivation while Janajati ethnic groups mostly live above in the subtropical zone and grow other grains more than rice.

The Temperate climate zone from occupies 12% of Nepal&#x27;s land area and has up to 153 annual days of frost. It is encountered in higher parts of the Middle Hills and throughout much of the Mountain region. Crops include cold-tolerant rice, maize, wheat, barley, potato, apple, walnut, peach, various cole, amaranthus and buckwheat.

The Subalpine zone from occupies 9% of Nepal&#x27;s land area, mainly in the Mountain and Himalayan regions. It has permanent settlements in the Himalaya, but further south it is only seasonally occupied as pasture for sheep, goats, yak and hybrids in warmer months. There are up to 229 annual days of frost here. Crops include barley, potato, cabbage, cauliflower, amaranthus, buckwheat and apple. Medicinal plants are also gathered.

The Alpine zone from occupies 8% of the country&#x27;s land area. There are a few permanent settlements above 4,000 meters. There is virtually no plant cultivation although medicinal herbs are gathered. Sheep, goats, yaks and hybrids are pastured in warmer months.

Above 5,000 meters the climate becomes Nival and there is no human habitation or even seasonal use.

Arid and semi-arid land in the rainshadow of high ranges have a Transhimalayan climate. Population density is very low. Cultivation and husbandry conform to subalpine and alpine patterns but depend on snowmelt and streams for irrigation.

Precipitation generally decreases from east to west with increasing distance from the Bay of Bengal, source of the summer monsoon. Eastern Nepal gets about annually; the Kathmandu area about and western Nepal about . This pattern is modified by adiabatic effects as rising air masses cool and drop their moisture content on windward slopes, then warm up as they descend so relative humidity drops. Annual precipitation reaches on windward slopes in the Annapurna Himalaya beyond a relatively low stretch of the Lower Himalayan Range. In rainshadows beyond the high mountains, annual precipitation drops as low as .

===Seasons===
The year is divided into a wet season from June to September—as summer warmth over Inner Asia creates a low-pressure zone that draws in moist air from the Indian Ocean—and a dry season from October to June as cold temperatures in the vast interior create a high-pressure zone causing dry air to flow outward. April and May are months of intense water stress when cumulative effects of the long dry season are exacerbated by temperatures rising over in the tropical climate belt. Seasonal drought further intensifies in the Siwaliks hills consisting of poorly consolidated, coarse, permeable sediments that do not retain water, so hillsides are often covered with drought-tolerant scrub forest. In fact, much of Nepal&#x27;s native vegetation adapted to withstand drought, but less so at higher elevations where cooler temperatures mean less water stress.

The summer monsoon may be preceded by a buildup of thunderstorm activity that provides water for rice seedbeds. Sustained rain on average arrives in mid-June as rising temperatures over Inner Asia creates a low-pressure zone that draws in moist air from the Indian Ocean, but this can vary up to a month. Significant failure of monsoon rains historically meant drought and famine while above-normal rains still cause flooding and landslides with losses in human lives, farmland and buildings.

The monsoon also complicates transportation with roads and trails washing out while unpaved roads and airstrips may become unusable and cloud cover reduces safety margins for aviation. Rains diminish in September and generally end by mid-October, ushering in generally cool, clear, and dry weather, as well as the most relaxed and jovial period in Nepal. By this time, the harvest is completed and people are in a festive mood. The two largest and most important Hindu festivals—Dashain and Tihar (Dipawali)—arrive during this period, about one month apart. The post-monsoon season lasts until about December.

After the post-monsoon comes the winter monsoon, a strong northeasterly flow marked by occasional, short rainfalls in the lowlands and plains and snowfalls in the high-altitude areas. In this season the Himalayas function as a barrier to cold air masses from Inner Asia, so southern Nepal and northern India have warmer winters than would otherwise be the case. April and May are dry and hot, especially below where afternoon temperatures may exceed .

==Environment==
The dramatic changes in elevation along this transect result in a variety of biomes, from tropical savannas along the Indian border, to subtropical broadleaf and coniferous forests in the hills, to temperate broadleaf and coniferous forests on the slopes of the Himalaya, to montane grasslands and shrublands, and finally rock and ice at the highest elevations.

This corresponds to the Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands ecoregion.

Subtropical forests dominate the lower elevations of the Hill region. They form a mosaic running east–west across Nepal, with Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests between and Himalayan subtropical pine forests between . At higher elevations, to , are found temperate broadleaf forests: eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests to the east of the Gandaki River and western Himalayan broadleaf forests to the west.

The native forests of the Mountain region change from east to west as precipitation decreases. They can be broadly classified by their relation to the Gandaki River. From are the eastern and western Himalayan subalpine conifer forests. To are the eastern and western Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows.

=== Environmental issues ===
; Natural hazards:
: Earthquakes, severe thunderstorms (tornadoes are rare), flooding and flash flooding, landslides, drought, and famine depending on the timing, intensity, and duration of the summer monsoons
; Environment - current issues:
: Deforestation (overuse of wood for fuel and lack of alternatives); contaminated water (with human and animal wastes, agricultural runoff, and industrial effluents); wildlife conservation; vehicular emissions
; Environment - international agreements
:* Party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
:* Signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation
:* Existing and proposed dams, barrages and canals for flood control, irrigation and hydroelectric generation

== River systems ==

Nepal has three categories of rivers. The largest systems -— from east to west the Koshi, Gandaki/Narayani, Karnali/Goghra and Mahakali—originate in multiple tributaries rising in or beyond the high Himalaya that maintain substantial flows from snowmelt through the hot, drought-stricken spring before the summer monsoon. These tributaries cross the highest mountains in deep gorges, flow south through the Middle Hills, then join in candelabra-like configuration before crossing the Lower Himalayan Range and emerging onto the plains where they have deposited megafans exceeding in area.

The Koshi is also called &quot;Sapta Koshi&quot; for its seven Himalayan tributaries in eastern Nepal: Indrawati, Sun Koshi, Tama Koshi, Dudh Koshi, Liku, Arun, and Tamor. The Arun rises in Tibet some beyond Nepal&#x27;s northern border. A tributary of the Sun Koshi, Bhote Koshi also rises in Tibet and is followed by the Arniko Highway connecting Kathmandu and Lhasa.

The &quot;Gandaki/Narayani&quot; has seven Himalayan tributaries in the center of the country: Daraundi, Seti Gandaki, Madi, Kali, Marsyandi, Budhi, and Trisuli also called &quot;Sapta Gandaki&quot;. The &quot;Kali Gandaki&quot; rises on the edge of the Tibetan Plateau and flows through the semi-independent Kingdom of Mustang, then between the 8,000 meter Dhaulagiri and Annapurna ranges in the world&#x27;s deepest valley. The Trisuli rises north of the international border inside Tibet. After the seven upper tributaries join, the river becomes the &quot;Narayani&quot; inside Nepal and is joined by the East Rapti from Chitwan Valley. Crossing into India, its name changes to &quot;Gandak&quot;.

The Karnali drains western Nepal, with the Bheri and Seti as major tributaries. The upper Bheri drains Dolpo, a remote valley beyond the Dhaulagiri Himalaya with traditional Tibetan cultural affinities. The upper Karnali rises inside Tibet near-sacred Lake Manasarovar and Mount Kailash. The area around these features is the hydrographic nexus of South Asia since it holds the sources of the Indus and its major tributary the Sutlej, the Karnali—a Ganges tributary—and the Yarlung Tsangpo/Brahmaputra. It is the centre of the universe according to traditional cosmography. The Mahakali or &quot;Kali&quot; along the Nepal-India border on the west joins the Karnali in India, where the river is known as &quot;Goghra&quot; or &quot;Ghaghara&quot;.

Second category rivers rise in the Middle Hills and Lower Himalayan Range, from east to west the Mechi, Kankai and Kamala south of the Kosi; the Bagmati that drains Kathmandu Valley between the Kosi and Gandaki systems, then the West Rapti and the Babai between the Gandaki and Karnali systems. Without glacial sources, annual flow regimes in these rivers are more variable although limited flow persists through the dry season.

Third category rivers rise in the outermost Siwalik foothills and are mostly seasonal.

None of these river systems supports significant commercial navigation. Instead, deep gorges create obstacles to establishing transport and communication networks and de-fragmenting the economy. Foot-trails are still the primary transportation routes in many hill districts.

===River management===
Rivers in all three categories are capable of causing serious floods. Koshi River in the first category caused a major flood in August 2008 in Bihar state, India after breaking through a poorly maintained embankment just inside Nepal. The West Rapti in the second category is called &quot;Gorakhpur&#x27;s Sorrow&quot; for its history of urban flooding. Third category Terai rivers are associated with flash floods.

Since uplift and erosion are more or less in equilibrium in the Himalaya, at least where the climate is humid, rapid uplift must be balanced out by annual increments of millions tonnes of sediments washing down from the mountains; then on the plains settling out of suspension on vast alluvial fans over which rivers meander and change course at least every few decades, causing some experts to question whether manmade embankments can contain the problem of flooding. Traditional &quot;Mithila&quot; culture along the lower Koshi in Nepal and Bihar celebrated the river as the giver of life for its fertile alluvial soil, yet also the taker of life through its catastrophic floods.

Large reservoirs in the Middle Hills may be able to capture peak flows and mitigate downstream flooding, to store surplus monsoon flows for dry season irrigation and to generate electricity. Water for irrigation is especially compelling because the Indian Terai is suspected to have entered a food bubble where dry season crops are dependent on water from tube wells that in the aggregate are unsustainably &quot;mining&quot; groundwater.
Depletion of aquifers without building upstream dams as a sustainable alternative water source could precipitate a Malthusian catastrophe in India&#x27;s food insecure states Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, with over 300 million combined population. With India already experiencing a Naxalite–Maoist insurgency in Bihar, Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh, Nepalese reluctance to agree to water projects could even seem an existential threat to India.

As Nepal builds barrages to divert more water for irrigation during the dry season preceding the summer monsoon, there is less for downstream users in Bangladesh and India&#x27;s Bihar and Uttar Pradesh states. The best solution could be building large upstream reservoirs, to capture and store surplus flows during the summer monsoon as well as providing flood control benefits to Bangladesh and India. Then water-sharing agreements could allocate a portion of the stored water to be left to flow into India during the following dry season.

Nevertheless, building dams in Nepal is controversial for several reasons. First, the region is seismically active. Dam failures caused by earthquakes could cause tremendous death and destruction downstream, particularly on the densely populated Gangetic Plain. Second, global warming has led to the formation of glacial lakes dammed by unstable moraines. Sudden failures of these moraines can cause floods with cascading failures of manmade structures downstream.

Third, sedimentation rates in the Himalaya are extremely high, leading to rapid loss of storage capacity as sediments accumulate behind dams. Fourth, there are complicated questions of cross-border equity in how India and Nepal would share costs and benefits that have proven difficult to resolve in the context of frequent acrimony between the two countries.

== Area ==
:* Total: 
:* Land: 
:* Water: 

; Coastline:
: 0 km (landlocked)
; Elevation extremes:
:* Lowest point: Kechana Kawal, jhapa district 59 m
:* Highest point: Sagarmatha (Mount Everest) 8,848 m

== Resources and land use ==
; Natural resources:
:Quartz, water, timber, hydropower, scenic beauty, small deposits of lignite, copper, cobalt, iron ore
; Land use:
:* Arable land: 16.0%
:* Permanent crops: 0.8%
:* Other: 83.2% (2001)
; Irrigated land:
: 11,680 km² (2003) Nearly 50% of arable land
; Total renewable water resources
: 210.2 km3 (2011)

== Land cover ==

ICIMOD’s first and most complete national land cover database of Nepal prepared using public domain Landsat TM data of 2010 shows that show that forest is the dominant form of land cover in Nepal covering 57,538 km2 with a contribution of 39.09% to the total geographical area of the country. Most of this forest cover is broadleaved closed and open forest, which covers 21,200 km2 or 14.4% of the geographical area.

Needleleaved open forest is the least common of the forest areas covering 8267 km2 (5.62%). Agriculture area is significant extending over 43,910 km2 (29.83%). As would be expected, the high mountain area is largely covered by snow and glaciers and barren land.
The Hill region constitutes the largest portion of Nepal, covering 29.5% of the geographical area, and has a large area (19,783 km2) of cultivated or managed lands, natural and semi natural vegetation (22,621 km2) and artificial surfaces (200 km2). The Tarai region has more cultivated or managed land (14,104 km2) and comparatively less natural and semi natural vegetation (4280 km2). The Tarai has only 267 km2 of natural water bodies. The High mountain region has 12,062 km2 of natural water bodies, snow/glaciers and 13,105 km2 barren areas.

=== Forests ===
25.4% of Nepal&#x27;s land area, or about is covered with forest according to FAO figures from 2005. FAO estimates that around 9.6% of Nepal&#x27;s forest cover consists of &quot;primary forest&quot; which is relatively intact. About 12.1% Nepal&#x27;s forest is classified as &quot;protected&quot; while about 21.4% is &quot;conserved&quot; according to FAO. About 5.1% Nepal&#x27;s forests are classified as &quot;production forest&quot;. Between 2000 and 2005, Nepal lost about of forest. Nepal&#x27;s 2000–2005 total deforestation rate was about 1.4% per year meaning it lost an average of of forest annually. Nepal&#x27;s total deforestation rate from 1990 to 2000 was or 2.1% per year. The 2000–2005 true deforestation rate in Nepal, defined as the loss of primary forest, is −0.4% or per year. Forest is not changing in the plan land of Nepal, forest fragmenting on the &quot;Roof of the World&quot;.

According to ICIMOD figures from 2010, forest is the dominant form of land cover in Nepal covering 57,538 km2 with a contribution of 39.09% to the total geographical area of the country. Most of this forest cover is broadleaved closed and open forest, which covers 21,200 km2 or 14.4% of the geographical area. Needleleaved open forest is the least common of the forest areas covering 8,267 km2 (5.62%). At national level 64.8% area is covered by core forests of &gt; 500 ha size and 23.8% forests belong to patch and edge category forests. The patch forest constituted 748 km2 at national level, out of which 494 km2 of patch forests are present in hill regions. Middle mountains, Siwaliks and Terai regions have more than 70% of the forest area under core forest category &gt; 500 ha size. The edge forests constituted around 30% of forest area of High Mountain and Hill regions.
Forest Resource Assessment (FRA) which was conducted between 2010 and 2014 by the Ministry of Forest and Soil conservation with the financial and technical help of the Government of Finland shows that 40.36% of the land of Nepal is forested. 4.40% of the land has shrubs and bushes.

Deforestation is driven by multiple processes.
Virtually throughout the nation, over-harvest of firewood remains problematic. Despite the availability of liquefied petroleum gas in towns and cities, firewood is sold more at energy-competitive prices because cutting and selling it is a fallback when better employment opportunities aren&#x27;t forthcoming. Firewood still supplies 80% of Nepal&#x27;s energy for heating and cooking. Harvesting construction timber and lopping branches for fodder for cattle and other farm animals are also deforestation/degradation drivers in all geographic zones.

Illegal logging is a problem in the Siwaliks, with sawlogs smuggled into India. Clearing for resettlement and agriculture expansion also causes deforestation as does urban expansion, building infrastructure such as schools, hospitals, electric transmission lines, water tanks, police and army barracks, temples and picnic areas.

In the Middle Hills road construction, reservoirs, transmission lines and extractive manufacturing such as cement factories cause deforestation. In the mountains building hotels, monasteries and trekking trails cause deforestation while timber-smuggling into the Tibet Autonomous Region and over-grazing cause degradation.

==Boundaries==
:* Total: 2,926 km
:* Border countries: China 1,236 km, India 1,690 km

===Border crossings with India===
While India and Nepal have an open border with no restrictions on movement of their citizens on either side, there are 23 checkpoints for trade purposes. These are listed in clockwise order, east to west. The six in italics are also used for entry/exit by third country nationals.

===Border crossings with China===

== See also ==
* Geology of Nepal
* List of mountains in Nepal
* Valleys of Nepal

==References==
== External links ==
* 
* Atlas of Nepal 
* Nepal Encyclopedia Geopolitical category 
* Brief and Concise Geography of Nepal </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="0" end="5" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="101" end="106" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="114" end="137" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="183" end="194" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666467" start="215" end="232" title="Siliguri Corridor" label="Siliguri Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="258" end="268" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="286" end="292" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="297" end="302" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133636" start="3614" end="3619" title="Terai" label="Terai"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="3644" end="3658" title="Gangetic Plain" label="Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q740358" start="3689" end="3698" title="snow line" label="snow line"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="3749" end="3762" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="3964" end="3974" title="Rain shadow" label="rainshadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="3988" end="3997" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737100" start="4083" end="4102" title="South Asian monsoon" label="South Asian monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q695610" start="4286" end="4291" title="Koshi River" label="Koshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q849494" start="4293" end="4309" title="Gandaki River" label="Gandaki/Narayani"/>
<link wikidata="Q390232" start="4314" end="4321" title="Karnali River" label="Karnali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095324" start="4337" end="4345" title="Mahakali River" label="Mahakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="4396" end="4408" title="Ganges River" label="Ganges river"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244259" start="4421" end="4435" title="Yarlung Zangbo River" label="Yarlung Zangbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="4436" end="4447" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4729" end="4738" title="Montane#Subalpine zone" label="subalpine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4743" end="4754" title="Montane#Alpine grasslands and tundra" label="alpine zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q740358" start="4984" end="4993" title="snow line" label="snow line"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="5063" end="5076" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82019" start="5084" end="5096" title="Kanchenjunga" label="Kanchenjunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q82019" start="5145" end="5157" title="Kangchenjunga" label="Kanchenjunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q924257" start="5180" end="5196" title="Mahalangur Himal" label="Mahalangur Himal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631256" start="5219" end="5227" title="Langtang" label="Langtang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16466024" start="5248" end="5257" title="Annapurna" label="Annapurna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170070" start="5262" end="5269" title="Manaslu" label="Manaslu"/>
<link wikidata="Q165440" start="5293" end="5303" title="Dhaulagiri" label="Dhaulagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968920" start="5322" end="5331" title="Kanjiroba Himal" label="Kanjiroba"/>
<link wikidata="Q28619" start="5341" end="5346" title="Jumla district" label="Jumla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619858" start="5359" end="5371" title="Gurans Himal" label="Gurans Himal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="5447" end="5458" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244259" start="5473" end="5488" title="Yarlung Zangbo River" label="Yarlung Tsangpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="5498" end="5503" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="5513" end="5519" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q28623" start="5637" end="5642" title="Humla district" label="Humla"/>
<link wikidata="Q28619" start="5644" end="5649" title="Jumla district" label="Jumla"/>
<link wikidata="Q851875" start="5651" end="5656" title="Dolpo" label="Dolpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239575" start="5658" end="5665" title="Mustang District" label="Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q735686" start="5667" end="5673" title="Manang" label="Manang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428329" start="5678" end="5684" title="Khumbu" label="Khumbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="5802" end="5807" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="5852" end="5859" title="Tibetan People" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637938" start="5884" end="5891" title="Bhotiya" label="Bhotiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975309" start="5907" end="5913" title="Bhutia" label="Bhutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200513" start="5941" end="5948" title="Sherpa people" label="Sherpas"/>
<link wikidata="Q957074" start="5990" end="6015" title="Sinicization of Tibet" label="Chinese cultural hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769166" start="6216" end="6234" title="Kali Gandaki Gorge" label="Kali Gandaki Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800548" start="6241" end="6248" title="Thakali people" label="Thakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="6406" end="6409" title="yak" label="yak"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="6445" end="6451" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="6455" end="6461" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="6463" end="6472" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="6477" end="6483" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="6556" end="6560" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544588" start="6935" end="6956" title="Lower Himalayan Range" label="Lower Himalayan Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530167" start="7246" end="7253" title="Pahari people (Nepal)" label="Paharis"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="7307" end="7323" title="Paddy field" label="rice cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="7371" end="7376" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="7381" end="7387" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="7416" end="7425" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208644" start="7430" end="7437" title="Pokhara Valley" label="Pokhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q524007" start="7475" end="7481" title="Newa people" label="Newars"/>
<link wikidata="Q357670" start="7489" end="7499" title="Adivasi" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="7528" end="7541" title="Tibeto-Burman" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="7542" end="7550" title="Newar language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7646" end="7657" title="Newa people#Settlements" label="other towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605658" start="7858" end="7863" title="Magar people" label="Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988987" start="7868" end="7878" title="Kham Magar" label="Kham Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341218" start="7896" end="7902" title="Gurung" label="Gurung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144444" start="7928" end="7934" title="Tamang people" label="Tamang"/>
<link wikidata="Q905467" start="7980" end="7983" title="Rai people" label="Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q692202" start="7985" end="7999" title="Sunuwar" label="Koinch Sunuwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668355" start="8004" end="8009" title="Limbu people" label="Limbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="8082" end="8091" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="Marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596647" start="8127" end="8133" title="Charas" label="Charas"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="8141" end="8148" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078602" start="8193" end="8203" title="Kingdom of Nepal" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657754" start="8331" end="8373" title="Transhumance" label="moving herds to lower elevations in winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610518" start="8487" end="8502" title="Multiple cropping" label="double cropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="8644" end="8661" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="8672" end="8686" title="subalpine zone" label="subalpine zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="8970" end="8984" title="Gangetic Plain" label="Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="9156" end="9160" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529576" start="9397" end="9402" title="Bihari people" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193656" start="9407" end="9420" title="Culture of Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="9449" end="9455" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737114" start="9559" end="9567" title="Maithil" label="Maithali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33268" start="9569" end="9577" title="Bhojpuri language" label="Bhojpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34035" start="9582" end="9587" title="Tharu languages" label="Tharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q613624" start="9682" end="9693" title="Sivalik Hills" label="Chure Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838877" start="9799" end="9805" title="Bhabar" label="Bhabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="9934" end="9941" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10011" end="10014" title="DDT#Use against malaria" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="10036" end="10043" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838877" start="10236" end="10242" title="Bhabar" label="Bhabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q613624" start="10253" end="10264" title="Sivalik Hills" label="Chure Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297155" start="10627" end="10638" title="Doon Valley" label="dūn valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035596" start="10646" end="10657" title="Inner Terai Valleys of Nepal" label="Inner Terai"/>
<link wikidata="Q357670" start="10734" end="10744" title="Adivasi" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277626" start="10745" end="10757" title="Tharu people" label="Tharu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="10766" end="10784" title="Thalassemia" label="genetic resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="10803" end="10806" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10824" end="10842" title="DDT#Use against malaria" label="suppress mosquitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544588" start="11013" end="11034" title="Lower Himalayan Range" label="Lower Himalayan Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="11152" end="11159" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="11321" end="11329" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="11353" end="11358" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="11554" end="11559" title="mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="11574" end="11580" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="11585" end="11591" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13182" start="11652" end="11659" title="litchee" label="litchee"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="11661" end="11670" title="jackfruit" label="jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="11672" end="11678" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="12098" end="12109" title="Subtropics" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="12432" end="12436" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="12438" end="12443" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="12445" end="12451" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="12453" end="12458" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="12460" end="12466" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712" start="12468" end="12480" title="Drupe" label="stone fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q357670" start="12731" end="12739" title="Adivasi" label="Janajati"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="12839" end="12856" title="Temperate climate" label="Temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="13092" end="13098" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="13108" end="13113" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="13115" end="13121" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="13123" end="13128" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q156344" start="13144" end="13152" title="amaranth" label="amaranth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="13159" end="13168" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13175" end="13184" title="Subalpine#Subalpine zone" label="Subalpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="13515" end="13522" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537" start="13524" end="13535" title="cauliflower" label="cauliflower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13611" end="13617" title="Montane ecology#Alpine grasslands and tundra" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="13810" end="13815" title="Sheep" label="Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="13817" end="13821" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="13824" end="13828" title="Domestic yak" label="yaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q740358" start="13912" end="13917" title="Snow line" label="Nival"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="14005" end="14015" title="rainshadow" label="rainshadow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14038" end="14060" title="Cold desert#Cold desert climates" label="Transhimalayan climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="14299" end="14312" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16466024" start="14666" end="14675" title="Annapurna" label="Annapurna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544588" start="14724" end="14745" title="Lower Himalayan Range" label="Lower Himalayan Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="14750" end="14761" title="Rain shadow" label="rainshadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q613624" start="15366" end="15374" title="Siwaliks" label="Siwaliks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737100" start="15710" end="15717" title="Monsoon of South Asia" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11212956" start="15885" end="15895" title="Inner Asia" label="Inner Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379695" start="16672" end="16679" title="Dashain" label="Dashain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128500" start="16684" end="16689" title="Tihar (festival)" label="Tihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="16691" end="16699" title="Diwali" label="Dipawali"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="17350" end="17355" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290693" start="17363" end="17380" title="Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands" label="tropical savannas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="17409" end="17420" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q158579" start="17421" end="17430" title="Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests" label="broadleaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055470" start="17435" end="17453" title="Tropical and subtropical coniferous forests" label="coniferous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="17471" end="17480" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="17481" end="17490" title="Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests" label="broadleaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q144019" start="17495" end="17505" title="Temperate coniferous forest" label="coniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q144005" start="17548" end="17581" title="montane grasslands and shrublands" label="montane grasslands and shrublands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565873" start="17660" end="17693" title="Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands" label="Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849849" start="17832" end="17871" title="Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests" label="Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080789" start="17884" end="17918" title="Himalayan subtropical pine forests" label="Himalayan subtropical pine forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126533" start="17995" end="18030" title="eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests" label="eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q849494" start="18050" end="18063" title="Gandaki River" label="Gandaki River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987931" start="18068" end="18103" title="western Himalayan broadleaf forests" label="western Himalayan broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848508" start="18297" end="18304" title="eastern Himalayan subalpine conifer forests" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079348" start="18309" end="18352" title="western Himalayan subalpine conifer forests" label="western Himalayan subalpine conifer forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126532" start="18365" end="18372" title="eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987929" start="18377" end="18419" title="western Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows" label="western Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="18472" end="18482" title="Earthquake" label="Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="18492" end="18504" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="18507" end="18516" title="tornadoes" label="tornadoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="18528" end="18533" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="18547" end="18552" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="18557" end="18566" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="18569" end="18576" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="18582" end="18588" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="18652" end="18659" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388264" start="18695" end="18708" title="Deforestation in Nepal" label="Deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="19002" end="19016" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="19018" end="19033" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="19073" end="19087" title="Law of the sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="19089" end="19111" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q695610" start="19431" end="19436" title="Koshi River" label="Koshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q849494" start="19438" end="19454" title="Gandaki River" label="Gandaki/Narayani"/>
<link wikidata="Q390232" start="19456" end="19470" title="Karnali River" label="Karnali/Goghra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095324" start="19475" end="19483" title="Sarda River" label="Mahakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="19506" end="19517" title="Tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737100" start="19661" end="19668" title="Monsoon of South Asia" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q548275" start="19782" end="19792" title="candelabra" label="candelabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544588" start="19832" end="19853" title="Lower Himalayan Range" label="Lower Himalayan Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q465088" start="19909" end="19917" title="alluvial fan" label="megafans"/>
<link wikidata="Q695610" start="19969" end="19980" title="Sapta Koshi" label="Sapta Koshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q118625" start="20041" end="20050" title="Indravati River, Nepal" label="Indrawati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638365" start="20052" end="20061" title="Sun Kosi" label="Sun Koshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197810" start="20075" end="20085" title="Dudh Kosi" label="Dudh Koshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111197" start="20093" end="20097" title="Arun River (Nepal)" label="Arun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969382" start="20103" end="20108" title="Tamor River" label="Tamor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695389" start="20206" end="20217" title="Bhote Koshi" label="Bhote Koshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784114" start="20261" end="20275" title="Arniko Rajmarg" label="Arniko Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="20287" end="20296" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869" start="20301" end="20306" title="Lhasa (prefecture-level city)" label="Lhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q849494" start="20319" end="20335" title="Gandaki River" label="Gandaki/Narayani"/>
<link wikidata="Q19679036" start="20404" end="20412" title="Daraundi River" label="Daraundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018531" start="20414" end="20426" title="Seti Gandaki River" label="Seti Gandaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389077" start="20440" end="20449" title="Marsyandi" label="Marsyandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463211" start="20462" end="20469" title="Trisuli River" label="Trisuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="20563" end="20578" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q28307" start="20618" end="20636" title="Mustang (kingdom)" label="Kingdom of Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q165440" start="20667" end="20677" title="Dhaulagiri" label="Dhaulagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16466024" start="20682" end="20691" title="Annapurna" label="Annapurna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769166" start="20706" end="20733" title="Kali Gandaki Gorge" label="world&amp;#x27;s deepest valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102539" start="20934" end="20948" title="Chitwan Valley" label="Chitwan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="20964" end="20969" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q390232" start="21016" end="21023" title="Ghaghara River" label="Karnali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695384" start="21055" end="21060" title="Bheri River" label="Bheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456679" start="21065" end="21069" title="Seti River" label="Seti"/>
<link wikidata="Q851875" start="21115" end="21120" title="Dolpo" label="Dolpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165440" start="21149" end="21159" title="Dhaulagiri" label="Dhaulagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q233627" start="21264" end="21280" title="Lake Manasarovar" label="Lake Manasarovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q229107" start="21285" end="21298" title="Mount Kailash" label="Mount Kailash"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="21360" end="21370" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="21405" end="21410" title="Indus River" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171675" start="21439" end="21445" title="Sutlej" label="Sutlej"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521121" start="21461" end="21477" title="Ganges Basin" label="Ganges tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244259" start="21486" end="21501" title="Yarlung Zangbo River" label="Yarlung Tsangpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="21502" end="21513" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q652550" start="21561" end="21584" title="Mount Meru (mythology)" label="traditional cosmography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095324" start="21590" end="21598" title="Sarda River" label="Mahakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866240" start="21858" end="21863" title="Mechi River" label="Mechi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695379" start="21865" end="21871" title="Kankai River" label="Kankai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6355608" start="21876" end="21882" title="Kamala River" label="Kamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461769" start="21906" end="21913" title="Bagmati" label="Bagmati"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="21926" end="21942" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869013" start="21990" end="22000" title="West Rapti River" label="West Rapti"/>
<link wikidata="Q613624" start="22235" end="22242" title="Siwalik" label="Siwalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347464" start="22706" end="22717" title="2008 Bihar flood" label="August 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="22721" end="22726" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584396" start="22867" end="22876" title="Gorakhpur" label="Gorakhpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909735" start="22916" end="22930" title="urban flooding" label="urban flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q465088" start="23280" end="23292" title="alluvial fan" label="alluvial fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104009" start="23482" end="23489" title="Mithila (Nepal)" label="Mithila"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="23685" end="23694" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="23857" end="23868" title="hydroelectricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426365" start="24035" end="24044" title="tube well" label="tube well"/>
<link wikidata="Q828341" start="24233" end="24255" title="Malthusian catastrophe" label="Malthusian catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="24272" end="24285" title="Food security" label="food insecure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="24293" end="24306" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="24311" end="24316" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q979845" start="24395" end="24421" title="Naxalite–Maoist insurgency" label="Naxalite–Maoist insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="24432" end="24441" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="24446" end="24460" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="24709" end="24719" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q211302" start="25414" end="25426" title="glacial lake" label="glacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="25447" end="25454" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254417" start="25501" end="25507" title="Glacial lake outburst flood" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q48839297" start="26044" end="26057" title="Kechana Kawal" label="Kechana Kawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28160" start="26059" end="26073" title="jhapa district" label="jhapa district"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="26109" end="26122" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="26184" end="26190" title="Quartz" label="Quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="26252" end="26259" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="26261" end="26267" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="26269" end="26275" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="26277" end="26285" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666404" start="26504" end="26510" title="International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development" label="ICIMOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q849791" start="26604" end="26611" title="Landsat program" label="Landsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565182" start="26612" end="26614" title="Thematic Mapper" label="TM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="26810" end="26822" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="27235" end="27240" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="27825" end="27828" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666404" start="28669" end="28675" title="International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development" label="ICIMOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q35808" start="29918" end="29926" title="firewood" label="firewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="29976" end="29999" title="liquefied petroleum gas" label="liquefied petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q597393" start="30421" end="30436" title="Illegal logging" label="Illegal logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="31014" end="31037" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="31130" end="31135" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="31146" end="31151" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q757292" start="31318" end="31329" title="Border checkpoint" label="checkpoints"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535382" start="31530" end="31546" title="Geology of Nepal" label="Geology of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834076" start="31549" end="31575" title="List of mountains in Nepal" label="List of mountains in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60485152" start="31578" end="31594" title="Valleys of Nepal" label="Valleys of Nepal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21325" wikidata="Q983179" url="?curid=21325" title="Demographics of Nepal">
<text>The current population of Nepal is 29,164,578 as per the 2021 census. The population growth rate is 0.92% per year.

In the 2011 census, Nepal&#x27;s population was approximately 26 million people with a population growth rate of 1.35% and a median age of 21.6 years.

In 2016, the female median age was approximately 25 years old and the male median age was approximately 22 years old. Only 4.4% of the population is estimated to be more than 65 years old, comprising 681,252 females and 597,628 males. 61% of the population is between 15 and 64 years old, and 34.6% is younger than 14 years.

In 2011, the birth rate is estimated to be 22.17 births per 1,000 people with an infant mortality rate of 46 deaths per 1,000 live births. Compared to the infant mortality rate in 2006 of 48 deaths per 1000 live births, the 2011 IMR is a slight decrease within that 5-year period. Infant mortality rate in Nepal is higher in rural regions at 44 deaths per 1000 live births, whereas in urban regions the IMR is lower at 40 deaths per 1000 live births. This difference is due to a lack of delivery assistance services in rural communities compared to their urban counterparts who have better access to hospitals and neonatal clinics.

Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 67.44 years for females and 64.94 years for males. The mortality rate is estimated to be 681 deaths per 100,000 people.

Net migration rate is estimated to be 61 migrants per 100,000 people.

According to the 2000 census, 65.9% of the total population is literate.

== Population growth ==

The population of Nepal has been steadily rising in recent decades. In the June 2001 census, there was a population of about 23 million in Nepal. The population increased by 5 million from the preceding 1991 census; the growth rate is 2.3%. The current population is roughly 30 million which contributes to an increase of about 3 million people every 5 years.

Sixty caste and linguistic subgroups have formed throughout time with the waves of migration from Tibet and India. There was a moderate amount of immigration early in Nepal&#x27;s history, then the population essentially remained the same without any significant fluctuations for over one hundred years. Natural disasters and the following government resettlement programs in the 1950s led to a spike in internal migration from the hills to the Terai region. In the 1980s the Western Chitwan Valley became a major transportation hub for all of Nepal. Along with this major change came a dramatic increase in government services, business expansion, and growing employment, especially in the agricultural industry. The valley&#x27;s population grew rapidly through both in-migration and natural increase.

== Vital statistics ==

=== UN estimates ===

CBR = crude birth rate (per 1000); CDR = crude death rate (per 1000); NC = natural change (per 1000); TFR = total fertility rate (number of children per woman); IMR = infant mortality rate per 1000 births

Source: UN DESA, World Population Prospects, 2022

=== Structure of the population ===





=== Life expectancy ===

Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

=== Demographic and Health Survey ===

Total fertility rate (TFR) (wanted fertility rate) and crude birth rate (CBR):

The following demographic statistics are from the 2011 Nepal Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS).

Median birth intervals (median number of months since preceding birth)
:Total: 36.2
:Rural: 35.9
:Urban: 40.3 (2011)

Median age at first birth
:Median age: 20.1 (2011)

Fertility rate – past trend and present
:Total fertility rate: 4.6 children born/woman (1996)
:Total fertility rate: 4.1 children born/woman (2001)
:Total fertility rate: 3.1 children born/woman (2006)

:Total fertility rate: 2.6 children born/woman
:Rural fertility rate: 2.8 children born/woman
:Urban fertility rate: 1.6 children born/woman (2011)

Ideal family size – mean ideal number of children
:Overall (female/male): 2.1 / 2.3
:Currently married (female/male): 2.2 / 2.3
:Urban (female/male): 1.9 / 2.0
:Rural (female/male): 2.2 / 2.3 (2011)

Ideal family size by gender and age group
:Below is a table of the ideal family size by gender and age for 2011.


== Ethnic and regional equity ==


Nepali was the national language and Sanskrit became a required school subject. Children who spoke Nepali natively and who were exposed to Sanskrit had much better chances of passing the national examinations at the end of high school, which meant they had better employment prospects and could continue into higher education. Children who natively spoke local languages of the Madhesh and Hills, or Tibetan dialects prevailing in the high mountains were at a considerable disadvantage. This history of exclusion coupled with poor prospects for improvement created grievances that encouraged many in ethnic communities such as Madhesi and Tharu in the Tharuhat and Madhesh and Kham Magar in the mid-western hills to support the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) and various other armed Maoist opposition groups such as the JTMM during and after the Nepali Civil War. The negotiated end to this war forced King Gyanendra to abdicate in 2008. Issues of ethnic and regional equity have tended to dominate the agenda of the new republican government and continue to be divisive. Today, even after the end of a 10-year-old Maoist conflict, the upper caste dominates every field in Nepal. Although Newars are low in numbers, their urban living habitat gives them a competitive advantage. Kayastha of Madhesh are the toppers in Human Development Index. From a gender perspective, Newari women are the most literate and lead in every sector. Brahmin and Chhetri women have experienced less social and economic mobility compared to Newari women. Specifically, Brahmin women experience less equality due to their predominately rural living conditions which deprives them of access to certain educational and healthcare advantages.

== Languages ==

Nepal&#x27;s diverse linguistic heritage evolved from three major language groups: Indo-Aryan, Tibeto-Burman languages, and various indigenous language isolates. According to the 2001 national census, 92 different living languages are spoken in Nepal (a 93rd category was &quot;unspecified&quot;). Based upon the 2011 census, the major languages spoken in Nepal (percentage spoken out of the mother tongue language) includes

Nepali (derived from Khas bhasa) is an Indo-Aryan language and is written in Devanagari script. Nepali was the language of the house of Gorkhas in the late 18th century and became the official, national language that serves as the &quot;lingua franca&quot; among Nepali of different ethnolinguistic groups. Maithili, Bhojpuri, Bajjika and Awadhi languages are spoken in the southern Terai. There has been a surge in the number and percentage of people who understand English. Majority of the urban and a significant number of the rural schools are English-medium schools. Higher education in technical, medical, scientific and engineering fields are entirely in English. Nepal Bhasa, the mother-tongue of the Newars, is widely used and spoken in and around Kathmandu Valley and in major Newar trade towns across Nepal.

Other languages, particularly in the Inner Terai hill and mountain regions, are remnants of the country&#x27;s pre-unification history of dozens of political entities isolated by mountains and gorges. These languages typically are limited to an area spanning about one day&#x27;s walk. Beyond that distance, dialects and languages lose mutual intelligibility. However, there are some major languages spoken by indigenous peoples in the region: Magar and Gurung in the west-central hills, Tamang in the east-centre and Limbu in the east. In the high Himalayas are spoken various Tibetan languages, including Bhotia.

Since Nepal&#x27;s unification, various indigenous languages have come under threat of extinction as the government of Nepal has marginalized their use through strict policies designed to promote Nepali as the official language. Indigenous languages which have gone extinct or are critically threatened include Byangsi, Chonkha, and Longaba. Since democracy was restored in 1990, however, the government has worked to improve the marginalization of these languages. Tribhuvan University began surveying and recording threatened languages in 2010 and the government intends to use this information to include more languages on the next Nepali census.

==Religion==
As of the 2021 census, 81.19% of the Nepali population was Hindu, 8.21% Buddhist, 5.09% Muslim, 3.17% Kiratist/Yumaist, 1.76% Christian, and 0.9% followed other or no religion.
Nepal defines itself as a secular nation according to Constitution of Nepal It is common for many Hindus in the country to also worship Buddhist deities simultaneously with Hindu traditions. The notion of religion in Nepal is more fluid than other countries, particularly Western countries. The Nepali people build their social networks through their religious celebrations, which are a central part to the whole of communities within the country.

There is a general idea held by the Nepali people that there is an omnipotent, transcendental &quot;moral order&quot; that is sacred to Hinduism. This idea exists along with the constant presence of chaos and disorder in the material world. In the northwestern region of the country, this all-encompassing state of disorder in the world is synonymous with human affliction, which the religious shamans are believed to alleviate.

Kathmandu Valley is home to the Newars, a major ethnic group in Nepal. The city Bhaktapur is located inside of Kathmandu Valley. Bhaktapur was once an independent Hindu Kingdom. Individual homes typically have at least one shrine devoted to personal deities, with an altar displaying flowers, fruit, and oil among other offerings to the Gods. The perimeter of Kathmandu Valley is lined with shrines devoted to Hindu goddesses, whose purpose is to protect the city from chaotic events. At least one shrine can be found on the vast majority of streets in Kathmandu. The people of Nepal do not feel the need to segregate or compete based upon religion, so Hindu and Buddhist shrines are often coexisting in the same areas. The areas outside of the city are perceived to always possess some form of wild or disordered nature, so the Nepali people inside of the city lines regularly worship the Hindu gods through public ceremonies.

The Hindu god Vishnu is believed to symbolise moral order in the Newar society. The natural human shortcomings in maintaining this moral order is believed to be represented by the Hindu god Shiva. The destruction of Shiva is neutralised by the preserver Vishnu, who tips the scales to restore order. In recent times, there has been a rise in political violence, specifically Maoist violence. This increased violence, along with the widespread poverty, has caused the Nepali to seek stability and peace in religion.

Nepal&#x27;s constitution continues long-standing legal provisions prohibiting discrimination against other religions (but also proselytization). The king was deified as the earthly manifestation of the Hindu god Vishnu. On May 19, 2006, the government faced a constitutional crisis, the House of Representatives which had been just reformed, having been previously dissolved, declared Nepal a &quot;secular state&quot;.

The 2001 census identified 80.6% of the population as Hindu and 10.7% as Buddhist (although many people labeled Hindu or Buddhist often practice a syncretic blend of Hinduism, Buddhism, or animist traditions), 4.2% of the population was Muslim, 3.6% of the population followed the indigenous Kirat Mundhum religion and Christianity was practiced by 0.45% of the population.

Buddhist and Hindu shrines and festivals are respected and celebrated by most Nepali. Certain animist practises of old indigenous religions continue to survive to the modern era.
==Migration==
=== Emigration ===
=== Nepali in the United Kingdom ===

In the 2001 census, approximately 6,000 Nepali were living in the UK. According to latest figure from Office for National Statistics estimates that 51,000 Nepal-born people are currently resident in the UK. There has been increasing interest in the opportunities offered in the UK by the Nepali, especially education. Between the years of 2001 to 2006, there were 7,500 applications for student visas.

=== Nepali in Hong Kong ===

The Nepali people residing in Hong Kong are primarily made up of children of ex-Gurkhas; born in Hong Kong during their parents&#x27; service with the British Army&#x27;s Brigade of Gurkhas, which was based in Hong Kong from the 1970s until the handover. Large groups of Nepali people can be found in Shek Kong and Yuen Long District off of the main bases of the British army. Many ex-Gurkhas remained in Hong Kong after the end of their service under the sponsorship of their Hong Kong-born children, who held right of abode.

Nepali of middle age or older generations in Hong Kong are predominantly found in security, while those of younger generations are predominantly found in the business industry.

Mostly the people from Kirati ethnic groups such as Rai and Limbu are the ones residing in Hong Kong and other neighbouring nations such as Singapore and Japan.

=== Nepali overseas ===
Nepali migrants abroad have suffered tremendous hardships, including some 7,500 deaths in the Middle East and Malaysia alone since the year 2000, some 3,500 in Saudi Arabia.

=== Immigration ===

According to the 2001 census, there were 116,571 foreign born citizens in Nepal; 90% of them were of Indian origin followed by Bhutan, Pakistan and China. This number does not include the refugees from Bhutan and Tibet.

==See also==
*Ethnic groups in Nepal

== References ==

== External links ==
* Nepal Encyclopedia Ethnicity Page </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="26" end="31" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q105657245" start="57" end="68" title="2021 Nepal census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="608" end="618" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="676" end="692" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="1228" end="1243" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="1327" end="1341" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="1393" end="1411" title="Net migration rate" label="Net migration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="1527" end="1535" title="literacy" label="literate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010170" start="2007" end="2016" title="Migration in Nepal" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671637" start="2989" end="2996" title="UN DESA" label="UN DESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="4240" end="4246" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4277" end="4285" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601861" start="4618" end="4625" title="Madheshi people" label="Madhesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398928" start="4630" end="4635" title="Geography of Nepal" label="Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601861" start="4867" end="4874" title="Madhesi people" label="Madhesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277626" start="4879" end="4884" title="Tharu people" label="Tharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q26707924" start="4892" end="4900" title="Tharuhat" label="Tharuhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104009" start="4905" end="4912" title="Madhesh" label="Madhesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988987" start="4917" end="4927" title="Kham Magar" label="Kham Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="4968" end="5009" title="Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)" label="Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q866013" start="5071" end="5075" title="JTMM" label="JTMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002975" start="5097" end="5113" title="Nepalese Civil War" label="Nepali Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q201327" start="5158" end="5167" title="Gyanendra of Nepal" label="Gyanendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593740" start="5601" end="5619" title="Gender inequality in Nepal" label="gender perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="6070" end="6080" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="6082" end="6105" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q645304" start="6119" end="6138" title="indigenous language" label="indigenous language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="6413" end="6419" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630408" start="6434" end="6438" title="Khas" label="Khas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38592" start="6490" end="6500" title="Devanagari" label="Devanagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="6509" end="6515" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q36109" start="6720" end="6728" title="Maithili language" label="Maithili"/>
<link wikidata="Q33268" start="6730" end="6738" title="Bhojpuri language" label="Bhojpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636001" start="6740" end="6747" title="Bajjika" label="Bajjika"/>
<link wikidata="Q29579" start="6752" end="6758" title="Awadhi language" label="Awadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133636" start="6796" end="6801" title="Terai" label="Terai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="7084" end="7095" title="Newar language" label="Nepal Bhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="7170" end="7186" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q56904" start="8160" end="8167" title="Byangsi language" label="Byangsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="8572" end="8577" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8585" end="8593" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="8601" end="8607" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429351" start="8615" end="8631" title="Kirat Mundhum" label="Kiratist/Yumaist"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="8639" end="8648" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="8744" end="8765" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="Constitution of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="11227" end="11233" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="11275" end="11296" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="11414" end="11427" title="separation of church and state" label="secular state"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="11490" end="11495" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="11509" end="11517" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="11583" end="11592" title="Syncretism" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="11625" end="11632" title="animism" label="animist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="11673" end="11679" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429351" start="11728" end="11741" title="Kirat Mundhum" label="Kirat Mundhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="11755" end="11767" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="12163" end="12193" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="12573" end="12579" title="Gurkha" label="Gurkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="12644" end="12656" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635167" start="12664" end="12682" title="Brigade of Gurkhas" label="Brigade of Gurkhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="12738" end="12746" title="Transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong" label="handover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493203" start="12794" end="12803" title="Shek Kong" label="Shek Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q871442" start="12808" end="12826" title="Yuen Long District" label="Yuen Long District"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566404" start="13004" end="13018" title="Right of abode issue, Hong Kong" label="right of abode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="13103" end="13111" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q25068" start="13222" end="13228" title="Kirati" label="Kirati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="13229" end="13242" title="ethnic groups" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q905467" start="13251" end="13254" title="Rai (ethnic group)" label="Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668355" start="13259" end="13264" title="Limbu people" label="Limbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="13290" end="13299" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="13339" end="13348" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13353" end="13358" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="13479" end="13490" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="13495" end="13503" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="13545" end="13557" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50449920" start="13816" end="13838" title="Ethnic groups in Nepal" label="Ethnic groups in Nepal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21326" wikidata="Q1155916" url="?curid=21326" title="Politics of Nepal">
<text>The politics of Nepal functions within the framework of a parliamentary republic with a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister and their cabinet, while legislative power is vested in the Parliament.

The Governing Nepali Congress and Communist Party of Nepal (UML) have been the main rivals of each other since the early 1990s, with each party defeating the other in successive elections. There are seven major political parties in the federal parliament: Nepali Congress (NC), CPN (UML), CPN (Maoist-centre), CPN (Unified Socialist), People&#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal, Loktantrik Samajwadi Party, Nepal and People&#x27;s Progressive Party. While all major parties officially espouse democratic socialism, UML, Unified Socialist and Maoist-centre are considered leftist while the Nepali Congress, Democratic Socialist Party and People&#x27;s Progressive Party are considered centrist, with most considering them center-left and some center-right. The party PSP-N is center-left to left-wing. During most of the brief periods of democratic exercise in the 1950s and 1990s, Nepali Congress held a majority in parliament. After a ten-year civil war, the Nepalese parliament voted to abolish the monarchy in June 2006, and Nepal became a federal republic on 28 May 2008. A new constitution was adopted in 2015, and in 2017 Nepal held its first general election since the end of the civil war, in which the Nepal Communist Party (a short-lived merger of the UML and Maoist-centre) won a majority at the federal level as well as in six of the seven provinces.

 while the 2018 Polity data series considers it to be a democracy. According to the 2023 V-Dem Democracy indices Nepal was the 7th most electoral democratic country in Asia.

==History ==
===Family politics===
The four noble families to be involved in the active politics of the Kingdom of Nepal before the rise of the Rana dynasty were the Shah dynasty, the Basnyat family, the Pande dynasty and the Thapa dynasty. At the end of 18th century, the Thapas and the Pandes had extreme dominance over Nepalese Darbar politics, alternatively contesting for central power with one another. Early politics in the Kingdom of Nepal was characterised by factionalism, conspiracies and murders, including two major massacres. After almost a century of power-wrangling among the Basnyat, Pande and Thapa families, the military leader Bir Narsingh Kunwar emerged on top in the aftermath of the Kot massacre, and established the Rana dynasty in 1846, which consolidated powers of the king and prime minister and would reign for another century with a policy of oppression and isolationism.

===Post 1950s===
By the 1930s, Nepali expatriates in India had started smuggling in writings on political philosophies, which gave birth to a vibrant underground political movement in the capital, birthing Nepal Praja Parishad in 1939, which was dissolved only two years later, following the execution of the four great martyrs. Around the same time, Nepalis involved in the Indian Independence Movement started organising into political parties, leading to the birth of Nepali Congress and Communist Party of Nepal. Following Indian independence, Nepali Congress was successful in overthrowing the Rana regime with support from the Indian government and cooperation from the king. While communism was still trying to find its footing, Nepali Congress enjoyed overwhelming support of the electorate. Following a brief ten-year exercise in democracy, the autocratic Panchayat system was initiated, this time by the King, who deposed the democratically elected government of Nepali Congress, imprisoned or exiled prominent leaders and issued a ban on party politics.

Many political parties and their leaders remained underground or in exile for the next 30 years of &quot;partyless&quot; politics in Nepal. BP Koirala was released from prison in 1968 and went into exile in Benaras, returning in 1976 only to immediately be put in house arrest. Although an armed insurgency launched by the major communist faction called the Jhapa movement had failed comprehensively by 1971, it formed the foundation for the dominant communist power, CPN (ML), that was officially launched in 1978. A general referendum was held in 1980, which saw the CPN ML campaign for the option of multi-party democracy, along with Nepali Congress, but the Panchayat System was declared the winner to significant controversy. The Panchayat rule saw governments led by a group of monarchy loyalists taking turns, with Surya Bahadur Thapa, Tulsi Giri and Kirti Nidhi Bista becoming prime minister three times each, among others. It introduced a number of reforms, built infrastructures and modernised the country, while significantly curtailing political freedom, imposing the Nepali language and Khas culture to the oppression of all others, and spreading Indophobic propaganda, the effects of which are experienced to the present day.

In 1990, the joint civil resistance launched by the United Left front and Nepali Congress was successful in overthrowing the Panchayat, and the country became a constitutional monarchy. The United Left Front became CPN UML. The Panchayat loyalists formed National Democratic Party, which emerged as the third major party. While Nepali Congress ran the government for most of the next ten years of democracy that followed, democracy was mostly a disappointment owing to the immature democratic culture and political infighting in the capital, as well as the civil war that followed the guerrilla insurgency launched by the Maoist Party. Following a four-year autocratic rule by King Gyanendra that failed to defeat the Maoists, a mass civil protest was launched by a coalition of the Maoists and the political parties in 2006, which forced the king to stepped down, brought the Maoists to the peace process, and established a democratic republic by 2008.
Following the political consensus to draft the new constitution of the Republic via a constituent assembly, Nepali politics saw a rise of nationalist groups and ideologies. While the political power-wrangling caused continuous instability, maintaining the established average of nine months per government, this period saw two constituent assembly elections and the rise of Madhesi nationalist parties, especially in the Eastern Terai region. By 2015, the new constitution had been promulgated and Nepal became &quot;a federal democratic republic striving towards democratic socialism&quot;. In 2017, a series of elections were held according to the new constitution, which established Nepal Communist Party (NCP) (formally united after the election) as the ruling party at the federal level as well as six of the seven provinces, Nepali Congress as the only significant opposition in federal and provincial levels, while the Madhesi coalition formed the provincial government in Province No. 2, but boasts negligible presence in the rest of the country.

== Political parties ==
The political parties in Nepal can be mainly divided into the Democratic camp and the Communist camp. Still, these parties at times form alliances with each other and among them as per the situation and demand.

=== Democratic/socialist camp ===
This camp is led by Nepali Congress, the opposition party in Nepal. Numerous parties in Nepal claim to endorse democratic ideology but few are active which are listed below.
=== Communist camp ===

Majorly, CPN(UML) and CPN(Maoist Centre) carry the communist legacy in Nepal while there are other few parties which claim to endorse communist ideology. Some of them are given below. They currently make up the ruling coalition.

==Political conditions==

===2001: Royal Massacre===

The Royal Massacre (राजदरबार हत्याकाण्ड) happened
on 1 June 2001, in which members of the royal family, King Birendra, Queen Aishwarya, Crown Prince Dipendra, Prince Nirajan, as well as many others, were killed. However, after the massacre, the Crown Prince survived for a short while in a coma.

Although the prince never regained consciousness before dying, Crown Prince Dipendra was the monarch under the law of Nepali royal succession. Two days later after his death, the late King&#x27;s surviving brother Gyanendra was proclaimed as a king.

===2002–2007: suspension of parliament and Loktantra Andolan===

On 22 May 2002 King Gyanendra suspended the Parliament, appointed a government led by himself, and enforced martial law. The King argued that civil politicians were unfit to handle the Maoist insurgency. Telephone lines were cut and several high-profile political leaders were detained. Other opposition leaders fled to India and regrouped there. A broad coalition called the Seven Party Alliance (SPA) was formed in opposition to the royal takeover, encompassing the seven parliamentary parties who held about 90% of the seats in the old, dissolved parliament.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in response to events in Nepal, set up a monitoring program in 2005 to assess and observe the human rights situation there.

On 22 November 2005, the Seven Party Alliance (SPA) of parliamentary parties and the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) agreed on a historic and unprecedented 12-point memorandum of understanding (MOU) for peace and democracy. Nepali people from various walks of life and the international community regarded the MOU as an appropriate political response to the crisis that was developing in Nepal. Against the backdrop of the historical sufferings of the Nepali people and the enormous human cost of the last ten years of violent conflict, the MOU, which proposes a peaceful transition through an elected constituent assembly, created an acceptable formula for a united movement for democracy. As per the 12-point MOU, the SPA called for a protest movement, and the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) supported it. This led to a countrywide uprising called the Loktantra Andolan that started in April 2006. All political forces including civil society and professional organisations actively galvanised the people. This resulted in massive and spontaneous demonstrations and rallies held across Nepal against King Gyanendra&#x27;s autocratic rule.

On 21 April 2006, King Gyanendra declared that &quot;power would be returned to the people&quot;. This had little effect on the people, who continued to occupy the streets of Kathmandu and other towns, openly defying the daytime curfew. Finally, King Gyanendra announced the reinstatement of the House of Representatives, thereby conceding one of the major demands of the SPA, at midnight on 24 April 2006. Following this action, the coalition of political forces decided to call off the protests.

At least 14 died during the 19 days of protests.

On 19 May 2006, the parliament assumed total legislative power and gave executive power to the Government of Nepal (previously known as His Majesty&#x27;s Government). Names of many institutions (including the army) were stripped of the &quot;royal&quot; adjective and the Raj Parishad (a council of the King&#x27;s advisers) was abolished, with his duties assigned to the Parliament itself. The activities of the King became subject to parliamentary scrutiny and the King&#x27;s properties were subjected to taxation. Moreover, Nepal was declared a secular state abrogating the previous status of a Hindu Kingdom. However, most of the changes have, as yet, not been implemented. On 19 July 2006, the prime minister, G. P. Koirala, sent a letter to the United Nations announcing the intention of the Nepali government to hold elections to a constituent assembly by April 2007.

===December 2007 to May 2008: abolition of the monarchy===
On 23 December 2007, an agreement was made for the monarchy to be abolished and the country to become a federal republic with the Prime Minister becoming head of state. The Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) became the largest party amidst a general atmosphere of fear and intimidation from all sides. A federal republic was established in May 2008, with only four members of the 601-seat Constituent Assembly voting against the change, which ended 240 years of royal rule in Nepal. The government announced a public holiday for three days, (28 – 30 May), to celebrate the country becoming a federal republic.

=== Since 2008 ===

Major parties such as the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist) (CPN UML) and the Nepali Congress agreed to write a constitution to replace the interim constitution within 2 years.

The Maoists, as the largest party of the country, took power right after the elections and named Pushpa Kamal Dahal (Prachanda) as the prime minister of Nepal. CPN UML also joined this government, but the Nepali Congress took the part of the main opposition party. Prachanda soon fell into a dispute with the then army chief Rookmanda Katwal and decided to sack him. But the President Ram Baran Yadav, as the supreme head of
military power in the country, revoked this decision and gave the army chief additional time in office. An angry Prachanda and his party quit the government, majorly citing this reason and decided to operate as the main opposition to the government headed by CPN UML and its co-partner Nepali Congress afterward. Madhav Kumar Nepal was named the Prime Minister.

The Maoists demanded civilian supremacy over the army.

The Maoists forced closures – commonly known as &quot;bandhs&quot; – in the country, and also declared autonomous states for almost all the ethnic groups in Nepal.

In May 2012 the constitutional assembly was dissolved and another election to select the new constitutional assembly members were declared by Dr. Baburam Bhattarai.

=== Madhes Movement (2007–2016) ===
The Madhes Movement (Nepali: मधेस अान्दोलन) is a political movement launched by various political parties, especially those based in Madhes, for equal rights, dignity and identity of Madhesis and Tharus, Muslims and Janjati groups in Nepal. In nearly a decade, Nepal witnessed three Madhes Movements - the first Madhes Movement erupted in 2007, the second Madhes Movement in 2008 and the third Madhes Movement in 2015. About the origin of the first Madhes Movement, Journalist Amarendra Yadav writes in The Rising Nepal &quot;When the then seven-party alliance of the mainstream political parties and the CPN-Maoist jointly announced the Interim Constitution in 2007, it totally ignored the concept of federalism, the most desired political agenda of Madhesis and other marginalised communities. A day after the promulgation of the interim statute, a group of Madhesi activists under the Upendra Yadav-led Madhesi Janaadhikar Forum-Nepal (then a socio-intellectual NGO) burnt copies of the interim constitution at Maitighar Mandala, Kathmandu.&quot; This triggered the Madhes movement I.

The second Madhes Movement took place in 2008, jointly launched by Madhesi Janaadhikar Forum-Nepal, Terai Madhes Loktantrik Party and Sadbhawana Party led by Rajendra Mahato with three key agenda: federalism, proportional representation and population-based election constituency, which were later ensured in the Interim Constitution of Nepal 2008.

However, The Constitution of Nepal 2015 backtracked from those issues, that were already ensured by the Interim Constitution of Nepal 2008. Supreme Court of Nepal Advocate Dipendra Jha writes in The Kathmandu Post: &quot;many other aspects of the new constitution are more regressive than the Interim Constitution of Nepal 2007. Out of all its deficiencies, the most notable one concerns the issue proportional representation or inclusion in all organs of the state.&quot; This triggered the third Madhes Movement by Madhesis in Nepal. Although the first amendment to the constitution was done, the resistance over the document by Madhesi and Tharus in Nepal still continues.

=== From 2017 to 2019 ===

In June 2017, Nepali Congress leader Sher Bahadur Deuba was elected the 40th Prime Minister of Nepal, succeeding prime minister and chairman of CPN (Maoist Centre) Pushpa Kamal Dahal. Deuba had been previously prime minister from 1995 to 1997, from 2001 to 2002, and from 2004 to 2005.

In November 2017, Nepal had its first general election since the civil war ended and the monarchy was abolished. The main alternatives were centrist Nepali Congress Party and the alliance of former Maoist rebels and the Communist UML party. The alliance of communists won the election, and UML leader Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli was sworn in February 2018 as the new prime minister. He had previously been prime minister since 2015 until 2016.

=== 2020: political crisis ===

Since the inception of NCP, the struggle for power between the two leaders: Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli and Pushpa Kamal Dahal started. The internal crisis led to dissolution of parliament (both house of representative and lower house of parliament) by Khadga Prasad Oli twice within six months. It was approved by the president but Supreme court denied the legality of such decision by Oli. After the supreme court&#x27;s historic decision, both the parliaments were reinstated.

After facing the vote for confidence in parliament, Oli lost the vote for confidence. As per the 72(6) of Constitution of Nepal, the opposition was given the opportunity to form a new government by President Bidya Devi Bhandari. The opposition and they could not construct the new government as they lacked support of one faction from Janata Samajbadi Party. As a result, the party got divide and Loktantrik Samajwadi Party, Nepal was formed after nearly a month.

As a result, Khadga Prasad Oli was sworn in again as the prime minister of Nepal. He dissolved the parliament on 22 May 2021 for second time rather than taking vote of confidence. This time as well, it was approved by president unanimously against the signatures submitted claiming majority to NC. Still, 146 of the total 275 sitting members of HOR filed a case in supreme court against the decision and approval of president. Previously, they had submitted majority signatures to president asking to appoint Sher Bahadur Deuba as the next prime minister of Nepal.

On 4 June 2021, a major cabinet re-shuffle took place when so called Madhesbani leader Rajendra Mahato led faction of PSP-N joined the government with eight cabinet ministers and two state ministers while other five from CPN (UML). Bishnu Prasad Paudel, Raghubir Mahasheth and Rajendra Mahato were made Deputy Prime-minister. While the previous expansion was yet to be clarified by the Supreme Court, Oli made yet another re-shuffle and included seven ministers from UML and one from PSP-N. On 22 June, Supreme Court delivered a fresh blow to embattled Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli 20 removing recently appointed ministers. It revealed a care-taker prime-minister cannot make such change as per article 77(3) of Constitution of Nepal.  By the end, only five ministers are present in Council of ministers including sitting PM Oli while deputy prime minister post of Bishnu Prasad Paudel was removed.

=== Present (2021–) ===

On 12 July 2021, the Supreme Court stated the decision to dissolve parliament was unlawful. Similarly, it ordered the appointment Deuba as the next Prime Minister of Nepal citing article 76(5) of the Constitution of Nepal within 28 hours. It stated that the decision made by the president was against the norms of the constitution. This was celebrated by the then opposition alliance led by the Nepali Congress including allies CPN (Maoist-Centre) and the Janata Samajbadi Party. On 13 July 2021, President Bidya Devi Bhandari appointed Sher Bahadur Deuba as the Prime Minister without including any article of Constitution and stating as per the order of Court. This created cold dispute and people alleged President Bhandari of forgetting her limits and being tilted to ex-PM Oli. After Deuba declined to take the oath as per the appointment letter, the letter was changed and stated that Deuba was made PM in accordance with article 76(5), marking Deuba&#x27;s fifth term as PM. On 13 July 2021, Sher Bahadur Deuba was sworn in as Nepal’s prime minister for fifth time.

In December 2022, former Maoist guerilla chief, Pushpa Kamal Dahal aka Prachanda, became the new prime minister after the 2022 Nepalese general election. In March 2023, Ram Chandra Paudel of Nepali Congress was elected as Nepal’s third president to succeed Bidya Devi Bhandari.

On 15 July 2024, K. P. Sharma Oli was sworn in as Nepali prime minister for fourth time. New coalition was formed between Nepali Congress, led by Sher Bahadur Deuba, and UML, led by Oli. The party leaders will take turns as prime ministers for 18 months each until the next general elections in 2027.

==Legislative branch==

===Present===
In 2022, the Parliament (&quot;Sansad&quot;) has two chambers. The House of Representatives (&quot;Pratinidhi Sabha&quot;) has 275 members elected for five-year term in single-seat constituencies. The National Council (&quot;Rashtriya Sabha&quot;) has 59 members, 8 from each state and the remaining 3 from the private concern of the government.

===From the 2006 democratic movement to the Constituent Assembly===
After the victory of the democratic movement in the spring of 2006, a unicameral interim legislature replaced the previous parliament. The new body consists both of members of the old parliament as well as nominated members. As of December 2007, the legislature had the following composition.

===The first elections after becoming a Republic: the Constituent Assembly===
In May 2008 the elections for the Constituent Assembly saw the Communist Party of Nepal as the largest party in the Constituent Assembly, which will have a term of two years.

==Judicial branch==
The judiciary is composed of the Supreme Court (सर्बोच्च अदालत), Appellate courts, and various District courts. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court was appointed by the monarch on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council; the other judges were appointed by the monarch on the recommendation of the Judicial Council.

Nepal&#x27;s judiciary is legally separate from the executive and legislative and has increasingly shown the will to be independent of political influence. The judiciary has the right of judicial review under the constitution.

== Different levels of governments ==

=== Federal government ===

The executive is headed by prime minister while president remains head of state. Nepal has provision for executive prime minister per the present Constitution of Nepal. The role of president is largely ceremonial as the functioning of the government is managed entirely by the prime minister who is appointed by the Parliament.

=== Provincial government ===

As per the Constitution of Nepal, there are 7 provinces in Nepal with their own provincial government and assemblies.

=== Municipal/Local government ===

as per the Constitution of Nepal, there are 753 local levels, Rual municipalities and municipalities which are referred to as the village executive and municipal executive respectively. The district assembly is governed by the District Coordination Committee.

==International organisation participation of Nepal==
AsDB, MINA, CCC, Colombo Plan, ESCAP, FAO, Group of 77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, International Development Association, IFAD, International Finance Corporation, IFRCS, International Labour Organization, International Monetary Fund, International Maritime Organization, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, International Organization for Standardization (correspondent), ITU, MONUC, Non-Aligned Movement, OPCW, SAARC, United Nations, UNCTAD, UNDP, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNTAET, UPU, World Federation of Trade Unions, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO CPC Nepal (applicant)

==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 

==Further reading==
* Devendra, Jonathan (2013). &quot;Massacre at the Palace: The Doomed Royal Dynasty of Nepal&quot;. New York: Hyperion. .

==External links==
* The Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2063 (2007)
* The Constitution of The Kingdom of Nepal, 2047 (1990) (terminated by the Interim Constitution)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1155916" start="4" end="21" title="Politics of Nepal" label="politics of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="72" end="80" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="88" end="106" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="108" end="123" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="184" end="201" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896143" start="219" end="229" title="Federal Parliament of Nepal" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="246" end="261" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="266" end="296" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (UML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="488" end="508" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress (NC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="510" end="519" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="CPN (UML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="521" end="540" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist-centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108140275" start="542" end="565" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Socialist)" label="CPN (Unified Socialist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92259330" start="567" end="603" title="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal (2020)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108140300" start="605" end="638" title="Loktantrik Samajwadi Party, Nepal" label="Loktantrik Samajwadi Party, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108321456" start="643" end="674" title="People&amp;#x27;s Progressive Party (Nepal)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002975" start="1171" end="1180" title="Nepalese Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="1269" end="1285" title="federal republic" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="1304" end="1320" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776360" start="1369" end="1391" title="2017 Nepalese general election" label="first general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700514" start="1437" end="1458" title="Nepal Communist Party" label="Nepal Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q290494" start="1606" end="1624" title="Polity data series" label="Polity data series"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="1679" end="1702" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q116754464" start="1736" end="1762" title="democracy in Asia" label="democratic country in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313700" start="1909" end="1921" title="Rana dynasty" label="Rana dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274200" start="1931" end="1943" title="Shah dynasty" label="Shah dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867809" start="1949" end="1963" title="Basnyat family" label="Basnyat family"/>
<link wikidata="Q29996653" start="1969" end="1982" title="Pande dynasty" label="Pande dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29912873" start="1991" end="2004" title="Thapa dynasty" label="Thapa dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078602" start="2196" end="2212" title="Kingdom of Nepal" label="Kingdom of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355896" start="2412" end="2431" title="Jung Bahadur Rana" label="Bir Narsingh Kunwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138461" start="2471" end="2483" title="Kot massacre" label="Kot massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313700" start="2505" end="2517" title="Rana dynasty" label="Rana dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60107" start="2556" end="2564" title="King of Nepal" label="the king"/>
<link wikidata="Q19679769" start="2873" end="2893" title="Nepal Praja Parishad" label="Nepal Praja Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11805893" start="2976" end="2994" title="Martyrs of Nepal" label="four great martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="3042" end="3070" title="Indian independence movement" label="Indian Independence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="3138" end="3153" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q617165" start="3158" end="3182" title="Communist Party of Nepal" label="Communist Party of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q381928" start="3339" end="3347" title="Tribhuvan of Nepal" label="the king"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130299" start="3532" end="3548" title="Panchayat (Nepal)" label="Panchayat system"/>
<link wikidata="Q313110" start="3577" end="3585" title="Mahendra of Nepal" label="the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744730" start="4201" end="4209" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (1978)" label="CPN (ML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q983444" start="4555" end="4574" title="Surya Bahadur Thapa" label="Surya Bahadur Thapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510568" start="4576" end="4586" title="Tulsi Giri" label="Tulsi Giri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267879" start="4591" end="4608" title="Kirti Nidhi Bista" label="Kirti Nidhi Bista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589523" start="5026" end="5043" title="United Left Front (Nepal, 1990)" label="United Left front"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="5189" end="5196" title="CPN UML" label="CPN UML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632719" start="5229" end="5254" title="Rastriya Prajatantra Party" label="National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154424" start="5592" end="5608" title="CPN Maoist" label="the Maoist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q201327" start="5651" end="5665" title="King Gyanendra" label="King Gyanendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700514" start="6614" end="6641" title="Nepal Communist Party (NCP)" label="Nepal Communist Party (NCP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277029" start="7012" end="7038" title="List of political parties in Nepal" label="political parties in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="7274" end="7289" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="7461" end="7469" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="CPN(UML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="7474" end="7492" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN(Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162306" start="7845" end="7853" title="Birendra of Nepal" label="Birendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134162" start="7861" end="7870" title="Aishwarya of Nepal" label="Aishwarya"/>
<link wikidata="Q311235" start="7885" end="7893" title="Dipendra of Nepal" label="Dipendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244182" start="7902" end="7909" title="Nirajan" label="Nirajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201327" start="8247" end="8256" title="Gyanendra" label="Gyanendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q201327" start="8364" end="8378" title="Gyanendra of Nepal" label="King Gyanendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="8457" end="8468" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="8916" end="8979" title="OHCHR" label="Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775917" start="9131" end="9151" title="Seven Party Alliance" label="Seven Party Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996861" start="9965" end="9982" title="Loktantra Andolan" label="Loktantra Andolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220991" start="11519" end="11532" title="Girija Prasad Koirala" label="G. P. Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="11851" end="11859" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="11893" end="11906" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="12395" end="12436" title="Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)" label="Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="12438" end="12489" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="12508" end="12523" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="12725" end="12734" title="Prachanda" label="Prachanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="12983" end="12992" title="President (government title)" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q57441" start="12993" end="13008" title="Ram Baran Yadav" label="Ram Baran Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="13346" end="13364" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185046" start="13417" end="13449" title="Civilian control of the military" label="civilian supremacy over the army"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727415" start="13823" end="13838" title="Madhes Movement" label="Madhes Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="13840" end="13846" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="13868" end="13886" title="political movement" label="political movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104009" start="13952" end="13958" title="Madhesh" label="Madhes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601861" start="14002" end="14010" title="Madhesi people" label="Madhesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277626" start="14015" end="14021" title="Tharu people" label="Tharus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="14023" end="14029" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="14053" end="14058" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17057163" start="14322" end="14338" title="The Rising Nepal" label="The Rising Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109312" start="14707" end="14720" title="Upendra Yadav" label="Upendra Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782923" start="14725" end="14756" title="Madheshi Jana Adhikar Forum, Nepal" label="Madhesi Janaadhikar Forum-Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782923" start="14975" end="15006" title="Madheshi Jana Adhikar Forum, Nepal" label="Madhesi Janaadhikar Forum-Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110794362" start="15008" end="15037" title="Terai Madhesh Loktantrik Party (2007)" label="Terai Madhes Loktantrik Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366312" start="15042" end="15058" title="Sadbhavana Party" label="Sadbhawana Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417978" start="15066" end="15081" title="Rajendra Mahato" label="Rajendra Mahato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="15267" end="15297" title="Constitution of Nepal 2015" label="The Constitution of Nepal 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="15370" end="15391" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="Constitution of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644951" start="15398" end="15420" title="Supreme Court of Nepal" label="Supreme Court of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q50345333" start="15430" end="15442" title="Dipendra Jha" label="Dipendra Jha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521460" start="15457" end="15472" title="The Kathmandu Post" label="Kathmandu Post:"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="15976" end="15991" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="15999" end="16017" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="16039" end="16062" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="Prime Minister of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="16106" end="16125" title="CPN (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="16126" end="16144" title="Pushpa Kamal Dahal" label="Pushpa Kamal Dahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776360" start="16295" end="16303" title="2017 Nepalese general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="16479" end="16482" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="UML"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="16550" end="16574" title="Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli" label="Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700514" start="16746" end="16749" title="Nepal Communist Party" label="NCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="16799" end="16823" title="KP Sharma Oli" label="Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="16828" end="16846" title="Pushpa Kamal Dahal" label="Pushpa Kamal Dahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="16973" end="16990" title="KP Sharma Oli" label="Khadga Prasad Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644951" start="17053" end="17066" title="Supreme Court of Nepal" label="Supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193958" start="17409" end="17428" title="Bidya Devi Bhandari" label="Bidya Devi Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q92259330" start="17536" end="17558" title="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal (2020)" label="Janata Samajbadi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q108140300" start="17598" end="17631" title="Loktantrik Samajwadi Party, Nepal" label="Loktantrik Samajwadi Party, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="17960" end="17962" title="Nepali Congress" label="NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915308" start="18011" end="18014" title="House of Representatives (Nepal)" label="HOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="18175" end="18193" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q92259330" start="18350" end="18355" title="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal (2020)" label="PSP-N"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="18453" end="18462" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="CPN (UML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="19305" end="19328" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="Prime Minister of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="19357" end="19378" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="Constitution of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="19585" end="19604" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist-Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126164106" start="19613" end="19635" title="Janata Samajbadi Party" label="Janata Samajbadi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193958" start="19664" end="19683" title="Bidya Devi Bhandari" label="Bidya Devi Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="19694" end="19712" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="19929" end="19938" title="KP Sharma Oli" label="ex-PM Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="20279" end="20297" title="Pushpa Kamal Dahal" label="Pushpa Kamal Dahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="20302" end="20311" title="Prachanda" label="Prachanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q84080733" start="20353" end="20383" title="2022 Nepalese general election" label="2022 Nepalese general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183124" start="20400" end="20418" title="Ram Chandra Poudel" label="Ram Chandra Paudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026062" start="20442" end="20449" title="2023 Nepalese presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="20527" end="20543" title="K. P. Sharma Oli" label="K. P. Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="20656" end="20674" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896143" start="20863" end="20873" title="Parliament of Nepal" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="20903" end="20911" title="bicameralism" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="21031" end="21045" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584155" start="21346" end="21365" title="interim legislature of Nepal" label="interim legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534989" start="21653" end="21691" title="2008 Nepalese Constituent Assembly election" label="elections for the Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="21700" end="21724" title="Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)" label="Communist Party of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274219" start="21753" end="21773" title="1st Nepalese Constituent Assembly" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644951" start="21866" end="21896" title="Supreme Court of Nepal" label="Supreme Court (सर्बोच्च अदालत)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="22827" end="22848" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="Constitution of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="22982" end="23003" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="Constitution of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130323024" start="23198" end="23229" title="District Coordination Committee" label="District Coordination Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="23286" end="23290" title="AsDB" label="AsDB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23292" end="23296" title="Stichting Mina" label="MINA"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="23298" end="23301" title="Customs Cooperation Council" label="CCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077459" start="23303" end="23315" title="Colombo Plan" label="Colombo Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="23317" end="23322" title="ESCAP" label="ESCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="23324" end="23327" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="23329" end="23340" title="Group of 77" label="Group of 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="23342" end="23346" title="IBRD" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="23348" end="23352" title="ICAO" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="23354" end="23359" title="ICFTU" label="ICFTU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23361" end="23365" title="Institute of Clinical Research Management" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="23367" end="23404" title="International Development Association" label="International Development Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="23406" end="23410" title="IFAD" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="23412" end="23445" title="International Finance Corporation" label="International Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="23447" end="23452" title="IFRCS" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="23454" end="23487" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="23489" end="23516" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="23518" end="23553" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="23555" end="23563" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="23565" end="23573" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="23575" end="23578" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="23580" end="23583" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="23585" end="23631" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="23649" end="23652" title="ITU" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="23654" end="23659" title="MONUC" label="MONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="23661" end="23681" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="23683" end="23687" title="OPCW" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="23689" end="23694" title="SAARC" label="SAARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="23696" end="23710" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="23712" end="23718" title="UNCTAD" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="23720" end="23724" title="UNDP" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="23726" end="23732" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="23734" end="23739" title="UNIDO" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="23741" end="23747" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q487377" start="23749" end="23755" title="UNMIBH" label="UNMIBH"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="23757" end="23762" title="UNMIK" label="UNMIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618168" start="23764" end="23769" title="UNMOP" label="UNMOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785413" start="23771" end="23776" title="UNMOT" label="UNMOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q332358" start="23778" end="23784" title="UNTAET" label="UNTAET"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="23786" end="23789" title="UPU" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="23791" end="23823" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="World Federation of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="23825" end="23828" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="23830" end="23834" title="WIPO" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="23836" end="23839" title="WMO" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="23841" end="23845" title="WToO" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="23847" end="23851" title="WTrO" label="WTrO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21327" wikidata="Q660099" url="?curid=21327" title="Economy of Nepal">
<text>The economy of Nepal is a developing category and is largely dependent on agriculture and remittances. Until the mid-20th century Nepal was an isolated pre-industrial society, which entered the modern era in 1951 without schools, hospitals, roads, telecommunications, electric power, industry, or civil service. The country has, however, made progress toward sustainable economic growth since the 1950s. The country was opened to economic liberalization, leading to economic growth and improvement in living standards when compared to the past. The biggest challenges faced by the country in achieving higher economic development are the frequent changes in political leadership, as well as corruption.

Nepal has used a series of five-year plans in an attempt to make progress in economic development. It completed its ninth economic development plan in 2002; its currency has been made convertible, and 17 state enterprises have been privatised. Foreign aid to Nepal accounts for more than half of the development budget. Government priorities over the years have been result in the development of transportation and communication facilities, agriculture, and industry. Since 1975, improved government administration and rural development efforts have been emphasised.

Agriculture remains Nepal&#x27;s principal economic activity, employing about 65% of the population and providing 31.7% of GDP. Only about 20% of the total area is cultivable; another 40.7% is forested (i.e., covered by shrubs, pastureland and forest); most of the rest is mountainous. Fruits and vegetables (apples, pears, tomatoes, various salad greens, peach, nectarine, potatoes), as well as rice and wheat are the main food crops. The lowland Terai region produces an agricultural surplus, part of which supplies the food-deficient hill areas.

GDP is heavily dependent on remittances (9.1%) of foreign workers. Subsequently, economic development in social services and infrastructure in Nepal has not made dramatic progress. A countrywide primary education system is under development, and Tribhuvan University has several campuses under it . Although eradication efforts continue, malaria had been controlled in the fertile but previously uninhabitable Terai region in the south. Kathmandu is linked to India and nearby hill regions by road and an expanding highway network. The capital was almost out of fuel and supplies, due to a crippling general strike in southern Nepal on 17 February 2008.

Major towns are connected to the capital by telephone and domestic air services. The export-oriented carpet and garment industries like pasmina have grown rapidly in recent years. Together, they account for approximately 70% of the country&#x27;s merchandise exports. The Cost of Living Index in Nepal is comparatively lower than many countries but not the least. The quality of life has declined to a much less desirous value in recent years. In the 2021 Global Hunger Index, Nepal ranks 76th out of the 116 countries with sufficient data to calculate 2021 GHI scores. With a score of 19.1, Nepal has a level of hunger that is moderate. Nepal has the worst road infrastructure in Asia.

==Foreign investments and taxation==
Huge numbers of Small Foreign Investments come to Nepal via the Non Resident Nepali, who are investing in many sectors. Nepal has a huge potential for hydroelectricity. Accordingly, a large number of foreign companies are willing to invest in Nepal, but political instability has stopped the process.
Nepal has entered into agreements for avoidance of double taxation (all in credit method) with 10 countries (PSRD) since 2000. Similarly, it has Investment protection agreements with 5 countries (PSRD) since 1983. In 2014, Nepal restricted the Foreign aid by setting a minimum limit for foreign grants, soft and commercial loans from its development partners.

==Imports and exports==
Nepal&#x27;s merchandise trade balance has improved somewhat since 2000 with the growth of the carpet and garment industries. In the fiscal year 2000–2001, exports posted a greater increase (14%) than imports (4.5%), helping bring the trade deficit down by 4% from the previous year to $749 million. Recently, the European Union has become the largest buyer of ready-made garments; fruits and vegetables (mostly apples, pears, tomatoes, various salads, peach, nectarine, potatoes, rice) from Nepal. Exports to the EU accounted for 46.13 percent of the country&#x27;s garment exports.

The annual monsoon rain strongly influences economic growth. From 1996 to 1999, real GDP growth averaged less than 4%. The growth rate recovered in 1999, rising to 6% before slipping slightly in 2001 to 5.5%.

Strong export performance, including earnings from tourism, and external aid have helped improve the overall balance of payments and increase international reserves. Nepal receives substantial amounts of external assistance from the United Kingdom, the United States, Japan, Germany, and the Nordic countries.

Several multilateral organisations such as the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the UN Development Programme also provide assistance. In June 1998, Nepal submitted its memorandum on a foreign trade regime to the World Trade Organization and in May 2000 began direct negotiations on its accession.

==Resources==

Progress has been made in exploiting Nepal&#x27;s natural resources, tourism, and hydroelectricity. With eight of the world&#x27;s 10 highest mountain peaks, including Mount Everest at 8,848.86 m. In the early 1990s, one large public sector project and a number of private projects were planned; some have been completed. The most significant private sector financed hydroelectric projects currently in operation are the Khimti Khola (60 MW) and the Bhote Koshi Project (36 MW). The project is still undergoing and has dependency on China, India and Japan to take the further steps.

Nepal has 83,000 MW of theoretical and 42,133 MW of technically/financially viable hydroelectric potential, however the total installed capacity, at present, is 2500 MW and increasing.

The environmental impact of Nepal&#x27;s hydroelectric Own calendar (Bikram Sambat) New year in mid- April projects has been limited by the fact that most are &quot;run-of-the-river&quot; with only one storage project undertaken to date. The largest hydroelectric plant under consideration is the West Seti Dam (750 MW) storage project dedicated to exports to be built by the private sector. Negotiations with India for a power purchase agreement have been underway for several years, but agreement on pricing and financing remains a problem. Currently demand for electricity is increasing at 8-10% a year whereas Nepal&#x27;s option to have agreement with India will make this fulfilment against demand. As of June 2022 surplus electricity up to 364 MWp by Nepal is exported to India.

Population pressure on natural resources is increasing. Over-population is already straining the &quot;carrying capacity&quot; of the middle hill areas, particularly the Kathmandu Valley, resulting in the depletion of forest cover for crops, fuel, and fodder and contributing to erosion and flooding. Although steep mountain terrain makes exploitation difficult, mineral surveys have found small deposits of limestone, magnesite, zinc, copper, iron, mica, lead, and cobalt. Coal mining is also done with 11522 tones produced in 2018 alone.

The development of hydroelectric power projects also cause some tension with local indigenous groups, recently empowered by Nepal&#x27;s ratification of ILO Convention 169.

==Macro-economic trend==

This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Nepal at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund and EconStats with figures in millions of Nepali Rupees.

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2024.


==Statistics==

GDP: purchasing power parity - $84.37 Billion (2018 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 21.77% (2017)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity (current international $) - $2700 (2017 est.)
GDP - composition by sector:
&quot;agriculture:&quot; 17%
&quot;industry:&quot; 13.5%
&quot;services:&quot; 60.5% (2017 est.)
&quot;tourism:&quot; 9%

Population below poverty line: 25.6% (2017/2018)&lt;ref name=&quot;2017/2018 economic survey, Nepal ministry of finance&quot;&gt;https://mof.gov.np/uploads/document/file/for%20web_Economic%20Survey%202075%20Full%20Final%20for%20WEB%20_20180914091500.pdf &lt;/ref&gt;

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
&quot;lowest 10%:&quot; 3.2%
&quot;highest 10%:&quot; 29.8% (1995–96)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.5% (2017)

Labour force: 4 million (2016 est.) 

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 19%, services 69%, industry 12% (2014 est.)

Unemployment rate: 1.47% (2017 est.)

Budget:
&quot;revenues:&quot; $5.954 billion
&quot;expenditures:&quot; $5.974 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (2017 est.)

Industries:
tourism, carpet, textile; small rice, jute, sugar, and oilseed mills; cigarette; cement and brick production

Industrial production growth rate: 10.9% (2017 est.):

Electricity - production: 41,083 GWh (2017)

Electricity - production by source:
&quot;fossil fuel:&quot; 7.5%
&quot;hydro:&quot; 91.5%
&quot;nuclear:&quot; 0.3%
&quot;other:&quot; 0.7% (2001)

Available energy:6957.73 GWh (2017)
NEA Hydro:2290.78 GWh (2014)
NEA Thermal:9.56 GWh (2014)
purchase (total):2331.17 GWh (2014)
India (purchase):2175.04 GWh (2017)
Nepal (IPP):1258.94 GWh (2014)

Electricity - consumption: 4,776.53 GWh (2017)

Electricity - exports: 856 GWh (2001)
Electricity - imports: 12 GWh (2001)

Oil - production: (2001 est.)

Oil - consumption: 2001

Agriculture - products:
Fruits and vegetables, mostly: apples, pears, tomatoes, peaches, nectarines, potatoes, rice, maize, wheat, sugarcane, root crops, milk, and buffalo meat.

Exports: $1.29 billion f.o.b., but does not include unrecorded border trade with India (2020 est.)

Exports - commodities: carpets, clothing, leather goods, jute goods, grain

Exports - partners: India 56.6%, US 11.5%, Turkey 9.2% (2016 est.)

Imports: $1.6 billion f.o.b. (2021 est.)

Imports - commodities: gold, machinery and equipment, petroleum products, electrical goods, medicine

Imports - partners: India 70.1%, China 10.3%, UAE 2.6%, Singapore 2.1%, Saudi Arabia 1.2%. (2016 est.)

Debt - external: $9.1 billion (2022 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $2 billion (FY 2019/20)

Currency: 1 Nepali rupee (NPR) = 100 paisa

Fiscal year: 16 July - 15 July

==See also==

*Special Economic Zones (Nepal)
*Mineral resources of Nepal

==References==


==External links==
*Global Economic Prospects: Growth Prospects for South Asia The World Bank, 13 December 2006
*World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Nepal
*Nepal Budget Summary &amp; formulation process</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q660099" start="4" end="20" title="Economy of Nepal" label="economy of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="74" end="85" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="90" end="100" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="130" end="135" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="248" end="266" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="359" end="386" title="sustainable economic growth" label="sustainable economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="430" end="453" title="economic liberalization" label="economic liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19679869" start="691" end="701" title="Corruption in Nepal" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455777" start="721" end="746" title="Five-year plans of Nepal" label="series of five-year plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468350" start="948" end="968" title="Foreign aid to Nepal" label="Foreign aid to Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1272" end="1283" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1395" end="1398" title="gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133636" start="1720" end="1725" title="Terai" label="Terai"/>
<link wikidata="Q588239" start="2068" end="2088" title="Tribhuvan University" label="Tribhuvan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="2160" end="2167" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="2259" end="2268" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2282" end="2287" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408351" start="2749" end="2769" title="Cost of Living Index" label="Cost of Living Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049107" start="3266" end="3285" title="Non Resident Nepali" label="Non Resident Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060880" start="3648" end="3669" title="Investment protection" label="Investment protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="3747" end="3758" title="Foreign aid" label="Foreign aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="4123" end="4136" title="trade deficit" label="trade deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4202" end="4216" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4916" end="4930" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4936" end="4949" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4951" end="4956" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4958" end="4965" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="4975" end="4991" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="5041" end="5051" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="5057" end="5079" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="5089" end="5113" title="UN Development Programme" label="UN Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="5217" end="5241" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="5387" end="5394" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="5400" end="5416" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="5486" end="5499" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5739" end="5751" title="Khimti Khola" label="Khimti Khola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902058" start="5768" end="5787" title="Bhote Koshi Project" label="Bhote Koshi Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411996" start="6253" end="6269" title="Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity" label="run-of-the-river"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986465" start="6385" end="6398" title="West Seti Dam" label="West Seti Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585371" start="6510" end="6534" title="power purchase agreement" label="power purchase agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="7238" end="7245" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="7283" end="7292" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q425450" start="7294" end="7303" title="magnesite" label="magnesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="7305" end="7309" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="7311" end="7317" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="7319" end="7323" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="7325" end="7329" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="7331" end="7335" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="7341" end="7347" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324406" start="7349" end="7360" title="Coal mining in Nepal" label="Coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q331590" start="7569" end="7587" title="ILO 169" label="ILO Convention 169"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="9009" end="9013" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="9015" end="9020" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="9026" end="9033" title="oilseed" label="oilseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="9041" end="9050" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="9052" end="9058" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="9762" end="9767" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="9770" end="9774" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="9777" end="9785" title="tomatoes" label="tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="9787" end="9792" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="9796" end="9805" title="nectarine" label="nectarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="9808" end="9814" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="9818" end="9822" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="9824" end="9829" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="9831" end="9836" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="9838" end="9847" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q20136" start="9849" end="9859" title="root crops" label="root crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="9861" end="9865" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808610" start="9871" end="9883" title="buffalo meat" label="buffalo meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9967" end="9972" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q163446" start="10009" end="10015" title="carpet" label="carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="10028" end="10035" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="10043" end="10047" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="10055" end="10060" title="cereal" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="10082" end="10087" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10095" end="10097" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="10105" end="10111" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="10195" end="10199" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="10226" end="10235" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="10320" end="10323" title="United Arab Emirates" label="UAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="10330" end="10339" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="10346" end="10358" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178843" start="10491" end="10496" title="rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q110245417" start="10563" end="10593" title="Special Economic Zones (Nepal)" label="Special Economic Zones (Nepal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105759913" start="10595" end="10621" title="Mineral resources of Nepal" label="Mineral resources of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="10719" end="10733" title="The World Bank" label="The World Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21328" wikidata="Q7695992" url="?curid=21328" title="Telecommunications in Nepal">
<text>[[Nepal]]&#x27;s telecommunication network has increased over the years significantly, with the number of telephone users (both fixed and mobile phone) reaching 40,789,198 as of 14 May 2019.

Nepal Telecommunications Authority (NTA) is the regulatory body of telecommunications in the country. According to the latest figures, eight companies have been licensed to operate voice-based telephony services, out of which five are heavily invested by foreign companies. The investment market of telecom is a subject of interest for many foreign companies and NTA itself as it has to prepare the regulations on hand.

According to the latest Management Information system (MIS) report of the Nepal Telecommunications Authority (NTA), 97.65 percent of 26.49 million people in the country have access to telephone service. The report includes data of up to mid-December 2014. Telephone penetration increased by 12.88 percentage points in one year. It stood at 84.77 percent in mid-December 2013.

==History==

===The beginning===

In Nepal, operating any form of telecommunications service dates back to 1970. However, telecom service was formally provided mainly after the establishment of MOHAN AKASHWANI in B.S. 2005. Later as per the plan formulated in the First National Five-year plan (2012-2017 BS), Telecommunication Department was established in B.S. 2016. In order to modernize the telecommunications services and expand the services, during the third five-year plan (2026 BS), Telecommunication Department was converted into Telecommunications Development Board in B.S. 2026.

After enacting the Communications Corporation Act 2028, it was formally established as a fully owned Government Corporation called Nepal Telecommunications Corporation in B.S. 2032 to provide telecommunications services to Nepalese People. After serving the nation for 29 years with great pride and a sense of accomplishment, Nepal Telecommunication Corporation was transformed into Nepal Doorsanchar Company Limited (NDCL) from Baisakh 1, 2061. NDCL is a company registered under the Companies Act 2053 with an 85% government share. However, the company is known to the general public by Nepal Telecom (NT) as a registered trademark.

===Further developments and milestones===

Some milestones:

* 2023 CDMA Shutdown in Nepal
* 2022 eSIM launched in Nepal for Ntc and Ncell
* 2022 VoLTE launched in Ncell
* 2021 VoLTE launched in Ntc
* 2020 Ntc 4G coverage] reaches 77 districts
* 2017 TDM phones to IP migration started in Nepal
* 2017 Cellular 4G LTE starts in Nepal 
* 2011 Launching of GSM 3G Data Only Service
* 2011 Launching of EasyPhone SIP PPP Service
* 2010 Launching of EasyPhone SIP EasyCall Service
* 2010 Soft Launch of EasyPhone IP Call Service
* 2010 EVDO Service started
* 2009 Postpaid CDMA Mobile Service started
* 2009 SMS Service from GSM to CDMA mobile started
* 2009 IVR 1606 Service extended outside Kathmandu Valley
* 2009 IVR 198 Service extended outside KTM valley
* 2008 PSTN VMS - Notice Board Service Launched
* 2008 IVR 198 service extended for ADSL Fault Complaint Registration
* 2008 IVR Service 1607 started for GSM and CDMA PUK Enquiry
* 2008 Broadband ADSL Service launched
* 2007 GPRS, 3G and CRBT Services introduced in GSM Mobile
* 2007 VOIP Call Complaint Registration started via 188 IVR Service
* 2007 PSTN Bill Enquiry Service started via 1606 IVR Service
* 2007 Expansion of Internet Bandwidth via Optical link between Nepal &amp; India
* 2007 National Roaming for CDMA Mobile (Sky Phone) started
* 2006 CDMA Limited Servies in Kathmandu Valley
* 2006 MCC (198) Complaint Registration via IVR in Kathmandu Valley
* 2006 Home Country Direct Service - NepalDirect (IN)
* 2006 PSTN Credit Limit Service - PCL (IN)
* 2005 Outsourcing of Enquiry Service (197)
* 2005 Access Network Services
* 2005 Soft launch of CDMA
* 2004 Pre-paid Calling Card Service (IN Services)
* 2004 NEPAL TELECOM (Transformation from Corporation to Nepal Doorsanchar Company Limited)2003 GSM Prepaid Service
* 2002 East-West Highway Optical Fiber Project
* 2001 Launching of Payphone Service
* 2000 Launching of Internet Service
* 2000 Implementation of SDH Microwave Radio
* 1999 Launching of GSM Mobile service
* 1998 Direct Link with Bangladesh
* 1997 Digital Link with D.O.T. India through Optical Fiber in Birgunj - Raxual 
* 1996 Introduction of VSAT services
* 1996 Independent Int. Gateway Exchange established
* 1996 Automation of the entire Telephone Network
* 1996 Conversion of all Transmission link to Digital transmission link
* 1995 Installation of Optical Fiber Network
* 1987 Commencement of STD service
* 1984 Reliable Rural Telecom Service (JICA)
* 1984 Commencement of STD service
* 1983 Establishment of digital Telephone Exchange
* 1982 Establishment of SPC telex exchange
* 1982 Establishment of Standard &quot;B&quot; Type Earth Station for international circuits
* 1974 Microwave transmission links establishment for internal trunk
* 1971 Introduction of Telex Services
* 1965 First Automatic exchange in Nepal (1000 lines in Kathmandu)
* 1964 Beginning of International Telecommunications Service using HF Radio to India and Pakistan
* 1962 First Public Telephone Exchange in Kathmandu (300 lines CB)
* 1955 Distribution of telephone line to the general public
* 1951 Installation of Open Wire Trunk line from Kathmandu to Palpa
* 1950 Establishment of CB telephone exchange (100 lines) in Kathmandu
* 1950 Introduction to High-frequency Radio System (AM)
* 1950 Establishment of Telegram Service
* 1936 Installation of Open Wire Trunk line from Kathmandu to Dhankuta
* 1935 Installation of 25 lines automatic exchange in Royal Palace
* 1914 Establishment of Open wire Trunk Link from Kathmandu to Raxaul (India)
* 1913 Establishment of first telephone lines in Kathmandu

The first telephone exchange was established in Kathmandu in 1960. From 1960 to 2004, the state-owned Nepal Telecommunications Corporation (NTC), also known as Nepal Telecom, or Nepal Doorsanchar Company Limited (NDCL), had been the monopoly telecom carrier. Now, there are only two operators, so Nepal&#x27;s telecom industry is a duopoly market. Other competing telecom service providers like United Telecom (UTL), Smart Telecom are no more in the picture in Nepal.

==Telephony==

The country code for Nepal is 00977. As of May 2013, there are 644,347 wirline customers.

Telephone system:
* Good telephone and telegraph service; fair radio telephone communication service and mobile cellular telephone network
* &quot;Domestic:&quot; Microwave + Optical Fiber
* &quot;International&quot; Radio telephone Communications; microwave landline to India; satellite earth station - 2 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

=== Mobile telephony ===
As of 2019, there are four operational three major telecom operators in Nepal: 
* Nepal Telecom formerly known as Nepal Telecommunications Corporation (NTC)
* Ncell
* SmartCell

CG Telecom was set to launch its services in 2019.

Mobile Subscribers: 18,137,771 (May 2013)

====5G connectivity====
In 2019, Nepal Telecom has announced its intention to launch 5G services in the next few years after the deployment of 4G nationwide.

==Internet==

As of May 2013, there are 127 ISPs and 6.7 million internet users in Nepal.

===Net neutrality===
==Television broadcasting==

Television broadcast stations: 19 (37 registered) (2012)

Televisions: 130,000 (1997)

==Radio==

&quot;Radio broadcast stations:&quot;&#x27; AM 6, FM 20, shortwave 1 (January 2000)
Radios: 20,00,000 (2006)

==See also==
* Nepal Telecommunications Authority
* List of Telecom Companies in Nepal
* List of countries by smartphone penetration 
* List of countries by Internet connection speeds

==References==
==External links==
* Nepal Telecommunications Authority</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7695992" start="0" end="42" title="Telecommunications in Nepal" label="[[Nepal]]&amp;#x27;s telecommunication network"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="1027" end="1032" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467747" start="1056" end="1082" title="telecommunications service" label="telecommunications service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338265" start="2170" end="2183" title="Nepal Telecom" label="Nepal Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338265" start="3897" end="3910" title="Nepal Telecom" label="NEPAL TELECOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="5845" end="5854" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338265" start="5957" end="5970" title="Nepal Telecom" label="Nepal Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="6621" end="6630" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6643" end="6648" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="6650" end="6659" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="6678" end="6686" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="6688" end="6700" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338265" start="6810" end="6823" title="Nepal Telecom" label="Nepal Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13179656" start="6887" end="6892" title="Ncell" label="Ncell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183988" start="6895" end="6904" title="SmartCell" label="SmartCell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181043" start="6906" end="6916" title="CG Telecom" label="CG Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="7301" end="7311" title="Television" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="7405" end="7410" title="Radio" label="Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="7411" end="7420" title="Broadcasting" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q13182761" start="7524" end="7558" title="Nepal Telecommunications Authority" label="Nepal Telecommunications Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628868" start="7561" end="7595" title="List of Telecom Companies in Nepal" label="List of Telecom Companies in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065539" start="7598" end="7641" title="List of countries by smartphone penetration" label="List of countries by smartphone penetration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097729" start="7645" end="7692" title="List of countries by Internet connection speeds" label="List of countries by Internet connection speeds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21329" wikidata="Q7835042" url="?curid=21329" title="Transport in Nepal">
<text>Nepal is a landlocked country where transportation is difficult due to the mountainous terrain. Modern transportation in Nepal has only started in the 20th century.

Railways were the first type of transport introduced in Nepal by the Nepal Railway Company. The first railway line began in 1927 with the length of between Amlekhganj and Raxaul (India).

The Government of Nepal has also established many organisations and offices to construct and maintain the roads inside and outside the Kathmandu Valley.
The first highway, the Tribhuvan Highway was constructed in November 1952 between Kathmandu and Amlekhganj. The first vehicles (jeeps) were run on this road by Queen Kanti Rajyalaxmi in December 1953, on the fifth day of her marriage. Trucks could only pass through this road 2 years later, around after 1955.

==Road==

The Statistics of National Highway SNH-2020/21 and Provincial Transport Master Plan (PTMP) guidelines clears that the authority of the National Highway of Nepal resides with the central government and that the other roads has been handed over to provincial governments and local governments.

Road transport is the country&#x27;s primary transportation mode. The Economic Survey 2022-23 released by the Ministry of Finance (Nepal), shows that the country had a total road network of national road length of 34,100 km; that only included roads constructed and maintained by the Department of Roads (DoR). This only included the national highway system

===National Highways===

*Total: 11,178.92 km
*Paved: 6,836.45 km
*Gravel: 1,116.36 km
*Unpaved: 3,226.12 km (2021 est.)

==Rail==
The Nepal Government Railway had operated a short narrow gauge railway, from 1927 to 1965. As of 2022, there are two operational railway lines in the country, both of which connect Nepal with India: the Raxaul–Sirsiya and the Jainagar–Janakpur. The former is a line from Raxaul, India to Sirsiya Inland Container Depot (a dry port) near Birgunj, Nepal, and is primarily used for freight transport. It allows container traffic to be imported to Nepal through the Sirsiya dry port container depot. The latter is a line from Jaynagar, India to Janakpur, Nepal, and is used primarily for passenger transport.

Nepal and India agreed to construct 8 different India–Nepal cross-border rail lines, including the line linking Raxaul with Kathmandu, during Prime Minister K.P. Oli&#x27;s visit to India. A team of technical officers visited Kathmandu to study the proposed railway from Raxaul to Kathmandu and have stated that a feasibility study of the project would begin. They have already identified Chobhar as the terminus of the 113 km-long line. 

The China–Nepal railway is a planned line through Kathmandu, linking the Indian Subcontinent with Lhasa in Tibet. It was proposed by the K.P. Oli government and in November 2017, Chinese media reported the arrival of a delegation of Chinese railway experts in Nepal. They discussed the possibility of a rail connection between China and Nepal. In August 2018, the two sides reached an agreement on construction details of the railway.

==Air==

There are 53 airports in Nepal as of 2020 out of which 34 are in operation. There are three international airports that serve as aviation hubs: The Tribhuvan International Airport in Kathmandu, The Gautam Buddha International Airport in Lumbini, and The Pokhara International Airport in Pokhara.

===Airports redundant and not in operation===
*Total: 12

==Ropeways==
The first ropeway to carry cargo was the &quot;Halchowk-Lainchour&quot; ropeway which was used to transport stones from the quarry to build palaces. The famous Dhorsing-Chisapnai-Chandragiri ropeway passing into Kathmandu was built by Chandra Shamser Rana in 1922. It was upgraded in 1964 to reach to Hetauda with a total length of 42 km with technical and financial assistance from USAID.
Following are the types of ropeways based on the operation mechanism and types of transport.

===Tar Pul or Ghirlings ===
Also known as &quot;twin&quot;, these are rudimentary ropeways used in lieu of bridges to cross rivers. These are generally installed by the local community based on necessity. As of May 2004, there are 25 &quot;Tar Pul&quot; in Kavre, Gorkha, Myagdi, Udaypur, Chitwan and Lamjung 
===Gravity Ropeways===
A gravity ropeway operates by using potential energy with mechanical power. A weight lowered from a higher elevation lifts the cargo.
Ropeways of this type were first used in Mustang to transport apples. Since then they have been installed in four other locations: Gorkha, Tanahun, Kalikot and Achham.
Most of the construction ropeways fall in this category.

===Cargo Ropeways===
Cargo ropeways are used in Nepal to transport goods from one place to another. The first ropeway, &quot;Halchowk-Lainchour&quot;, was in fact a cargo ropeway. The most famous cargo ropeway was the Kathmandu-Hetauda Ropeway, which is now out of operation. 

===Passenger ropeways===
Mostly electrically operated, these kinds of ropeways or &quot;Cable Cars&quot; are used by passengers. The first of this kind was Manakamana Cable Car, established in 1998. 

==Water==
Nepal is a landlocked country that does not have any territory connected to an ocean.

Nepal&#x27;s three dry ports are Birgunj, Biratnagar, and Bhairahawa.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="0" end="5" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546843" start="235" end="256" title="Nepal Railway Company Limited" label="Nepal Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420355" start="322" end="332" title="Amlekhganj" label="Amlekhganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087576" start="337" end="343" title="Raxaul" label="Raxaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181836" start="530" end="547" title="Tribhuvan Highway" label="Tribhuvan Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="589" end="598" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420355" start="603" end="613" title="Amlekhganj" label="Amlekhganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="635" end="640" title="Jeep" label="jeeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q20904123" start="667" end="689" title="Queen Kanti of Nepal" label="Queen Kanti Rajyalaxmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="742" end="748" title="Trucks" label="Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010343" start="1231" end="1258" title="Ministry of Finance (Nepal)" label="Ministry of Finance (Nepal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844481" start="1455" end="1478" title="National Highway System (Nepal)" label="national highway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012247" start="1615" end="1639" title="Nepal Government Railway" label="Nepal Government Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="1740" end="1747" title="Rail transport" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087576" start="1814" end="1820" title="Raxaul" label="Raxaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530636" start="1821" end="1828" title="Sirsiya" label="Sirsiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q31297648" start="1837" end="1845" title="Jaynagar railway station" label="Jainagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q378649" start="1846" end="1854" title="Janakpur, Nepal" label="Janakpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297310" start="1933" end="1941" title="dry port" label="dry port"/>
<link wikidata="Q8252" start="1948" end="1955" title="Birgunj" label="Birgunj"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="1990" end="1997" title="freight" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q744260" start="2133" end="2141" title="Jainagar, Bihar" label="Jaynagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="2217" end="2222" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2227" end="2232" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2253" end="2300" title="India–Nepal border#Rail" label="8 different India–Nepal cross-border rail lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087576" start="2329" end="2335" title="Raxaul" label="Raxaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="2341" end="2350" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="2374" end="2382" title="Khadga Prasad Oli" label="K.P. Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="2443" end="2452" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087576" start="2488" end="2494" title="Raxaul" label="Raxaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="2498" end="2507" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964225" start="2606" end="2613" title="Chobhar, Nepal" label="Chobhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55693961" start="2661" end="2680" title="China–Nepal railway" label="China–Nepal railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026100" start="2755" end="2760" title="Lhasa" label="Lhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="2764" end="2769" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="3194" end="3215" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q61066" start="3250" end="3281" title="Tribhuvan International Airport" label="Tribhuvan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="3285" end="3294" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275873" start="3300" end="3335" title="Gautam Buddha Airport" label="Gautam Buddha International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213" start="3339" end="3346" title="Lumbini" label="Lumbini"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630162" start="3356" end="3385" title="Pokhara International Airport" label="Pokhara International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640" start="3389" end="3396" title="Pokhara" label="Pokhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="3682" end="3691" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061786" start="3705" end="3725" title="Chandra Shumsher Jang Bahadur Rana" label="Chandra Shamser Rana"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="3853" end="3858" title="USAID" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746788" start="5081" end="5101" title="Manakamana Cable Car" label="Manakamana Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="5147" end="5165" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="5215" end="5220" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297310" start="5242" end="5251" title="Dry port" label="dry ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q44550990" start="5256" end="5263" title="Dryport Birgunj" label="Birgunj"/>
<link wikidata="Q8247" start="5265" end="5275" title="Biratnagar" label="Biratnagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530936" start="5281" end="5291" title="Siddharthanagar" label="Bhairahawa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21330" wikidata="Q727013" url="?curid=21330" title="Nepalese Armed Forces">
<text>The Nepali Armed Forces are the military forces of Nepal. Composed primarily of the ground-based Nepali Army, organized into six active combat divisions, the Nepalese Armed Forces also operates the smaller Nepalese Army Air Service designed to support army operations and provide close light combat support. The Nepalese Army also operates smaller formations responsible for the organization of air defense, logistics, military communications, artillery, and airborne forces within Nepalese territory. In addition, the Armed Police Force acts as a paramilitary force tasked with maintaining internal security within Nepal.

The Nepalese Armed Forces are a volunteer force with an estimated 95,000 active duty personnel in 2020, with an estimated annual military budget of around 440 million US dollars, not including military assistance funding from the Republic of India and People&#x27;s Republic of China or more recently from the United States of America. Although most of Nepal&#x27;s military equipment are imports from neighboring India or China, Nepal has received 20,000 M-16 rifles, as well as night vision equipment from the United States to assist ongoing efforts in the post-September 11 global War on Terror campaign. The Nepalese Army bought 1,000 Galil rifles from Israel and received 2 V-5 helicopters from Russia.

== Supreme Command ==
Article 144 of Interim Constitution of Nepal states that the President of Nepal is the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of Nepal Army.
Currently as the President of Nepal Ram Chandra Poudel who assumed office on 13 March 2023, is the current supreme commander of Nepal Army.

Before the 2006 democracy movement in Nepal forced the King to restore democracy in 2006, Article 119 of the 1990 constitution stated that the King is the Supreme Commander of the Royal Nepal Army. However, following the People&#x27;s Power revolution in April 2006, the 1990 constitution has been replaced by an interim constitution which has removed the King from anything to do with the army. On May 28, 2008, the Monarchy was formally abolished and Nepal was declared a republic.

== The National Defence Council ==
Nepal&#x27;s Interim Constitution&#x27;s Article 145 has envisioned National Defence Council which includes Prime Minister, Defence Minister, Home Minister and other three minister appointed by Prime Minister which recommends to the Council of Ministers on mobilization, operation and use of the Nepal Army. Upon Council of Ministers recommendation, President authorizes mobilization, operation and use of Nepal Army.

Before the Interim Constitution replaced Constitution of Kingdom of Nepal in 1990, the 1990 constitution had a provision for the defense council. This Council used to have three members: the Prime Minister, the Defence Minister and the Chief of the Army Staff. In accordance with the Constitution, the King (as Supreme Commander) used to &quot;operate and use&quot; the &quot;Royal Nepal Army on the recommendation&quot; of this council.

==Battles of Unification campaigns==
The Nepali army fought various battles on the national unification campaigns of the 18th century. These battles of Nepal unification helped the Royal Nepali army to gain more experience while helping to unify Nepal.

* Battles of Nepal Unification Campaign

==Engagements==
===Battle against Mir Qasim===

The fortress of Makawanpur has a historical and military significance for the Nepali. It was here that the Nepali defeated superior forces of Mir Qasim in 1763 and seized 500 guns and two cannons. Later on, these weapons were used by Nepali troops and four companies were established regular, namely, Srinath, Kalibox, Barda Bahadur (Bardabahini) and Sabuj. (Purano) Gorakh Company was established a few months later. It was the first rank and file system beginning a proper organizational history for the Royal Nepali Army. The battle against Mir Qasim troops was the first battle of the Royal Nepali Army against a foreign power.

Sardar Nandu Shah was the fortress Commander of Makawanpur with 400 troops, some guns and home-made traditional weapons like Dhanu, Khukuri, Talwar, Ghuyatro etc. They devised different hit-and-run strategies to surprise the enemy. A spoiling attack base was set up on the Taplakhar mountain ridge
for night operations.

Mir Qasim&#x27;s renowned warrior, Gurgin Khan was the commander on the other side with approximately 2,500 troops with cannons, guns, ammunition and a very good logistics back up. Their attack base was at the bottom of the Makawanpur Gadhi hill. They had planned a night attack. When the enemy&#x27;s heavy forces marched in December 1762 and arrived at Harnamadi in January 1763, they found all the local houses already evacuated and the area short of food provisions. Makawanpur Gadhi was on top of a mountain, about nine kilometers uphill from the Harnamadi area. Although the Nepali had physically occupied all the fortresses en route, the enemy was able to initially push them back to the Makawanpur Gadhi area.

About 300 enemy launched a strong attack on 20 January 1763 putting the Nepali still more on the defensive. But they were totally surprised when they were resting in Taplakhar, as Kaji Vamsharaj Pande led a downhill attack on them Kaju Naharsigh Basnyat led an uphill attack from below them and Nandu Shah led a frontal attack. The smooth coordination among the three, leading their, by now battle-hardened, troops in the dark of the night, led the bewildered enemy to scatter. About 1700 of them died and 30 Nepali soldiers were lost in that battle. The Nepali captured
500 rifles and two cannons with other military equipment. More importantly, the battle led to the beginning of a proper organization of the Royal Nepali Army.

===Other major engagements===
* Battle of Pauwa Gadhi against Captain Kinloch- 1767 AD
* Anglo-Nepal War 1814 AD
* First Nepal - Tibet War

The relations started forming sour after the Malla rulers started to mint impure silver coins just before their downfall. The Tibetans demanded that the coins be replaced by pure silver ones. When Prithvi Narayan Shah took over, he found that it would be a great loss to him if he conceded to the Tibetan demands. That case remained unsolved due to his untimely demise. Queen Mother Rajendra Laxmi, the Regent of minor King Rana Bahadur Shah, inherited the coinage problem which reached the culminating point in 1888 AD. Another sore point in Nepal-Tibet relations was Nepal&#x27;s decision to provide refuge to Syamarpa Lama with his 14 Tibetan followers. He had fled from Tibet to Nepal on religious and political grounds. Yet
another cause for conflict was the low quality salt being provided by Tibetans to Nepal. All salt came from Tibet in those days. Tibet ignored the Nepali ultimatums and that promoted the preparations for war. Nepal was soon preparing to launch multi-directional attacks.

Kerung Axis: &quot;Kaji&quot; Balbhadra Shah was the main Commander of the offensive attack from Kerung axis. &quot;Kaji&quot; Kirtiman Singh Basnyat, &quot;Sardar&quot; Amar Singh Thapa and &quot;Kapardar&quot; Bhotu Pande were the subordinate commanders under him. Approximately 6,000 troops and 3,200 porters were despatched for this operation. Their main objective was to capture Dirgacha through Kerung. The march of the troops was delayed because Balbhadra Shah became seriously ill. They crossed
Kerung on 20 July 1788 and captured Jhunga on 3 August 1788. &quot;Kapardar&quot; Bhotu Pande was captured by the Tibetans. The Nepali troops were reinforced with 2,000 more troops and &quot;Kapardar&quot; Bhotu Pande was freed from the Tibetans on 14 October 1788.

Kuti Axis (I):Shree Krishna Shah was the Commander and Kaji Ranajit Pande, Sardar Parath Bhandari, Captain Harsa Panta, Captain Naharsingh Basnyat and Captain Shiva Narayan Khatri were the subordinate commanders under him. About 5,800 soldiers and 3,000 porters were allotted for the offensive operation. Later on, Kaji Abhimansingh Basnyat and Ranajit Kunwar also joined this offensive. The Dalai Lama was taken by surprise and to protect his sovereignty, he initiated a parallel approach whereby he asked military help from Sovan Shahi, the King of Jumla in West Nepal, and requested him to launch guerrilla activities and revolt against the Nepali Army in and around Jumla. Sovan Shahi did revolt at Humla and captured some fortresses. The Dalai Lama also asked for military help from the Chinese Emperor. Additionally, he himself and Panchen Lama of Dirgacha wrote a secret letter to the East India Company seeking military assistance. The Tibetans also initiated propaganda about having constructed a new road through the Tigri valley and establishing a post at the front. They also rumoured that they had assembled an Army of 1,25,000 men. But the Tibetans could get nothing from Jumla, China or the East India Company.

Kuti Axis (II):Kaji Damodar Pande was leading his troops with subordinate commanders Bom Shah, Dev Dutta Thapa and others. He was given about 4,000 troops and his objective was to capture Dirgacha via the Kuti axis. The Battles Nepali troops, having crossed the Himalayas captured Chhochyang and Kuti in June 1788 and Sikarjong on 3 August 1788, in spite of many difficult logistic limitations. Later, Bahadur Shah was able to provide some reinforcements and improve some logistics arrangements. Still that was not enough and progress was slow. When the Nepali were about to capture Dirgacha via both Kuti and Kerung, the Tibetans started to make compromises with Nepali commanders. Bahadur Shah started negotiations, ultimately arriving at a solution. Prisoners were handed back to the Tibetans. Tibet was ready to pay tributes to the tune of Rs. 50,000 in silver coins per annum to Nepal and a treaty was signed on 2 June 1789 in Kerung. The treaty is called the ‘Treaty of Kerung’ by historians Rasuwa Gadhi and Timure were the firm bases in the first Nepal-Tibet war. Syabru Besi and Rasuwa Gadhi were Strategic points in this war. Likewise, Listi and Duguna villages were the main bases for offensive operations against Tibet. They were the forward most dumping places of the Royal Nepali Army. Although Rasuwa Gadhi and Duguna Gadhi Fortresses were not constructed at the time, the places themselves were important because of their military significance.

* Nepal-Tibet/China War
* Nepali-Tibetan War

==Foreign involvement==
* Royal Nepal Army in Indian Sepoy Mutiny
* Royal Nepal Army in The First World War 1914–1918
* Royal Nepal Army in Waziristhan War
* Royal Nepal Army in Afghan War −1919
* Royal Nepal Army in The Second World War
* Royal Nepal Army in Hyderabad Action – 1948

==Domestic operations==
*Disarmament of the Khampas – 1974

In 1974, The Royal Nepali Army (RNA) was mobilized to disarm the Tibetan Khampas who had been using Nepali soil to engage guerilla war against the Chinese forces. The Khampas had secretly created their base in Mustang (north-west Nepal) and were operating from there against China. The RNA, under immense diplomatic pressure from China and the international community, moved nine infantry units towards the Khampa post in Mustang and gave them an ultimatum to either disarm themselves and surrender, or face consequences. The terms and conditions of their surrender was that they would be given Nepali citizenship, land, and some money. The Khampa commander Wang Di agreed to surrender but eventually fled the camp. He was later killed in Doti, far-western Nepal by RNA forces while trying to loot a Nepal Police post. This was first time that the RNA was mobilized in such a large number domestically.

*Nepali Civil War

==International operations==

Nepal Army&#x27;s long association with UN Peace Support Operations began with the deployment of five Military Observers in the Middle East, Lebanon (UNOGIL/ United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon) in 1958. And the first Nepali contingent, Purano Gorakh battalion was deployed in Egypt in 1974. Nepal&#x27;s participation in the UN peacekeeping operations spans a period of 50 years covering 42 Nepal army-involved UN Missions, the latest being UNSMIL in Libya, in which over 60,652 Nepali soldiers have served in support of UN peacekeeping endeavors. The Nepal Army has contributed Force Commanders, military contingents, military observers, and staff officers. Nepali troops have taken part in some of the most difficult operations, and have suffered casualties in the service of the UN. To date, the number of those lost on duty with the UN is 54, while 57 were seriously wounded.

Its most significant contribution has been of ensuring peace and stability in Africa. It has demonstrated its capacity of sustaining large troop commitments over prolonged periods. Presently, Nepal is ranked as the second largest troop-contributing country (TCC) to the UN.

Contributions include:
* United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
* UNOSOMII the UN Protective Force (UNPROFOR), UN Operational Mission Somalia II
* UNMIH the United Nations Mission in Haiti
* UNAMSIL – Currently, Nepal is sending an 800-man battalion to serve in the peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).
* UNMIS – The Nepali Army has sent a protection company of 200 personnel in United Nations Mission In Sudan.
* RCHQ – The RCHQ, KASSALA is also manned by Nepali forces.
* UNMISET – The UN mission in Timor Leste (East Timor)
* MINUSTAH – The UN mission in Haiti
* UNDOF

==U.S./Nepal military relations==
The U.S.-Nepali military relationship focuses on support for democratic institutions, civilian control of the military, and the professional military ethic to include respect for human rights. Both countries have had extensive contact over the years. Nepali Army units and Nepali Army Air Service units have served with distinction alongside American forces in places such as Haiti, Iraq, and Somalia.

U.S.-Nepali military engagement continues today through IMET, Enhanced International Peacekeeping Capabilities (EIPC), and various conferences and seminars. The U.S. military sends many Nepali Army officers to America to attend military schooling such as the Command and General Staff College and the U.S. Army War College. The IMET budget for FY2001 was $220,000.

The EPIC program is an interagency program between the Department of Defense and the Department of State to increase the pool of international peacekeepers and to promote interoperability. Nepal received about $1.9 million in EPIC funding.

Commander United States Pacific Command (CDRUSPACOM) coordinates military engagement with Nepal through the Office of Defense Cooperation (ODC). The ODC Nepal is located in the American Embassy, Kathmandu.

==Nepal military relations with China and India==
India has agreed to resume military aid to Nepal. The aid was in the pipeline before India imposed an embargo in February 2005 following the seizure of power by the then King Gyanendra. In 2009, People&#x27;s Republic of China pledged military aid worth Rs100 million to Nepal.

Since 1950, the Chief of the Army Staff of Nepal is also awarded the honorary Chief of the Army Staff of India and vice -versa in recognition of the mutual harmonious relationship between the two armies of different countries.

==Divisions==
The command of the Nepali army is divided into 8 parts, namely.
* Far western division
* Northwestern division
* Midwestern division
* Western division
* Mid-division
* Valley division
* Mideastern division
* Eastern division

==Statistics==
Military branches: Nepalese Army (includes Nepalese Army Air Service), Armed Police Force Nepal, Nepalese Police Force

Military manpower – military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower – availability:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;males age 15–49:&quot; 6,674,014 (2003 est.)

Military manpower – fit for military service:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;males age 15–49:&quot; 3,467,511 (2003 est.)

Military manpower – reaching military age annually:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;males:&quot; 303,222 (2003 est.)

Military expenditures – dollar figure: $57.22 million (FY02)

Military expenditures – percent of GDP: 1.1% (FY02)

==Gurkhas==
Nepal is also notable for the Gurkhas. Significant sections of the British Army and Indian Army are recruited from Nepal. This arrangement comes from the days of the British East India Company&#x27;s rule of India when Company troops tried to invade Nepal and were beaten back. Both sides were impressed with the other, and Gurkhas were recruited into the company&#x27;s forces. The Gurkhas remained loyal during the Indian Mutiny of 1857 and were kept on in the Indian Army thereafter. Upon Indian independence in 1947, some units went to British service and some to Indian service, with a Britain-India-Nepal Tripartite Agreement signed between the three nations. The Gurkhas are feared troops, and their signature weapon is the khukuri.

==Army pilot training school==
The Nepal Army Air Service has operated a flying and helicopter pilots training school since 2004 within the 11 Brigade. It is the only helicopter pilots training school in Nepal,(there is a fixed-wing pilot training school in Bharatpur, Nepal by private pilots training school) This school produces both army air service and civilian pilots. The school provides the Mil Mi-17, and Eurocopter Ecureuil helicopter flying training.

==Women in the military==
The Nepali Army started enrolling women from 1961 for technical service and since 2004 for general service. As of 2019 there were 3758 female Junior Commission, Non-Commission Officers and other ranks in general service and 907 in technical service. There were also 183 female officers in the general service and 214 female technical officers.

==See also==
* Armed Police Force Nepal

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==
* Official website of the Nepal Army
* Official website of the Armed Police Force of Nepal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q727013" start="4" end="23" title="Nepalese Armed Forces" label="Nepali Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="32" end="47" title="armed forces" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="51" end="56" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056518" start="97" end="108" title="Nepali Army" label="Nepali Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630485" start="206" end="231" title="Nepalese Army Air Service" label="Nepalese Army Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="395" end="406" title="air defense" label="air defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="408" end="417" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736535" start="419" end="442" title="military communications" label="military communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="444" end="453" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="459" end="474" title="airborne forces" label="airborne forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793035" start="519" end="537" title="Armed Police Force (Nepal)" label="Armed Police Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="854" end="871" title="India" label="Republic of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="876" end="907" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="934" end="958" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="1080" end="1091" title="M16 rifle" label="M-16 rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1188" end="1200" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="1208" end="1221" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q276093" start="1263" end="1275" title="IMI Galil" label="Galil rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q317288" start="1303" end="1306" title="Mil Mi-17" label="V-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q153756" start="1501" end="1519" title="President of Nepal" label="President of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183124" start="1520" end="1538" title="Ram Chandra Poudel" label="Ram Chandra Poudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056518" start="1612" end="1622" title="Nepal Army" label="Nepal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996861" start="1636" end="1668" title="2006 democracy movement in Nepal" label="2006 democracy movement in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595321" start="3332" end="3341" title="Mir Qasim" label="Mir Qasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q27502509" start="5204" end="5219" title="Vamsharaj Pande" label="Vamsharaj Pande"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5782" end="5827" title="Battle of Pauwa Gadhi against Captain Kinloch" label="Battle of Pauwa Gadhi against Captain Kinloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q195378" start="5839" end="5862" title="Anglo-Nepal War 1814 AD" label="Anglo-Nepal War 1814 AD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5865" end="5888" title="First Nepal - Tibet War" label="First Nepal - Tibet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q27531150" start="6921" end="6935" title="Balbhadra Shah" label="Balbhadra Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q27531005" start="7018" end="7040" title="Kirtiman Singh Basnyat" label="Kirtiman Singh Basnyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495310" start="7103" end="7114" title="Bhotu Pande" label="Bhotu Pande"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495310" start="7476" end="7487" title="Bhotu Pande" label="Bhotu Pande"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495310" start="7600" end="7611" title="Bhotu Pande" label="Bhotu Pande"/>
<link wikidata="Q29953767" start="7721" end="7734" title="Ranajit Pande" label="Ranajit Pande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274210" start="8908" end="8921" title="Damodar Pande" label="Damodar Pande"/>
<link wikidata="Q13185283" start="9886" end="9898" title="Rasuwa Gadhi" label="Rasuwa Gadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412409" start="9903" end="9909" title="Timure" label="Timure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425512" start="9960" end="9971" title="Syabru Besi" label="Syabru Besi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13185283" start="9976" end="9988" title="Rasuwa Gadhi" label="Rasuwa Gadhi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10352" end="10373" title="Nepal-Tibet/China War" label="Nepal-Tibet/China War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001528" start="10376" end="10394" title="Nepalese-Tibetan War" label="Nepali-Tibetan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="10422" end="10461" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Royal Nepal Army in Indian Sepoy Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10464" end="10513" title="World War I" label="Royal Nepal Army in The First World War 1914–1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976949" start="10516" end="10551" title="Waziristan campaign (1919–20)" label="Royal Nepal Army in Waziristhan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259237" start="10554" end="10590" title="Third Anglo-Afghan War" label="Royal Nepal Army in Afghan War −1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10593" end="10633" title="World War II" label="Royal Nepal Army in The Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992979" start="10636" end="10679" title="Indian integration of Hyderabad" label="Royal Nepal Army in Hyderabad Action – 1948"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10706" end="10732" title="Disarmament of the Khampas" label="Disarmament of the Khampas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002975" start="11646" end="11662" title="Nepali Maoist Peoples War" label="Nepali Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933912" start="11852" end="11895" title="United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon" label="United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12094" end="12125" title="Nepal army-involved UN Missions" label="Nepal army-involved UN Missions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12512" end="12542" title="Nepal Army&amp;#x27;s personnel lost lives in UN peacekeeping missions" label="those lost on duty with the UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="12884" end="12923" title="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon" label="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="12925" end="12931" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12935" end="12943" title="UNOSOMII" label="UNOSOMII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12948" end="12967" title="UN Protective Force" label="UN Protective Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12980" end="13013" title="UN Operational Mission Somalia II" label="UN Operational Mission Somalia II"/>
<link wikidata="Q667038" start="13016" end="13021" title="UNMIH" label="UNMIH"/>
<link wikidata="Q667038" start="13026" end="13057" title="United Nations Mission in Haiti" label="United Nations Mission in Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="13060" end="13067" title="UNAMSIL" label="UNAMSIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="13159" end="13171" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q487859" start="13185" end="13190" title="UNMIS" label="UNMIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q487859" start="13259" end="13290" title="United Nations Mission In Sudan" label="United Nations Mission In Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113731830" start="13294" end="13298" title="RCHQ" label="RCHQ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13311" end="13318" title="KASSALA" label="KASSALA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141705" start="13354" end="13361" title="UNMISET" label="UNMISET"/>
<link wikidata="Q740123" start="13409" end="13417" title="MINUSTAH" label="MINUSTAH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428532" start="13446" end="13451" title="UNDOF" label="UNDOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185046" start="13573" end="13605" title="civilian control of the military" label="civilian control of the military"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13952" end="14000" title="Enhanced International Peacekeeping Capabilities" label="Enhanced International Peacekeeping Capabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="14149" end="14182" title="Command and General Staff College" label="Command and General Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q635078" start="14191" end="14212" title="U.S. Army War College" label="U.S. Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14260" end="14272" title="EPIC program" label="EPIC program"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14497" end="14536" title="Commander United States Pacific Command" label="Commander United States Pacific Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891215" start="14605" end="14634" title="Office of Defense Cooperation" label="Office of Defense Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="14692" end="14701" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14949" end="14980" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056518" start="15536" end="15549" title="Nepalese Army" label="Nepalese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630485" start="15560" end="15585" title="Nepalese Army Air Service" label="Nepalese Army Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793035" start="15588" end="15612" title="Armed Police Force Nepal" label="Armed Police Force Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503273" start="15614" end="15635" title="Nepalese Police Force" label="Nepalese Police Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="16151" end="16158" title="Gurkhas" label="Gurkhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="16188" end="16200" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="16205" end="16216" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="16287" end="16313" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16329" end="16334" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="16538" end="16551" title="Indian Mutiny" label="Indian Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969264" start="16712" end="16752" title="Britain-India-Nepal Tripartite Agreement" label="Britain-India-Nepal Tripartite Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q740429" start="16852" end="16859" title="Kukri" label="khukuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="17066" end="17071" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q250220" start="17120" end="17136" title="Bharatpur, Nepal" label="Bharatpur, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q317288" start="17260" end="17269" title="Mil Mi-17" label="Mil Mi-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411745" start="17275" end="17294" title="Eurocopter Ecureuil" label="Eurocopter Ecureuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793035" start="17710" end="17734" title="Armed Police Force Nepal" label="Armed Police Force Nepal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21331" wikidata="Q5468522" url="?curid=21331" title="Foreign relations of Nepal">
<text>Though the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) is the government agency which is responsible for conducting the foreign relations of Nepal, historically, it is the Office of the Prime Minister (PMO) which has exercised the authority to formulate the country&#x27;s foreign policies. As a landlocked country wedged between two larger and far stronger powers, Nepal has tried to maintain good relations with both of its neighbors, People&#x27;s Republic of China and Republic of India. However, the relationship between Nepal and India was significantly hampered by the 2015 Nepal blockade when the Government of Nepal accused India of mimicking &quot;Russia-Ukraine&quot; tactics by using ethnically Indian residents of Nepal to cause unrest along Nepal&#x27;s southern border. India denied the allegation the unrest were an internal affair. For the most part though, Nepal has traditionally maintained a non-aligned policy and enjoys friendly relations with its neighboring countries and almost all the major countries of the world.

== Overview ==
Constitutionally, Nepal&#x27;s foreign policy is to be guided by &quot;the principles of the United Nations Charter, nonalignment, Panchsheel (five principles of peaceful coexistence), international law and the value of world peace.&quot;

Nepal&#x27;s most substantive international relations are perhaps with international economic institutions such as the Asian Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation. Nepal also has strong bilateral relations with major providers of economic and military aid, such as France, Germany, Japan, South Korea, Switzerland, the United States, and particularly the United Kingdom, with whom military ties date back to the nineteenth century. The country&#x27;s external relations are managed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Prime Minister&#x27;s Office.

In its foreign policy, Nepal generally seeks to balance its relations with its large neighbors India and China in order to avoid dependency on either one. Nepal&#x27;s relation with China has seen a major upswing in the recent years with China now becoming Nepal&#x27;s top 5 aid donor to Nepal. In 2021, Indian government also announced increments of aid to Nepal by nearly 13% to $130 million, to counter China&#x27;s growing footprint in Nepal. However, data on the actual disbursement of aid by the Indian government remains unclear.

==International disputes==

In 1955, when Nepal joined the UN, Nepal had no border disputes with either of its neighbors. Both India and China without any objections, accepted the map of Nepal filed at the UN in 1955.

However, with degradation of relations between India and China during late 1950s, Indian government initiated a &#x27;Forward Policy&#x27; along its northern frontiers which resulted in Indian military outposts being built in all unmanned areas along India&#x27;s northern border. Successive Nepali government&#x27;s from 1990 onwards, have continued their objection to Indian occupation of certain Nepali territories under the guise of India&#x27;s &#x27;Forward Policy&#x27;. A joint border commission continues to work on resolving the issue of removal of Indian military outpost from Nepal&#x27;s Kalapani territory. , Nepal has border disputes with India at Lipulekh and Kalapani between Darchula district and Uttarakhand and Susta in Bihar and Nawalpur district. In 2018, EPG (Eminent Persons Group), a joint committee between Nepal and India finished a report on the disputed territories between these two countries. The report is yet to be submitted to the head of governments of both countries.

==International trade==
Nepal has been a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) since 11 September 2003 and on 24 January 2017 became the 108th WTO member to ratify the WTO&#x27;s Trade Facilitation Agreement.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Nepal maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
===Afghanistan===


===Austria===


===Bangladesh===

Nepal welcomed Bangladesh&#x27;s independence on 16 January 1972. The turning point for the two nations occurred in April 1976, when the two nations signed, a four-point agreement on technical cooperation, trade, transit and civil aviation. They both seek cooperation in the fields of power generation and development of water resources. In 1986, relations further improved when Bangladesh insisted Nepal should be included on a deal regarding the distribution of water from the Ganges River. Also recently Nepal and Bangladesh had signed MOU&#x27;s that Nepal would sell 10,000 MW of electricity to Bangladesh once its larger projects are completed.

===Bhutan===
Relations with Bhutan have been strained since 1992 over the nationality and possible repatriation of refugees from Bhutan.

===Canada===
Many Nepalese politicians and government officials criticized Canadian diplomats in the aftermath of the Kabul attack on Canadian Embassy guards in which the majority of victims were Nepalese citizens. Members of Parliament were among those who were critical of the way that Canada treated its security contractors at the embassy, leading to meetings in Ottawa between Nepalese and Canadian diplomats, including ambassador Nadir Patel.

===China===


Nepal formally established relations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China on August 1, 1955. The two countries share 1414 kilometers long border in the Himalayan range along the northern side of Nepal. Nepal has established its embassy in Beijing, opened consulates general in Lhasa, Hong Kong and Guangzhou and appointed an honorary consul in Shanghai.

Nepal&#x27;s relations with China have grown closer following China&#x27;s Belt and Road Initiative.

===Denmark===
See Denmark–Nepal relations.

===European Union===


===France===

Nepal and the French Republic entered into diplomatic relations on 20 April 1949. Bilateral economic cooperation programme commenced in February 1981 when the two countries signed the First Protocol amounting to French Franc 50 million loan which was converted into debt in 1989. Food aid and the counterpart funds that it generated have been the main form of aid since 1991. Main areas of cooperation are national seismologic network, petroleum exploration, restructuring of Water Supply Corporation, the Kavre Integrated Project and Gulmi and Arghakhanchi Rural Development Project, rehabilitation of airports, &#x27;food for work&#x27;, and others.

Nepal and France have signed an agreement concerning Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investment in 1983. The major areas of French investment are hotels, restaurants, medicine, aluminium windows and doors, vehicle body building sectors. Alcatelhad became the leading supplier of the Nepal Telecommunication Corporation, with 200,000 lines installed, and fibre optic cables. Cegelec secured a 24 million dollars contract in respect of the construction of Kali Gandaki hydroelectric project.

The Government of Nepal awarded a contract to Oberthur Technologies of France in 2010, for printing, supply, and delivery of Machine Readable Passports. A significant number of French tourists (24,097 in 2014, 16, 405 in 2015, and, 20,863 in 2016) arrive in Nepal from France each year.

===India===


===Israel===

Nepal was the first and until recently the only nation in South and Central Asia to establish diplomatic ties with Israel. The bilateral relation between the two countries has been good. Traditionally, Nepal votes in favor of Israel at the UN and abstains from resolution opposed by the Israeli government barring few exceptions. Israel-Nepal relations are based on mutual security concerns.

Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala, Prime Minister of Nepal from 1959 to 1960, had a strongly pro-Israel foreign policy. King Mahendra visited Israel in 1963 and maintained Koirala&#x27;s special relationship. 

===Japan===


Nepal-Japan relations date back to the late eighteenth century. The relationship became formal with the establishment of diplomatic relations on 1 September 1956. The Embassy of Nepal was established in Tokyo in 1965 and Japan established its embassy in Kathmandu in 1967. Nepal has honorary consulates in Osaka and Fukuoka. Japan is one of the largest aid donors to Nepal.

Japan is the 2nd most preferred destination for abroad study to the Nepali students.

===Malaysia===


Malaysia has an embassy in Kathmandu, and Nepal has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Both countries established diplomatic relations on 1 January 1960, with bilateral relations between Malaysia and Nepal have developed from historic grounds.

===Mexico===
Both nations established diplomatic relations in 1975.

* Mexico is accredited to Nepal from its embassy in New Delhi, India and maintains an honorary consulate in Kathmandu.
* Nepal is accredited to Mexico from its embassy in Washington, D.C., United States and maintains an honorary consulate in Mexico City.

===Norway===


Diplomatic relations were established on 26 January 1973. Norway established an embassy in Kathmandu in 2000. Norway&#x27;s aid to Nepal was around 32 million USD in 2017. Norwegian aid prioritizes education, good governance and energy.

In 2008, Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg and Minister of the Environment and International Development Erik Solheim visited Nepal. In 2009, Prime Minister Prachanda visited Norway. In May 2008, a small bomb exploded outside the Norwegian embassy in Kathmandu. No one was injured.

===Pakistan===


The bilateral relations between Nepal and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan were fully established between 1962 and 1963.

===Russia===


===Serbia===

*A number of bilateral agreements have been concluded and are in force between both countries.

===Spain===


===South Korea===

In addition to the in-kind and monetary donations and emergency relief workers sent by the government of the Republic of Korea immediately after the latest earthquake in Nepal the Korean government provided grant aid worth 10 million US dollars to assist with Nepal&#x27;s recovery and reconstruction efforts.

===Turkey===


===United Kingdom===

The first British High Commissioner to Nepal was accredited in 1947.
*Nepal maintains an embassy in London.
*The United Kingdom is accredited to Nepal through its embassy in Kathmandu.

Both countries share common membership of the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and an Investment Agreement.

===United States===

Nepal and the United States established the diplomatic relations between them on 25 April 1947.
==See also==
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Nepal)
* 1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship
* List of diplomatic missions in Nepal
* List of diplomatic missions of Nepal

==References==
==External links==
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Nepal
* Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal to the United Nations
* https://web.archive.org/web/20090904225228/http://www.mofa.gov.np/bilateral/nepal-russia.php</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6867016" start="11" end="38" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Nepal)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468522" start="111" end="137" title="Foreign relations of Nepal" label="foreign relations of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468522" start="163" end="191" title="Foreign relations of Nepal" label="Office of the Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="357" end="362" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="428" end="459" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="464" end="481" title="India" label="Republic of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070574" start="567" end="586" title="2015 Nepal blockade" label="2015 Nepal blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="866" end="871" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="1141" end="1163" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255047" start="1179" end="1189" title="Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence" label="Panchsheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="1233" end="1250" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q238651" start="1268" end="1279" title="world peace" label="world peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="1407" end="1429" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1435" end="1462" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="1468" end="1478" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="1488" end="1536" title="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation" label="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867016" start="1863" end="1890" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Nepal)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350651" start="3289" end="3307" title="Kalapani territory" label="Kalapani territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="3748" end="3772" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q28690409" start="3879" end="3907" title="Trade Facilitation Agreement" label="Trade Facilitation Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="4762" end="4768" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231249" start="4990" end="5029" title="Kabul attack on Canadian Embassy guards" label="Kabul attack on Canadian Embassy guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="5239" end="5245" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="5770" end="5794" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258036" start="5815" end="5838" title="Denmark–Nepal relations" label="Denmark–Nepal relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q560515" start="7738" end="7764" title="Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala" label="Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="7766" end="7789" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="Prime Minister of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q313110" start="7851" end="7864" title="Mahendra of Nepal" label="King Mahendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="8461" end="8470" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="8500" end="8512" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="8983" end="8994" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="9103" end="9112" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="9171" end="9174" title="United States dollar" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="9210" end="9219" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345314" start="9221" end="9236" title="good governance" label="good governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="9241" end="9247" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57665" start="9284" end="9300" title="Jens Stoltenberg" label="Jens Stoltenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354155" start="9363" end="9375" title="Erik Solheim" label="Erik Solheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="9604" end="9632" title="Islamic Republic of Pakistan" label="Islamic Republic of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="9947" end="9964" title="Republic of Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q626814" start="10018" end="10035" title="Government of South Korea" label="Korean government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="10051" end="10054" title="aid" label="aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="10098" end="10103" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991731" start="10275" end="10282" title="Embassy of Nepal, London" label="embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="10286" end="10292" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="10418" end="10442" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867016" start="10668" end="10703" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Nepal)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Nepal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986110" start="10706" end="10752" title="1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship" label="1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616474" start="10755" end="10791" title="List of diplomatic missions in Nepal" label="List of diplomatic missions in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606397" start="10794" end="10830" title="List of diplomatic missions of Nepal" label="List of diplomatic missions of Nepal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21332" wikidata="Q25227" url="?curid=21332" title="Netherlands Antilles">
<text>The Netherlands Antilles (, ; ), also known as the Dutch Antilles, was a constituent Caribbean country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands consisting of the islands of Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Sint Maarten in the Lesser Antilles, and Aruba, Curaçao, and Bonaire in the Leeward Antilles. The country came into being in 1954 as the autonomous successor of the Dutch colony of Curaçao and Dependencies, and it was dissolved in 2010, when like Aruba in 1986, Sint Maarten and Curaçao gained status of constituent countries within the Kingdom of the Netherlands, and Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Bonaire gained status of special municipality of Netherlands as the Caribbean Netherlands. The neighboring Dutch colony of Surinam in continental South America, did not become part of the Netherlands Antilles but became a separate autonomous country in 1954. All the territories that belonged to the Netherlands Antilles remain part of the kingdom today, although the legal status of each differs. As a group they are still commonly called the Dutch Caribbean, regardless of their legal status. People from this former territory continue to be called Antilleans (&quot;Antillianen&quot;) in the Netherlands.

== Geographical grouping ==

The islands of the Netherlands Antilles are all part of the Lesser Antilles island chain. Within this group, the country was spread over two smaller island groups: a northern group (part of Leeward Islands) and a western group (part of the Leeward Antilles). No part of the country was in the southern Windward Islands.

=== Islands located in the Leeward Islands ===
This island subregion was located in the eastern Caribbean Sea, to the east of Puerto Rico. It consisted of three islands, collectively known as the &quot;SSS islands&quot;:
* 
* (the southern part of the island of Saint Martin)

The islands are located approximately northeast of the ABC islands.

=== Islands located in the Leeward Antilles ===
This island subregion was located in the southern Caribbean Sea off the north coast of Venezuela. There were three islands collectively known as the &quot;ABC islands&quot;:
* (until 1 January 1986)
* including an islet called Klein Bonaire (&quot;Little Bonaire&quot;)
* , including an islet called Klein Curaçao (&quot;Little Curaçao&quot;)

== Climate ==
The Netherlands Antilles have a tropical trade-wind climate, with hot weather all year round. The Leeward islands are subject to hurricanes in the summer months, while those islands located in the Leeward Antilles are warmer and drier.

== History ==
Spanish explorers discovered both the leeward (Alonso de Ojeda, 1499) and windward (Christopher Columbus, 1493) island groups in the late 16th century. However, the Spanish Crown only founded settlements in the Leeward Islands.

In the 17th century the islands were conquered by the Dutch West India Company and colonized by The Netherlands. From the last quarter of the 17th century, the group consisted of six Dutch islands: Curaçao (settled in 1634), Aruba (settled in 1636), Bonaire (settled in 1636), Sint Eustatius (settled in 1636), Saba (settled in 1640) and Sint Maarten (settled in 1648). In the past, Anguilla (1631–1650), the present-day British Virgin Islands (1612–1672), St. Croix and Tobago had also been Dutch.

During the American Revolution Sint Eustatius, along with Curaçao, was a major trade center in the Caribbean, with Sint Eustatius a major source of supplies for the Thirteen Colonies. It had been called &quot;the Golden Rock&quot; because of the number of wealthy merchants and volume of trade there. The British sacked its only town, Oranjestad, in 1781 and the economy of the island never recovered.

However, with the discovery of oil in Venezuela in the nineteenth century, the Anglo-Dutch Shell Oil Company established refineries in Curaçao, while the U.S. processed Venezuelan crude oil in Aruba. This resulted in booming economies on the two islands, which turned to bust in the 1980s when the oil refineries were closed.

The various islands were united as a single country – the Netherlands Antilles – in 1954, under the Dutch crown. The country was dissolved on 10 October 2010.
Curaçao and Sint Maarten became distinct constituent countries alongside Aruba which had become a distinct constituent country in 1986; whereas Bonaire, Sint Eustatius, and Saba (the BES islands) became special municipalities within the Netherlands proper.
From 1815 onwards Curaçao and Dependencies formed a colony of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In 1865 a government regulation for Curaçao was enacted that allowed for some very limited autonomy for the colony. Although this regulation was replaced by a constitution () in 1936, the changes to the government structure remained superficial and Curaçao continued to be ruled as a colony.

The Dutch abolition of slavery in 1863 would hit most of the economies of the Dutch Caribbean islands hard as they were primarily slave labor-driven, plantation-based economies (the King of the Netherlands officially apologising for its part in the trade at a formal ceremony in 2023). With the exception of Aruba, where slavery was not as widespread as the island was considered too dry by the Dutch for large-scale plantations.

Economic prosperity on Curaçao and neighboring Aruba was restored in the early 20th century with the construction of oil refineries to service the newly discovered Venezuelan oil fields.

Colonial rule ended after the conclusion of the Second World War. Queen Wilhelmina had promised in a 1942 speech to offer autonomy to the overseas territories of the Netherlands. During the war, the British and American occupation of the islands – with the consent of the Dutch government – led to increasing demands for autonomy within the population as well.

In May 1948 a new constitution for the territory entered into force, allowing the largest amount of autonomy possible under the Dutch constitution of 1922. Among other things, universal suffrage was introduced. The territory was also renamed &quot;Netherlands Antilles&quot;. After the Dutch constitution was revised in 1948, a new interim Constitution of the Netherlands Antilles was enacted in February 1951. Shortly afterwards, on 3 March 1951, the Island Regulation of the Netherlands Antilles () was issued by royal decree, giving fairly wide autonomy to the various island territories in the Netherlands Antilles. A consolidated version of this regulation remained in force until the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles in 2010.

The new constitution was only deemed an interim arrangement, as negotiations for a Charter for the Kingdom were already under way. On 15 December 1954 the Netherlands Antilles, Suriname and the Netherlands acceded as equal partners to an overarching Kingdom of the Netherlands, established by the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands. With this move, the United Nations deemed decolonization of the territory complete and removed the Netherlands Antilles from the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories.

Aruba seceded from the Netherlands Antilles on 1 January 1986 after a 30 year-long political battle for separation, paving the way for a series of referendums among the remaining islands on the future of the Netherlands Antilles. Whereas the ruling parties campaigned for the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles, the people voted for a restructuring of the Netherlands Antilles. The coalition campaigning for this option became the Party for the Restructured Antilles, which ruled the Netherlands Antilles for much of the time until its dissolution on 10 October 2010.

=== Dissolution ===

Even though the referendums held in the early 1990s resulted in a vote in favour of retaining the Netherlands Antilles, the arrangement continued to be an unhappy one. Between June 2000 and April 2005, each island of the Netherlands Antilles had a new referendum on its future status. The four options that could be voted on were the following:
* closer ties with the Netherlands
* remaining within the Netherlands Antilles
* autonomy as a country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands (&quot;status aparte&quot;)
* independence

Of the five islands, Sint Maarten and Curaçao voted for &quot;status aparte&quot;, Saba and Bonaire voted for closer ties with the Netherlands, and Sint Eustatius voted to stay within the Netherlands Antilles.

On 26 November 2005, a Round Table Conference (RTC) was held between the governments of the Netherlands, Aruba, the Netherlands Antilles, and each island in the Netherlands Antilles. The final statement to emerge from the RTC stated that autonomy for Curaçao and Sint Maarten, plus a new status for Bonaire, Sint Eustatius, and Saba (BES) would come into effect by 1 July 2007.
On 12 October 2006, the Netherlands reached an agreement with Bonaire, Sint Eustatius, and Saba: this agreement would make these islands special municipalities.

On 3 November 2006, Curaçao and Sint Maarten were granted autonomy in an agreement, but this agreement was rejected by the then island council of Curaçao on 28 November. The Curaçao government was not sufficiently convinced that the agreement would provide enough autonomy for Curaçao. On 9 July 2007 the new island council of Curaçao approved the agreement previously rejected in November 2006. A subsequent referendum approved the agreement as well.

The acts of parliament integrating the &quot;BES&quot; islands (Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba) into the Netherlands were given royal assent on 17 May 2010. After ratification by the Netherlands (6 July), the Netherlands Antilles (20 August), and Aruba (4 September), the &quot;Kingdom act amending the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands with regard to the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles&quot; was signed by the three countries in the closing Round Table Conference on 9 September 2010 in The Hague.

== Political grouping ==
=== Constitutional grouping at time of dissolution ===
The Island Regulation had divided the Netherlands Antilles into four island territories: Aruba, Bonaire, Curaçao (ABC), and the islands in the Leeward Islands. In 1983, the island territory of the Leeward was split up to form the new island territories of Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint Eustatius (SSS). In 1986, Aruba seceded from the Netherlands Antilles, reducing the number of island territories to five. After the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles in 2010, Curaçao and Sint Maarten became autonomous countries within the Kingdom and Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (BES) became special municipalities of the Netherlands.

=== Current constitutional grouping ===
The islands of the former country of the Netherlands Antilles are currently divided in two main groups for political and constitutional purposes:
* those islands that have the status of constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
* those islands that have the status of special municipality of the Netherlands alone, as distinct from the Kingdom in its entirety.

There are also several smaller islands, like Klein Curaçao and Klein Bonaire, that belong to one of the island countries or special municipalities.

==== Constituent countries ====
There are three Caribbean islands that are countries () within the Kingdom of the Netherlands: Aruba, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten. (The Netherlands is the fourth constituent country in the Kingdom of the Netherlands.)

Sint Maarten covers approximately 40% of the island of Saint Martin; the remaining northern part of the island – the &quot;Collectivity of Saint Martin&quot; – is an overseas territory of France.

==== Special municipalities ====
There are three Caribbean islands that are special municipalities of the Netherlands alone: Bonaire, Sint Eustatius, and Saba. Collectively, these special municipalities of the Netherlands are also known as the BES islands.

== Constitution ==
The Constitution of the Netherlands Antilles was proclaimed on 29 March 1955 by Order-in-Council for the Kingdom. Together with the Islands Regulation of the Netherlands Antilles it formed the constitutional basis for the Netherlands Antilles. Because the Constitution depended on the Islands Regulation, which gave fairly large autonomy to the different island territories, and the Islands Regulation was older than the Constitution, many scholars describe the Netherlands Antilles as a federal arrangement.

The head of state was the monarch of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, who was represented in the Netherlands Antilles by a governor. The governor and the council of ministers, chaired by a prime minister, formed the government. The Netherlands Antilles had a unicameral legislature called the Parliament of the Netherlands Antilles. Its 22 members were fixed in number for the islands making up the Netherlands Antilles: fourteen for Curaçao, three each for Sint Maarten and Bonaire, and one each for Saba and Sint Eustatius.

The Netherlands Antilles were not part of the European Union, but instead listed as overseas countries and territories (OCTs). This status was kept for all the islands after dissolution, and will be kept until at least 2015.

== Economy ==
Tourism, petroleum transshipment and oil refinement (on Curaçao), as well as offshore finance were the mainstays of this small economy, which was closely tied to the outside world. The islands enjoyed a high per capita income and a well-developed infrastructure as compared with other countries in the region.

Almost all consumer and capital goods were imported, with Venezuela, the United States, and Mexico being the major suppliers, as well as the Dutch government which supports the islands with substantial development aid. Poor soils and inadequate water supplies hampered the development of agriculture. The Antillean guilder had a fixed exchange rate with the United States dollar of 1.79:1.

== Demographics ==
A large percentage of the Netherlands Antilleans descended from European colonists and African slaves who were brought and traded there from the 17th to 19th centuries. The rest of the population originated from other Caribbean islands as well as Latin America, East Asia and elsewhere in the world. In Curaçao there was a strong Jewish element going back to the 17th century slave trade.

The language Papiamentu was predominant on Curaçao and Bonaire (as well as the neighboring island of Aruba). This creole descended from Portuguese and West African languages with a strong admixture of Dutch, plus subsequent lexical contributions from Spanish and English. An English-based creole dialect, formally known as Netherlands Antilles Creole, was the native dialect of the inhabitants of Sint Eustatius, Saba and Sint Maarten.

After a decades-long debate, English and Papiamentu were made official languages alongside Dutch in early March 2007.
Legislation was produced in Dutch, but parliamentary debate was in Papiamentu or English, depending on the island. Due to a massive influx of immigrants from Spanish-speaking territories such as the Dominican Republic in the SSS islands, and increased tourism from Venezuela in the ABC islands, Spanish had also become increasingly used.

The majority of the population were followers of the Christian faith, with a Protestant majority in Sint Eustatius and Sint Maarten, and a Roman Catholic majority in Bonaire, Curaçao and Saba. Curaçao also hosted a sizeable group of followers of the Jewish religion, descendants of a Portuguese group of Sephardic Jews that arrived from Amsterdam and Brazil from 1654. In 1982, there was a population of about 2,000 Muslims, with an Islamic association and a mosque in the capital.

Most Netherlands Antilleans were Dutch citizens and this status permitted and encouraged the young and university-educated to emigrate to the Netherlands. This exodus was considered to be to the islands&#x27; detriment, as it created a brain drain. On the other hand, immigrants from the Dominican Republic, Haiti, the Anglophone Caribbean and Colombia had increased their presence on these islands in later years.

==Antillean diaspora in the Netherlands==
== Culture ==

The origins of the population and location of the islands gave the Netherlands Antilles a mixed culture.

Tourism and overwhelming media presence from the United States increased the regional United States influence. On all the islands, the holiday of Carnival had become an important event after its importation from other Caribbean and Latin American countries in the 1960s. Festivities included &quot;jump-up&quot; parades with beautifully colored costumes, floats, and live bands as well as beauty contests and other competitions. Carnival on the islands also included a middle-of-the-night j&#x27;ouvert (juvé) parade that ended at sunrise with the burning of a straw King Momo, cleansing the island of sins and bad luck.

== Sports ==

Netherlands Lesser Antilles competed in the Winter Olympics of 1988, notably finishing 29th in the bobsled, ahead of Jamaica who famously competed but finished 30th.

Baseball is by far the most popular sport. Several players have made it to the Major Leagues, such as Xander Bogaerts, Andrelton Simmons, Hensley Meulens, Randall Simon, Andruw Jones, Kenley Jansen, Jair Jurrjens, Roger Bernadina, Sidney Ponson, Didi Gregorius, Shairon Martis, Wladimir Balentien, and Yurendell DeCaster. Xander Bogaerts won two World Series with the Boston Red Sox, in 2013 and 2018. Andruw Jones played for the Atlanta Braves in the 1996 World Series hitting two home runs in his first game against the New York Yankees.

Three athletes from the former Netherlands Antilles competed in the 2012 Summer Olympics. They, alongside one athlete from South Sudan, competed under the banner of Independent Olympic Athletes.

The Netherlands Antilles, though a non-existing entity since 2010, are allowed to field teams at the Chess Olympiad under this name, because the Curaçao Chess Federation remains officially registered as representing the dissolved country in the FIDE Directory.

== Miscellaneous topics ==
Unlike the metropolitan Netherlands, same-sex marriages were not performed in the Netherlands Antilles, but those performed in other jurisdictions were recognised.

The main prison of the Netherlands Antilles was Koraal Specht, later known as Bon Futuro. It was known for ill treatment of prisoners and bad conditions throughout the years.

The late Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez claimed that the Netherlands was helping the United States to invade Venezuela due to military games in 2006.

== See also ==

* Index of Netherlands Antilles-related articles 
* Outline of the Netherlands Antilles
* British West Indies
* Danish West Indies
* French West Indies
* Spanish West Indies
== Notes ==
== References ==
* Borman, C. (2005) &quot;Het Statuut voor het Koninkrijk&quot;, Deventer: Kluwer.
* Oostindie, G. and Klinkers, I. (2001) &quot;Het Koninkrijk inde Caraïben: een korte geschiedenis van het Nederlandse dekolonisatiebeleid 1940–2000&quot;. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

== External links ==

; Government
* GOV.an – Main governmental site
* Antillenhuis – Cabinet of the Netherlands Antilles&#x27; Plenipotentiary Minister in the Netherlands
* Central Bank of the Netherlands Antilles
; General information
* Netherlands Antilles . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Netherlands Antilles from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
; History
* Method of Securing the Ports and Populations of All the Coasts of the Indies from 1694. The last five pages of the book are about life, economy and culture of the Netherlands Antilles.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="4" end="24" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="51" end="65" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Dutch Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="85" end="94" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="110" end="136" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25528" start="166" end="170" title="Saba (island)" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="172" end="186" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="192" end="204" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="212" end="227" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="233" end="238" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="240" end="247" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="253" end="260" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30209" start="268" end="284" title="Leeward Antilles" label="Leeward Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953333" start="373" end="397" title="Curaçao and Dependencies" label="Curaçao and Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744166" start="403" end="419" title="Dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles" label="it was dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="496" end="517" title="Constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="constituent countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="529" end="555" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="612" end="632" title="Constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="special municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="636" end="647" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="655" end="676" title="Caribbean Netherlands" label="Caribbean Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646305" start="710" end="717" title="Surinam (Dutch colony)" label="Surinam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="733" end="746" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901436" start="807" end="836" title="Suriname (Kingdom of the Netherlands)" label="a separate autonomous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317255" start="1031" end="1046" title="Dutch Caribbean" label="Dutch Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1156" end="1167" title=":nl:Antillianen in Nederland" label="Antillianen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="1285" end="1300" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="1374" end="1387" title="archipelago" label="island groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="1415" end="1430" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30209" start="1465" end="1481" title="Leeward Antilles" label="Leeward Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="1527" end="1543" title="Windward Islands" label="Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631958" start="1605" end="1614" title="subregion" label="subregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="1672" end="1683" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277444" start="1748" end="1759" title="SSS islands" label="SSS islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25596" start="1808" end="1820" title="Saint Martin (island)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19386" start="1878" end="1889" title="ABC islands (Leeward Antilles)" label="ABC islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="2027" end="2036" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q19386" start="2095" end="2106" title="ABC islands (Leeward Antilles)" label="ABC islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544807" start="2167" end="2180" title="Klein Bonaire" label="Klein Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366804" start="2240" end="2253" title="Klein Curaçao" label="Klein Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="2350" end="2357" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="2427" end="2437" title="tropical cyclone" label="hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="2587" end="2594" title="Leeward Islands" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q313369" start="2596" end="2611" title="Alonso de Ojeda" label="Alonso de Ojeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="2623" end="2631" title="Windward Islands" label="windward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="2633" end="2653" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="2832" end="2856" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="2976" end="2983" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="3003" end="3008" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="3028" end="3035" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="3055" end="3069" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q25528" start="3089" end="3093" title="Saba (island)" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="3116" end="3128" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="3161" end="3169" title="Anguilla" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305" start="3199" end="3221" title="British Virgin Islands" label="British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q642481" start="3235" end="3244" title="St. Croix" label="St. Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q185111" start="3249" end="3255" title="Tobago" label="Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="3289" end="3308" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="3443" end="3460" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="3719" end="3728" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="3760" end="3789" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Anglo-Dutch Shell Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744166" start="4137" end="4146" title="Dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="4208" end="4229" title="Countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="constituent countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="4350" end="4361" title="BES islands" label="BES islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="4363" end="4392" title="Caribbean Netherlands" label="became special municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4404" end="4415" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953333" start="4442" end="4466" title="Curaçao and Dependencies" label="Curaçao and Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5478" end="5494" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150747" start="5496" end="5512" title="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands" label="Queen Wilhelmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="5968" end="5986" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047442" start="6244" end="6289" title="Island Regulation of the Netherlands Antilles" label="Island Regulation of the Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="6307" end="6319" title="royal decree" label="royal decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q246044" start="6615" end="6638" title="Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Charter for the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="6709" end="6717" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="7002" end="7055" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269032" start="7494" end="7529" title="Party for the Restructured Antilles" label="Party for the Restructured Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892841" start="8146" end="8159" title="status aparte" label="status aparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194631" start="9332" end="9353" title="Curaçao status referendum, 2009" label="subsequent referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="9426" end="9449" title="Caribbean Netherlands" label="&amp;quot;BES&amp;quot; islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="9895" end="9904" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047442" start="9991" end="10008" title="Island Regulation of the Netherlands Antilles" label="Island Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q944737" start="10056" end="10074" title="Island territories of the Netherlands Antilles" label="island territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q19386" start="10101" end="10104" title="ABC islands (Leeward Antilles)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277444" start="10283" end="10286" title="SSS islands" label="SSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="10563" end="10566" title="BES islands" label="BES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366804" start="11078" end="11091" title="Klein Curaçao" label="Klein Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544807" start="11096" end="11109" title="Klein Bonaire" label="Klein Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="11257" end="11266" title="Countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="11309" end="11314" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="11316" end="11323" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="11329" end="11341" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="11348" end="11359" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25596" start="11486" end="11498" title="Saint Martin (island)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q126125" start="11554" end="11582" title="Collectivity of Saint Martin" label="Collectivity of Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11619" end="11625" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648563" start="11704" end="11726" title="public body (Netherlands)" label="special municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="11734" end="11745" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="11753" end="11760" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="11762" end="11776" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q25528" start="11782" end="11786" title="Saba (island)" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="11808" end="11849" title="Caribbean Netherlands" label="special municipalities of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="11872" end="11883" title="BES islands" label="BES islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q522151" start="11909" end="11949" title="Constitution of the Netherlands Antilles" label="Constitution of the Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047442" start="12037" end="12083" title="Islands Regulation of the Netherlands Antilles" label="Islands Regulation of the Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="12673" end="12683" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568098" start="12707" end="12745" title="Parliament of the Netherlands Antilles" label="Parliament of the Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="12987" end="13001" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q844266" start="13025" end="13059" title="overseas countries and territories" label="overseas countries and territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="13550" end="13559" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="13584" end="13590" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q865909" start="13694" end="13709" title="development aid" label="development aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q522701" start="13797" end="13814" title="Antillean guilder" label="Antillean guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="13997" end="14003" title="Slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="14305" end="14315" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamentu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="14406" end="14412" title="creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="14428" end="14438" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933935" start="14615" end="14642" title="Netherlands Antilles Creole" label="Netherlands Antilles Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="14820" end="14825" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="15046" end="15064" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277444" start="15072" end="15083" title="SSS islands" label="SSS islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="15112" end="15121" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q19386" start="15129" end="15140" title="ABC islands (Leeward Antilles)" label="ABC islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="15470" end="15480" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="15490" end="15499" title="Sephardic" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="15537" end="15543" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="15602" end="15609" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="15645" end="15651" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813244" start="15702" end="15716" title="Dutch nationality law" label="Dutch citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="15905" end="15916" title="brain drain" label="brain drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="15957" end="15975" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="15977" end="15982" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486921" start="15988" end="16008" title="Anglophone Caribbean" label="Anglophone Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="16013" end="16021" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="16394" end="16402" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="16466" end="16475" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103628" start="16737" end="16750" title="j&amp;#x27;ouvert" label="j&amp;#x27;ouvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146749" start="16815" end="16824" title="King Momo" label="King Momo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891045" start="17153" end="17168" title="Xander Bogaerts" label="Xander Bogaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846523" start="17170" end="17187" title="Andrelton Simmons" label="Andrelton Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q958652" start="17189" end="17204" title="Hensley Meulens" label="Hensley Meulens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172021" start="17206" end="17219" title="Randall Simon" label="Randall Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376903" start="17221" end="17233" title="Andruw Jones" label="Andruw Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902109" start="17235" end="17248" title="Kenley Jansen" label="Kenley Jansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q959800" start="17250" end="17263" title="Jair Jurrjens" label="Jair Jurrjens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219401" start="17265" end="17280" title="Roger Bernadina" label="Roger Bernadina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483336" start="17282" end="17295" title="Sidney Ponson" label="Sidney Ponson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026879" start="17297" end="17311" title="Didi Gregorius" label="Didi Gregorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286558" start="17313" end="17327" title="Shairon Martis" label="Shairon Martis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318574" start="17329" end="17347" title="Wladimir Balentien" label="Wladimir Balentien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176824" start="17353" end="17371" title="Yurendell DeCaster" label="Yurendell DeCaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="17660" end="17680" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="17715" end="17726" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q140499" start="17757" end="17785" title="Independent Olympic Athletes at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="Independent Olympic Athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q428303" start="17889" end="17903" title="Chess Olympiad" label="Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="18033" end="18037" title="Fédération Internationale des Échecs" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="18114" end="18131" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14331108" start="18290" end="18303" title="Sentro di Detenshon i Korekshon Kòrsou" label="Koraal Specht"/>
<link wikidata="Q8440" start="18448" end="18459" title="Hugo Chávez" label="Hugo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735465" start="18589" end="18635" title="Index of Netherlands Antilles-related articles" label="Index of Netherlands Antilles-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112769" start="18639" end="18674" title="Outline of the Netherlands Antilles" label="Outline of the Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="18677" end="18696" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q829655" start="18699" end="18717" title="Danish West Indies" label="Danish West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022" start="18720" end="18738" title="French West Indies" label="French West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213222" start="18741" end="18760" title="Spanish West Indies" label="Spanish West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="19337" end="19355" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="19363" end="19390" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21334" wikidata="Q7887477" url="?curid=21334" title="Geography of the Netherlands Antilles">
<text>The Netherlands Antilles was a constituent country in the Caribbean Sea. It consisted of two island groups, the ABC islands Curaçao, Bonaire and (until 1986) Aruba just north of Venezuela, and the SSS islands east of the Virgin Islands.

The Netherlands Antilles had 960 km2 (1153 km2 before 1986) of land, which included no major lakes or other bodies of water.

Territory included the islands of Aruba until 1986 and Curaçao, Bonaire, Saba, Sint Eustatius, Sint Maarten (which is the Dutch part of the island of Saint Martin) until 2010 when the Netherlands Antilles was dissolved. Its only land boundary was with France on the island of Saint Martin, which was 10.2 kilometers in length. The Netherlands Antilles had 364 kilometers (432 km before 1986) of coastline.

== Climate ==
Tropical; ameliorated by northeast trade winds.
== Statistics ==
Maritime claims:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;exclusive fishing zone:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;territorial sea:&quot;
Terrain:
generally hilly, volcanic interiors

Elevation extremes:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;lowest point:&quot;
Caribbean Sea 0 m
&lt;br&gt;&quot;highest point:&quot;
Mount Scenery 

Natural resources:
phosphates (Curaçao only), salt (Bonaire only)

Land use:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;arable land:&quot;
10%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;permanent crops:&quot;
0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;permanent pastures:&quot;
0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;forests and woodland:&quot;
0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;other:&quot;
90% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land:
NA km2

Natural hazards:
Curaçao and Bonaire are south of Caribbean hurricane belt and are rarely threatened; Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint Eustatius are subject to hurricanes from July to October.

Environment - current issues:
NA

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="4" end="24" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="31" end="50" title="Countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="constituent country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="58" end="71" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="93" end="105" title="island group" label="island group"/>
<link wikidata="Q19386" start="112" end="123" title="ABC islands (Lesser Antilles)" label="ABC islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="124" end="131" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="133" end="140" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="158" end="163" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277444" start="197" end="208" title="SSS islands" label="SSS islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="221" end="235" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="398" end="403" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="419" end="426" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="428" end="435" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25528" start="437" end="441" title="Saba (island)" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="443" end="457" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="459" end="471" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q25596" start="514" end="526" title="Saint Martin (island)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744166" start="573" end="582" title="Dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="616" end="622" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301834" start="1110" end="1123" title="Mount Scenery" label="Mount Scenery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21335" wikidata="Q1993811" url="?curid=21335" title="Demographics of the Netherlands Antilles">
<text>Demographic features of the population of the former Netherlands Antilles include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.

== Population of the Islands ==

According to the official estimates of the Central Bureau of Statistics of the Netherlands Antilles, the five islands had a combined population of 211,871 as at 1 January 2013. The population of the individual islands was as follows: 
*Bonaire - 17,408
*Curaçao - 154,843
*Saba - 1,991
*Sint Eustatius - 4,020
*Sint Maarten - 33,609

For comparison: Aruba - 103,400

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
The capital and largest city was Willemstad.

Age structure:
* 0–14 years: 23,9% (male 27 197; female 25 886)
* 15–64 years: 67.3% (male 71 622; female 77 710)
* 65 years and over: 8.7% (male 7 925; female 11 396) (2006 est.)

Population growth rate: 0,79% (2006 est.)

Birth rate: 14,78 births/1,000 population (2006 est.)

Death rate: 6,45 deaths/1,000 population (2006 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2006 est.)

Human sex ratio:
* at birth: 1,05 male(s)/female
* under 15 years: 1,05 male(s)/female
* 15–64 years: 0,92 male(s)/female
* 65 years and over: 0,7 male(s)/female
* total population: 0,93 male(s)/female (2006 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 9,76 deaths/1,000 live births (2006 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
* total population: 76,03 years
* male: 73,76 years
* female: 78,41 years (2006 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.98 children born/woman (2008 est.)

Nationality:
* by law: Dutch &quot;(Nederlandse)&quot;
* noun: Netherlands Antillean(s)
* adjective: Netherlands Antillean

Ethnic groups: mixed black 85%, Carib Amerindian, white, East Asian 15%

Religions: Roman Catholic 72%, Pentecostal 4,9%, Protestant 3.5%, Seventh-day Adventist 3,1%, Methodist 2,9%, other Christian 4,2%, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses 1,7%, Jewish 1,3%

Languages: Dutch, English and Papiamento are official languages. Papiamento (a Portuguese-West African creole with Dutch and Spanish influence) predominates on Curaçao and Bonaire, while English is widely spoken. English is the most commonly spoken language on Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint Eustatius.

Literacy:
* definition: age 15 and over can read and write
* total population: 96,7%
* male: 96,7%
* female: 96,8% (2003 est.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="53" end="73" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="82" end="100" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="102" end="111" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="483" end="490" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="501" end="508" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q25528" start="520" end="524" title="Saba (island)" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="534" end="548" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="558" end="570" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="597" end="602" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="713" end="731" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="765" end="772" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q132679" start="794" end="804" title="Willemstad" label="Willemstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="1031" end="1041" title="Birth rate" label="Birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="1086" end="1096" title="Death rate" label="Death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="1140" end="1158" title="Net migration rate" label="Net migration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861780" start="1206" end="1221" title="Human sex ratio" label="Human sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="1421" end="1437" title="Infant mortality" label="Infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="1487" end="1502" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="1600" end="1620" title="Total fertility rate" label="Total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q231002" start="1660" end="1671" title="Nationality" label="Nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813244" start="1675" end="1681" title="Dutch nationality law" label="by law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="1784" end="1796" title="Ethnic group" label="Ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="1805" end="1810" title="Black people" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="1816" end="1821" title="Island Caribs" label="Carib"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1822" end="1832" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="1834" end="1839" title="White people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="1841" end="1851" title="East Asian" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="1857" end="1865" title="Religion" label="Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1868" end="1882" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="1888" end="1899" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1906" end="1916" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="1923" end="1944" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="1951" end="1960" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="1989" end="2013" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2020" end="2026" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="2033" end="2041" title="Language" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2044" end="2049" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2051" end="2058" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="2063" end="2073" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="2098" end="2108" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2112" end="2122" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="2136" end="2142" title="creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="2335" end="2343" title="Literacy" label="Literacy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21337" wikidata="Q5333834" url="?curid=21337" title="Economy of the Netherlands Antilles">
<text>The Netherlands Antilles was an autonomous Caribbean country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which was formally dissolved in 2010.

==Overview==
Tourism, petroleum transshipment, and offshore finance were the mainstays of the economy, which was closely tied to the outside world. The islands enjoyed a high per capita income and a well-developed infrastructure as compared with other countries in the region at the time of the dissolution. Almost all consumer and capital goods were imported, with Venezuela, the United States, and Mexico being the major suppliers. Poor soils and inadequate water supplies hampered the development of agriculture.

==Statistics==

Gross Domestic product- $3.81 billion
GDP:
purchasing power parity - $3 600 million (3,6 G$) (2007 est.)

GDP - real growth rate:
4,0% (2007 est.)

GDP - per capita:
purchasing power parity - $19 000 (2007 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;agriculture:&quot;
1%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;industry:&quot;
15%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;services:&quot;
84% (2007 est.)

Population below poverty line:
NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;lowest 10%:&quot;
± 1,5%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;highest 10%:&quot;
± 31%

Inflation rate (consumer prices):
3,0% (2007)

Labour force:
83 600 (2005)

Labour force - by occupation:
agriculture 1%, industry 20%, services 79% (2007 est.)

Unemployment rate:
9% (2007 est.)

Budget:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;revenues:&quot;
$757,9 million
&lt;br&gt;&quot;expenditures:&quot;
$949,5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (2004 est.)

==Composition of the Economy==

Industries:
tourism (Curaçao, Sint Maarten, and Bonaire), petroleum refining (Curaçao), petroleum transhipment facilities (Curaçao and Bonaire), light manufacturing (Curaçao)

Industrial production growth rate:
NA%

Electricity - production:
1 005 GWh (2004)

Electricity - production by source:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;fossil fuel:&quot;
100%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;hydro:&quot;
0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;nuclear:&quot;
0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;other:&quot;
0% (1998)

Electricity - consumption:
934,7 GWh (2004)

Electricity - exports:
0 kWh (2004)

Electricity - imports:
0 kWh (2004)

Agriculture - products:
aloes, sorghum, peanuts, vegetables, tropical fruit

==Exports and Imports==

Exports:
$2.076 million (f.o.b., 2004)

Exports - commodities:
petroleum products

Exports - partners:
US 32%, Panama 10.1%, Guatemala 7,9%, Haiti 6,4%, The Bahamas 5,1% (2005)

Imports:
$4.383 billion (c.i.f., 2004)

Imports - commodities:
crude petroleum, food, manufactures

Imports - partners:
Venezuela 50%, US 22,2%, Italy 5.2%, Netherlands 5% (2005)

==Foreign Debt and Economic Aid==

Its external debt was $2 680 million (2004). The IMF provided $61 million in 2000, and the Netherlands continued its support with $40 million (2004)

==Currency==
Its currency was 1 Netherlands Antillean guilder, gulden, or florin (NAf.) = 100 cents
Its exchange rate was Netherlands Antillean guilders, gulden, or florins (NAf.) per US$1 – 1.790 (fixed rate since 1989).

==Fiscal Year==

Fiscal year:
calendar year

== See also ==
* Economy of the Caribbean
* Central banks and currencies of the Caribbean
* List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)
* List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="4" end="24" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="43" end="52" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q456407" start="171" end="184" title="transshipment" label="transshipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744166" start="434" end="445" title="dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="505" end="514" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="520" end="533" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="539" end="545" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q38526" start="748" end="755" title="million" label="million"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1608" end="1615" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="1617" end="1624" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="1626" end="1638" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="1644" end="1651" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="1654" end="1663" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="1747" end="1760" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q127134" start="2181" end="2185" title="aloe" label="aloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="2188" end="2195" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="2197" end="2203" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="2206" end="2215" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q844144" start="2218" end="2232" title="tropical fruit" label="tropical fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2362" end="2364" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="2370" end="2376" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="2384" end="2393" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="2400" end="2405" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="2416" end="2423" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="2557" end="2566" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2572" end="2574" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2582" end="2587" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2594" end="2605" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2701" end="2704" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q522701" start="2834" end="2882" title="Netherlands Antillean guilder" label="Netherlands Antillean guilder, gulden, or florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333817" start="3087" end="3111" title="Economy of the Caribbean" label="Economy of the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q963348" start="3114" end="3159" title="Central banks and currencies of the Caribbean" label="Central banks and currencies of the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25242041" start="3162" end="3225" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)" label="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462848" start="3228" end="3287" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)" label="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21338" wikidata="Q5684801" url="?curid=21338" title="Telecommunications in Curaçao">
<text>Telecommunications in Curaçao.

==Telephone==
The ITU international calling code for the country is +5999.
==Radio==

Terrestrial radio stations operating in Curaçao include the following.

===FM radio===

===AM Radio===
===AM from nearby countries===
Some radio stations from mainland Venezuela and Bonaire can be received in Curaçao:
==Television==

Operating television stations include:

Cable TV providers:
* Columbus Communications
* United Telecommunication Services (UTS) / TDS TV Distribution Systems N.V.

Over-the-top media services:
* Cariflix

==Internet==
* Country code: .cw (Curaçao West Indies)
* As of 2016, an estimated 138,750 people use the Internet in Curaçao, or 93.6% of the population.
* Internet service providers include UTS, FLOW, and Tres.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="22" end="29" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="50" end="80" title="List of country calling codes" label="ITU international calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150028" start="414" end="437" title="Columbus Communications" label="Columbus Communications"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="440" end="473" title="United Telecommunication Services" label="United Telecommunication Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q829548" start="516" end="543" title="Over-the-top media services" label="Over-the-top media services"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="547" end="555" title="Cariflix" label="Cariflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="572" end="584" title="Country code" label="Country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q159410" start="586" end="611" title=".cw" label=".cw (Curaçao West Indies)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="713" end="738" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21339" wikidata="Q7835124" url="?curid=21339" title="Communications in the Netherlands Antilles">
<text>There were communications (including transport) in the Netherlands Antilles, before the dissolution of that country.

==Rail==
No railway tracks existed in the Netherlands Antilles

==Roads==
All driving was on the right. 
==Sea==
===Ports and harbours===
Fort Bay (Saba), Kralendijk (Bonaire), Philipsburg (Saint Martin), Willemstad (Curaçao)

There was a Curaçaon Dock Company.

===Merchant marine===
;total
:110 ships (1,000 GT or over) totaling 1,028,910 GT/
;ships by type
:bulk 2, cargo 27, chemical tanker 2, combination ore/oil 3, container 16, liquified gas 4, multi-functional large load carrier 18, passenger 1, petroleum tanker 5, refrigerated cargo 26, roll-on/roll-off 6 (1999 est.)
;note
:a flag of convenience registry; includes ships of 2 countries: Belgium owns 9 ships, Germany 1 (1998 est.)

==Air==
635,872.1 cubic inches of air.

==Public transport==
There were buses and taxis.

==Post==
See Postage stamps and postal history of the Netherlands Antilles.

==Telephones==

There were telephones.

==Broadcasting==
There was radio and television broadcasting. Channels included Telecuraçao.

==Newspapers==
Newspapers were published.

==Cinemas==
There were not cinemas.

==See also==
*also

==References==

*&quot;Communications&quot; in &quot;The Netherlands Antilles&quot; The Statesman&#x27;s Year-Book 1985-86. pp 894 &amp; 895. The Statesman&#x27;s Year-Book 1988-89. p 902. The Statesman&#x27;s Year-Book 1990-91. p 915. The Statesman&#x27;s Year Book: 1992-93. pp 1004 &amp; 1005. The Statesman&#x27;s Year-Book 1993–1994. pp 1004 &amp; 1005.
**&quot;Shipping&quot; and &quot;Roads&quot; and &quot;Post and Broadcasting&quot;. The Statesman&#x27;s Year-Book 1975-76. p 1184.
**&quot;Shipping&quot; and &quot;Roads&quot; and &quot;Post&quot;. The Statesman&#x27;s Year-Book 1969-70. p 1186. The Statesman&#x27;s Year-Book 1974-75. p 1180.
**See also other annual editions of this book.
*Willem van de Poll. The Netherlands Antilles. W van Hoeve. 1960. p 10.
*&quot;Harbour Statistics&quot; and &quot;Transport and Communication&quot;. Statistical Yearbook of the Netherlands Antilles 2006-2007.
*&quot;Port of Willemstad&quot;. Strategies for Global and Regional Ports: The Case of Caribbean Container and Cruise Ports. Springer Science+Business Media. 1998. pp 122 to 128.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="37" end="46" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="55" end="75" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744166" start="88" end="99" title="Dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470779" start="256" end="264" title="Fort Bay" label="Fort Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25528" start="266" end="270" title="Saba (island)" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q331584" start="273" end="283" title="Kralendijk" label="Kralendijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="285" end="292" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30958" start="295" end="306" title="Philipsburg, Sint Maarten" label="Philipsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="308" end="320" title="Sint Maarten" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132679" start="323" end="333" title="Willemstad" label="Willemstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="335" end="342" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q604097" start="706" end="725" title="flag of convenience" label="flag of convenience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233954" start="915" end="976" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the Netherlands Antilles" label="Postage stamps and postal history of the Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155879" start="1099" end="1110" title="Telecuraçao" label="Telecuraçao"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21342" wikidata="Q33788" url="?curid=21342" title="New Caledonia">
<text>New Caledonia ( ; ) is a group of islands in the southwest Pacific Ocean, southwest of Vanuatu and east of Australia. Located from Metropolitan France, it forms a &quot;sui generis&quot; collectivity of the French Republic, a legal status unique in overseas France and is enshrined in a dedicated chapter of the French Constitution.

The archipelago, part of the Melanesia subregion, includes the main island of Grande Terre, the Loyalty Islands, the Chesterfield Islands, the Belep archipelago, the Isle of Pines, and a few remote islets. The Chesterfield Islands are in the Coral Sea. French people, especially locals, call Grande Terre , a nickname also used more generally for the entire New Caledonia. Pro-independence Kanak parties use the name ( ) to refer to New Caledonia, a term coined in the 1980s from the ethnic name of the indigenous Melanesian Kanak people who make up 41% of New Caledonia&#x27;s population. New Caledonia is one of the European Union&#x27;s Overseas Countries and Territories (OCTs), but it is not part of the European Union.

New Caledonia has a land area of divided into three provinces. The North and South Provinces are on the New Caledonian mainland, while the Loyalty Islands Province is a series of four inhabited islands off the east coast of mainland (from north to south: Ouvéa, Lifou, Tiga, and Maré). New Caledonia&#x27;s population of 271,407 (October 2019 census) is of diverse origins and varies by geography; in the North and Loyalty Islands Provinces, the indigenous Kanak people predominate, while the wealthy South Province contains significant populations of European (Caldoches and Metropolitan French), Kanak, and Polynesian (mostly Wallisian) origin, as well as smaller groups of Southeast Asian, Pied-Noir, and North African heritage. The capital of New Caledonia is Nouméa.

== History ==
New Caledonia was part of the continent Zealandia, which broke off from the supercontinent Gondwana between 79 million and 83 million years ago. The earliest traces of human presence in New Caledonia date back to the period when the Lapita culture was influential in large parts of the Pacific, –500 BC or 1300–200 BC. The Lapita were highly skilled navigators and agriculturists. The first settlements were concentrated around the coast and date back to the period between c. 1100 BC and AD 200.
British explorer James Cook was one of the first Europeans to sight New Caledonia, on 4 September 1774, during his second voyage. He named it &quot;New Caledonia&quot;, as the northeast of the island reminded him of Scotland. The west coast of Grande Terre was approached by the Comte de Lapérouse in 1788, shortly before his disappearance, and the Loyalty Islands were first visited between 1793 and 1796 when Mare, Lifou, Tiga, and Ouvea were mapped by English whaler William Raven. Raven encountered the island, then named Britania, and today known as Maré (Loyalty Is.), in November 1793. From 1796 until 1840, only a few sporadic contacts with the archipelago were recorded. About 50 American whalers left record of being in the region (Grande Terre, Loyalty Is., Walpole and Hunter) between 1793 and 1887. Contacts with visiting ships became more frequent after 1840, because of their interest in sandalwood.

As trade in sandalwood declined, it was replaced by a new business enterprise, &quot;blackbirding&quot;, a euphemism for taking Melanesian or Western Pacific Islanders from New Caledonia, the Loyalty Islands, New Hebrides, New Guinea, and the Solomon Islands into slavery, indentured or forced labour in the sugarcane plantations in Fiji and Queensland by various methods of trickery and deception. Blackbirding was practised by both French and Australian traders, but in New Caledonia&#x27;s case, the trade in the early decades of the twentieth century involved kidnapping children from the Loyalty Islands to the Grand Terre for forced labour in plantation agriculture. New Caledonia&#x27;s primary experience with blackbirding revolved around a trade from the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu) to the Grand Terre for labour in plantation agriculture, mines, as well as guards over convicts and in some public works. In the early years of the trade, coercion was used to lure Melanesian islanders onto ships. In later years indenture systems were developed; however, when it came to the French slave trade, which took place between its Melanesian colonies of the New Hebrides and New Caledonia, very few regulations were implemented. This represented a departure from contemporary developments in Australia, since increased regulations were developed to mitigate the abuses of blackbirding and &#x27;recruitment&#x27; strategies on the coastlines.

The first missionaries from the London Missionary Society and the Marist Brothers arrived in the 1840s. In 1849, the crew of the American ship &quot;Cutter&quot; was killed and eaten by the Pouma clan. Human cannibalism was widespread throughout New Caledonia.

=== French colonisation ===

On 24 September 1853, under orders from Emperor Napoleon III, Admiral Febvrier Despointes took formal possession of New Caledonia. Captain Louis-Marie-François Tardy de Montravel founded Port-de-France (Nouméa) on 25 June 1854. A few dozen free settlers settled on the west coast in the following years. New Caledonia became a penal colony in 1864, and from the 1860s until the end of the transportations in 1897, France sent about 22,000 criminals and political prisoners to New Caledonia. The for 1888 indicates that 10,428 convicts, including 2,329 freed ones, were on the island as of 1 May 1888, by far the largest number of convicts detained in French overseas penitentiaries. The convicts included many Communards, arrested after the failed Paris Commune of 1871, including Henri de Rochefort and Louise Michel. Between 1873 and 1876, 4,200 political prisoners were &quot;relegated&quot; to New Caledonia. Only 40 of them settled in the colony; the rest returned to France after being granted amnesty in 1879 and 1880.
In 1864, nickel was discovered on the banks of the Diahot River; with the establishment of the in 1876, mining began in earnest. To work the mines the French imported labourers from neighbouring islands and from the New Hebrides, and later from Japan, the Dutch East Indies, and French Indochina. The French government also attempted to encourage European immigration, without much success.

The indigenous Kanak people were excluded from the French economy and from mining work, and ultimately confined to reservations. This sparked a violent reaction in 1878, when High Chief of La Foa managed to unite many of the central tribes and launched a guerrilla war that killed 200 Frenchmen and 1,000 Kanaks. A occurred in 1917, with Protestant missionaries like Maurice Leenhardt functioning as witnesses to the events of this war. Leenhardt would pen a number of ethnographic works on the Kanak of New Caledonia. Noël of Tiamou led the 1917 rebellion, which resulted in a number of orphaned children, one of whom was taken into the care of Protestant missionary Alphonse Rouel. This child, Wenceslas Thi, would become the father of Jean-Marie Tjibaou (1936–1989).

Europeans brought new diseases such as smallpox and measles, which caused the deaths of many natives. The Kanak population declined from around 60,000 in 1878 to 27,100 in 1921, and their numbers did not increase again until the 1930s.

===World War II===

In June 1940, after the fall of France, the General Council of New Caledonia voted to reject the Vichy government and continue supporting the Allied military effort against Germany. However, the colonial governor Georges-Marc Pélicier promulgated the Vichy government&#x27;s Constitutional Law, which sparked street demonstrations and an assassination attempt. By this time Caldoches had been in contact with Charles de Gaulle who encouraged them to form a Free French committee and appointed Henri Sautot as governor. The Vichy government despatched a warship, &quot;Dumont d&#x27;Urville&quot;, at Pélicier&#x27;s request, but soon deemed him incompetent and appointed an acting governor. By this time the Australian government had agreed to intervene and despatched HMAS &quot;Adelaide&quot; to oversee the installation of Sautot as governor. A stand-off between &quot;Dumont d&#x27;Urville&quot; and &quot;Adelaide&quot; followed, with Pélicier and other pro-Vichy officials ultimately deported to French Indochina.

In 1941, some 300 men from the territory volunteered for service overseas. They were joined, in April, by 300 men from French Polynesia (&#x27;the Tahitians&#x27;), plus a handful from the French districts of the New Hebrides: together they formed the . The Caledonians formed two of the companies, and the Polynesians the other two. In May 1941, they sailed to Australia and boarded the for the onward voyage to Africa. They joined the other Free French (FF) battalions in Qastina in August, before moving to the Western Desert with the 1st FF Brigade (). There they were one of the four battalions who took part in the breakout after the Battle of Bir Hakeim in 1942. Their losses could not easily be replaced from the Pacific and they were therefore amalgamated with the Frenchmen of another battalion wearing the anchor of , the BIM, to form the . The combined battalion formed part of the /, alongside three divisions from the French North African forces, in the French Expeditionary Corps during the Italian Campaign. They landed in Provence in 1944, when they were posted out and replaced by local French volunteers and résistants.

Meanwhile, in March 1942, with the assistance of Australia, New Caledonia became an important Allied base, and the main South Pacific Fleet base of the United States Navy in the South Pacific moved to Nouméa in 1942–1943. The fleet that turned back the Japanese Navy in the Battle of the Coral Sea in May 1942 was based at Nouméa. American troops stationed on New Caledonia numbered as many as 50,000, matching the entire local population at the time.

=== French overseas territory ===
In 1946, New Caledonia became an overseas territory. By 1953, French citizenship had been granted to all New Caledonians, regardless of ethnicity.

During the late 1940s and early 1950s, New Caledonia strengthened its economic links with Australia, particularly as turmoil within France and its empire weakened New Caledonia&#x27;s traditional economic links to metropolitan France; New Caledonia supplied nickel to Australia in exchange for coal vital for smelting nickel. New Caledonian exports of iron ore and timber to Australia also increased during this time period.

The European and Polynesian populations gradually increased in the years leading to the nickel boom of 1969–1972, and the indigenous Kanak Melanesians became a minority, though they were still the largest ethnic group.

====The Events====
Between 1976 and 1988, a period referred to as &quot;the Events&quot; (), conflicts between French government actions and the Kanak independence movement saw periods of serious violence and disorder. In 1983, a statute of &quot;enlarged autonomy&quot; for the territory proposed a five-year transition period and a referendum in 1989. In March 1984, the Front Indépendantiste, a Kanak resistance group, seized farms and the Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front (FLNKS) formed a provisional government. In January 1985, the French Left-wing government offered sovereignty to the Kanaks and legal protection for European settlers. The plan faltered as violence escalated. The government declared a state of emergency; however, regional elections went ahead, and the FLNKS won control of three out of four provinces. The centre-right government elected in France in March 1986 began eroding the arrangements established under the Socialists, redistributing lands mostly without consideration of native land claims, resulting in over two-thirds going to Europeans and less than a third to the Kanaks. By the end of 1987, roadblocks, gun battles and the destruction of property culminated in the Ouvéa cave hostage taking, a dramatic hostage crisis just days before the 1988 French presidential election began. Pro-independence militants on Ouvéa killed four gendarmes and took 27 hostage. The military assaulted the cave to rescue the hostages. Nineteen Kanak hostage takers were killed and another three died in custody, while two soldiers were killed during the assault.

====Nouméa Accord and independence referendums====
The Matignon Agreements, signed on 26 June 1988, ensured a decade of stability. The Nouméa Accord, signed 5 May 1998, set the groundwork for a 20-year transition that gradually transfers competences to the local government.

Following the timeline set by the Nouméa Accord that stated a vote must take place by the end of 2018, the groundwork was laid for a referendum on full independence from France at a meeting chaired by the French Prime Minister Édouard Philippe on 2 November 2017, to be held by November 2018. Voter list eligibility was the subject of a long dispute, but the details were resolved in an electoral list that granted automatic eligibility to voters of Kanak origin but excluded those of other origins who had not been longtime residents of the territory. The referendum was held on 4 November 2018, with independence being rejected.

Another referendum was held in October 2020, with voters once again choosing to remain a part of France. In the 2018 referendum, 56.7% of voters chose to remain in France. In the 2020 referendum, this percentage dropped with 53.4% of voters choosing to remain part of France.
The third referendum was held on 12 December 2021. The referendum was boycotted by pro-independence forces, who argued for a delayed vote due to the impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic; when the French government declined to do so, they called for a boycott. This led to 96% of voters choosing to stay with France.

In May 2024, riots broke out amid debate over a proposed electoral reform in the territory.

== Politics ==
New Caledonia is a territory &quot;sui generis&quot; to which France has gradually transferred certain powers. As such its citizens have French nationality and vote for the president of France. They have the right to vote in elections to the European Parliament. It is governed by a 54-member Territorial Congress, a legislative body composed of members of three provincial assemblies. The French State is represented in the territory by a High Commissioner. At a national level, New Caledonia is represented in the French Parliament by two deputies and two senators. At the 2012 French presidential election, the voter turnout in New Caledonia was 61.19%.

For 25 years, the party system in New Caledonia was dominated by the anti-independence The Rally–UMP. This dominance ended with the emergence of a new party, Avenir Ensemble, also opposed to independence, but considered more open to dialogue with the Kanak movement, which is part of the Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front, a coalition of several pro-independence groups.

=== Customary authority ===
Kanak society has several layers of customary authority, from the 4,000–5,000 family-based clans to the eight customary areas () that make up the territory. Clans are led by clan chiefs and constitute 341 tribes, each headed by a tribal chief. The tribes are further grouped into 57 customary chiefdoms (), each headed by a head chief, and forming the administrative subdivisions of the customary areas.

The Customary Senate is the assembly of the various traditional councils of the Kanaks, and has jurisdiction over the law proposals concerning the Kanak identity. The Customary Senate is composed of 16 members appointed by each traditional council, with two representatives per customary area. In its advisory role, the Customary Senate must be consulted on law proposals &quot;concerning the Kanak identity&quot; as defined in the Nouméa Accord. It also has a deliberative role on law proposals that would affect identity, the civil customary statute, and the land system. A new president is appointed each year in August or September, and the presidency rotates between the eight customary areas.

Kanak people have recourse to customary authorities regarding civil matters such as marriage, adoption, inheritance, and some land issues. The French administration typically respects decisions made in the customary system. However, their jurisdiction is sharply limited in penal matters, as some matters relating to the customary justice system, including the use of corporal punishment, are seen as clashing with the human rights obligations of France.

===Military and gendarmerie===
The Armed Forces of New Caledonia (, or ) include about 2,000 soldiers, mainly deployed in Koumac, Nandaï, Tontouta, Plum, and Nouméa. The land forces consist of a regiment of the , the . About 80 percent of the 700-member regiment is composed of soldiers on short-term (four month) deployments from metropolitan France. As of 2018, only about 30 personnel in the regiment were locally recruited.

The naval forces incorporate several vessels of the French Navy including: one , , the patrol and support vessel and , the lead ship of the class of patrol vessels. The French Navy will further reinforce its offshore patrol capabilities in New Caledonia by deploying a second vessel of the class () to the territory by 2025. One (EDA-S) landing craft is also to be delivered to naval forces based in New Caledonia by 2025. The landing craft is to better support coastal and riverine operations in the territory.

As of the latter 2010s, French naval aviation and air force elements in New Caledonia included two Navy Falcon 200 Gardian maritime surveillance aircraft (drawn from Flotilla 25F), which are to be replaced by the more modern Falcon 2000 Albatros starting in 2025/26, plus two Casa CN235 transport aircraft and three Puma helicopters from the Air Force&#x27;s 52 &quot;Tontouta&quot; Squadron. Prior to 2022, the frigate operated the Alouette III helicopter. However, with the retirement of the type in 2022, it is being replaced by the Eurocopter Dauphin N3. In 2022, the French Air Force demonstrated a capacity to reinforce the territory by deploying three Rafale fighters, supported by A400M transport aircraft and A330 MRTT Phénix tankers, from France to New Caledonia for a three-week exercise.

In addition, some 855 personnel from the National Gendarmerie are stationed on the archipelago, divided into 4 companies, 27 brigades and several specialized, and mobile Gendarmerie units. During periods such the 2021 referendum on independence, these forces have been significantly reinforced with personnel deployed from metropolitan France. The air component includes two helicopters while the deploys the patrol boat &quot;Dumbea&quot; in the territory.

=== Status ===
New Caledonia has been a member of the Pacific Community since 1983 with Nouméa the home of the organization&#x27;s regional headquarters. Since 1986, the United Nations Committee on Decolonization has included New Caledonia on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories. An independence referendum was held the following year, but independence was rejected by a large majority.

Under the Nouméa Accord, signed in 1998 following a period of secessionist unrest in the 1980s and approved in a referendum, New Caledonia was granted special status. Twenty years after inception, the Nouméa Accord required an referendum on independence which was held on 4 November 2018. The result was that 56.9% of voters chose to remain with France. The Nouméa Accord required another independence referendum, which was held on 4 October 2020. The result was that 53.26% of voters chose to remain with France. The third and last referendum permitted by the Nouméa Accord was held on 12 December 2021, confirming New Caledonia as part of the French Republic with 96% voting &quot;no&quot; to independence after the vote was boycotted by the bulk of the Kanak population.

The official name of the territory, , could be changed in the near future due to the accord, which states that &quot;a name, a flag, an anthem, a motto, and the design of banknotes will have to be sought by all parties together, to express the Kanak identity and the future shared by all parties.&quot; To date, however, there has been no consensus on a new name for the territory, although &quot;Kanak Republic&quot; is popular among 40% of the population. New Caledonia has increasingly adopted its own symbols, choosing an anthem, a motto, and a new design for its banknotes. In July 2010, the Congress of New Caledonia voted in favour of a wish to fly the Kanak flag of the independence movement FLNKS alongside the French tricolour, as dual flags of the territory. The wish, legally non-binding, proved controversial. A majority of New Caledonian communes, but not all, now fly both flags, the rest flying only the French Tricolour. The non-official adoption made New Caledonia one of the few countries or territories in the world with two flags. The decision to wish for the use of two flags has been a constant battleground between the two sides and led the coalition government to collapse in February 2011.

== Administrative divisions ==
The institutional organization is the result of the organic law and ordinary law passed by the Parliament on 16 February 1999.

The archipelago is divided into three provinces:
* South Province (&quot;province Sud&quot;). Provincial capital: Nouméa. Area: 9,407 km2. Population: 212,082 inhabitants (2019).
* North Province (&quot;province Nord&quot;). Provincial capital: Koné. Area: 7,348 km2. Population: 49,910 inhabitants (2019).
* Loyalty Islands Province (&quot;province des îles Loyauté&quot;). Provincial capital: Lifou. Area: 1,981 km2. Population: 18,353 inhabitants (2019).

New Caledonia is further divided into 33 communes (municipalities). One commune, Poya, is divided between two provinces. The northern half of Poya, with the main settlement and most of the population, is part of the North Province, while the southern half of the commune, with only 210 inhabitants in 2019, is part of the South Province.

== Geography ==


New Caledonia is part of Zealandia, a fragment of the ancient Gondwana super-continent, which is part of Oceania. It is speculated that New Caledonia separated from Australia roughly 66 million years ago, subsequently drifting in a north-easterly direction, reaching its present position about 50 million years ago.

The mainland is divided in length by a central mountain range whose highest peaks are Mont Panié () in the north and Mont Humboldt () in the southeast. The east coast is covered by a lush vegetation. The west coast, with its large savannahs and plains suitable for farming, is a drier area. Many ore-rich massifs are found along this coast.

The Diahot River is the longest river of New Caledonia, flowing for some . It has a catchment area of and opens north-westward into the Baie d&#x27;Harcourt, flowing towards the northern point of the island along the western escarpment of the Mount Panié. Most of the island is covered by wet evergreen forests, while savannahs dominate the lower elevations. The New Caledonian lagoon, with a total area of is one of the largest lagoons in the world. The lagoon and the surrounding New Caledonia Barrier Reef was named a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2008 for its exceptional beauty and marine biodiversity. In May 2023, there was an earthquake and tsunami in New Caledonia. This triggered a tsunami warning here as well as in other nearby countries.

=== Climate ===
The climate is tropical, with a hot and humid season from November to March with temperatures between , and a cooler, dry season from June to August with temperatures between , linked by two short interstices. The tropical climate is strongly moderated by the oceanic influence and the trade winds that attenuate humidity, which can be close to 80%. The average annual temperature is 23 °C, with historical extremes of .

The rainfall records show that precipitation differs greatly within the island. The of rainfall recorded in Galarino are three times the average of the west coast. There are also dry periods, because of the effects of El Niño. Between December and April, tropical depressions and cyclones can cause winds to exceed a speed of , with gusts of and very abundant rainfall. The last cyclone affecting New Caledonia was Cyclone Niran, in March 2021.

== Environment ==
New Caledonia has many unique taxa, especially birds and plants. It has the richest diversity in the world per square kilometre. The biodiversity is caused by Grande Terre&#x27;s central mountain range, which has created a variety of niches, landforms and micro-climates where endemic species thrive.

Largely due to its nickel industry, New Caledonia emits a high level of carbon dioxide per person compared to other countries. In 2019, it emitted 55.25 tons of CO2 per person, compared to 4.81 for France. The combination of the exceptional biodiversity of New Caledonia and its threatened status has made it one of the most critical biodiversity hotspots on Earth.

In 2001, Bruno Van Peteghem was awarded the Goldman Environmental Prize for his efforts on behalf of the Caledonian ecological protection movement in the face of &quot;serious challenges&quot; from Jacques Lafleur&#x27;s RPCR party. Progress has been made in a few areas in addressing the protection of New Caledonia&#x27;s ecological diversity from fire, industrial and residential development, unrestricted agricultural activity and mining (such as the judicial revocation of INCO&#x27;s mining licence in June 2006 owing to claimed abuses).

In 2008, six lagoons of the New Caledonian barrier reef, the world&#x27;s longest continuous barrier reef system, were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List.

=== Flora ===
New Caledonia&#x27;s fauna and flora derive from ancestral species isolated in the region when it broke away from Gondwana many tens of millions of years ago. Not only endemic species have evolved here, but entire genera, families, and even orders are unique to the islands.

More tropical gymnosperm species are endemic to New Caledonia than to any similar region on Earth. Of the 44 indigenous species of gymnosperms, 43 are endemic, including the only known parasitic gymnosperm (&quot;Parasitaxus usta&quot;). Also, of the 35 known species of &quot;Araucaria&quot;, 13 are endemic to New Caledonia. New Caledonia also has the world&#x27;s most divergent lineage of flowering plant, &quot;Amborella trichopoda&quot;, which is at, or near, the base of the clade of all flowering plants.

The world&#x27;s largest extant species of fern, &quot;Cyathea intermedia&quot;, also is endemic to New Caledonia. It is very common on acidic soil, usually found on fallow ground or in forest clearings, and grows about one metre per year on the east coast. There also are other species of &quot;Cyathea&quot;, notably &quot;Cyathea novae-caledoniae&quot;.

New Caledonia also is one of five regions on the planet where species of southern beeches (&quot;Nothofagus&quot;) are indigenous; five species are known to occur here.

New Caledonia has its own version of maquis (&quot;maquis minier&quot;) occurring on metalliferous soils, mostly in the south. The soils of ultramafic rocks (mining terrains) have been a refuge for many native flora species which are adapted to the toxic mineral content of the soils, to which most foreign species of plants are poorly suited, which has therefore prevented invasion into the habitat or displacement of indigenous plants.

Two terrestrial ecoregions lie within New Caledonia&#x27;s territory: New Caledonia rain forests and New Caledonia dry forests.

=== Fauna ===
In addition to its outstanding plant diversity and endemism, New Caledonia also provides habitat for a wide diversity of animals. Over 100 bird species live in New Caledonia, of which 24 are endemic. One of these endemic bird species is the New Caledonian crow, a bird noted for its tool-making abilities, which rival those of primates. These crows are renowned for their extraordinary intelligence and ability to fashion tools to solve problems, and make the most complex tools of any animal yet studied apart from humans.

The endemic kagu, agile and able to run quickly, is a flightless bird, but it is able to use its wings to climb branches or glide. Its sound is similar to the bark of a dog. It is the surviving member of monotypic family Rhynochetidae, order Eurypygiformes.

There are 11 endemic fish species and 14 endemic species of decapod crustaceans in the rivers and lakes of New Caledonia. Some, such as &quot;Neogalaxias&quot;, exist only in small areas. The nautilus—considered a living fossil and related to the ammonites, which became extinct at the end of the Mesozoic era—occurs in Pacific waters around New Caledonia. There is a large diversity of marine fish in the surrounding waters, which are within the extents of the Coral Sea.

Despite its large number of bird, reptile, and fish species, New Caledonia has remarkably few mammal species: nine, of which six are endemic.

Several species of New Caledonia are remarkable for their size: &quot;Ducula goliath&quot; is the largest extant species of arboreal pigeon; &quot;Rhacodactylus leachianus&quot;, the largest gecko in the world; &quot;Phoboscincus bocourti&quot;, a large skink thought to be extinct until rediscovered in 2003.

Much of New Caledonia&#x27;s fauna present before human settlement is now extinct, including &quot;Sylviornis&quot;, a bird over a metre tall not closely related to any living species, and &quot;Meiolania&quot;, a giant horned turtle that diverged from living turtles during the Jurassic period.

In January 2024, a court in the Capital Nouméa issued a ruling banning the culling of sharks citing it as disproportionate. The culls began after an Australian tourist was killed by a shark in the previous year.

== Demographics ==
At the last census in 2019, New Caledonia had a population of 271,407. Of these, 18,353 lived in the Loyalty Islands Province, 49,910 in the North Province, and 203,144 in the South Province. Population growth has slowed down recently with a yearly increase of 0.2% between 2014 and 2019.

Population growth is higher in the North Province (0.3% per year between 2014 and 2019) than in the Loyalty Islands (0.1%) and South Province (−0.2%).

30% of the population was under the age of 20, with the ratio of older people in the total population increasing. Two out of three residents of New Caledonia live in Greater Nouméa. 78% were born in New Caledonia. The total fertility rate decreased from 2.2 children per woman in 2014 to 1.9 in 2019.

=== Ethnic groups ===

At the 2019 census, 41.2% of the population reported belonging to the Kanak community (up from 39.1% at the 2014 census) and 24.1% to the European (Caldoche and Zoreille) community (down from 27.2% at the 2014 census). A further 7.5% of the population either self-identified as &quot;Caledonian&quot; or refused to declare an ethnic group (down from 9.9% at the 2014 census). Most of the people who self-identify as &quot;Caledonian&quot; or refuse to declare an ethnic group are thought to be ethnically European.

The other self-reported communities were Wallisians and Futunians (8.3% of the total population, up from 8.2% at the 2014 census), Indonesians who are from the Javanese ethnic group (1.4% of the total population, the same as in 2014), Tahitians (2.0% of the total population, down from 2.1% at the 2014 census), Ni-Vanuatu (0.9%, down from 1.0% at the 2014 census), Vietnamese (0.8%, down from 0.9% at the 2014 census), and other Asians (primarily ethnic Chinese; 0.4% of the total population, the same as in 2014).

11.3% of the population reported belonging to multiple communities (mixed race) (up from 8.6% at the 2014 census). The question on community belonging, which had been left out of the 2004 census, was reintroduced in 2009 under a new formulation, different from the 1996 census, allowing multiple choices (mixed race) and the possibility to clarify the choice &quot;other&quot; (which led many Europeans to self-identify as &quot;Caledonian&quot; in the category &quot;other&quot;, or to select several ethnic communities, such as both European and Kanak, thus appearing as mixed race, which is particularly the case for the Caldoches living in the bush, who often have mixed ancestry).

Finally, 2.1% of the population reported belonging to other communities to the exclusion of &quot;Caledonian&quot; (up from 1.3% at the 2014 census).

The Kanak people, part of the ethnic Melanesian group, are indigenous to New Caledonia. Their social organization is traditionally based on clans, which identify as either &quot;land&quot; or &quot;sea&quot; clans, depending on their original location and the occupation of their ancestors. According to the 2019 census, the Kanak constitute 95% of the population in the Loyalty Islands Province, 72% in the North Province and 29% in the South Province. The Kanak tend to be of lower socio-economic status than the Europeans and other settlers.

Europeans first settled in New Caledonia when France established a penal colony on the archipelago. Once the prisoners had completed their sentences, they were given land to settle. According to the 2014 census, of the 73,199 Europeans in New Caledonia, 30,484 were native-born, 36,975 were born in Metropolitan France, 488 were born in French Polynesia, 86 were born in Wallis and Futuna, and 5,166 were born abroad. The Europeans are divided into several groups. The Caldoches are usually defined as those born in New Caledonia who have ancestral ties that span back to the early French settlers. They often settled in the rural areas of the western coast of Grande Terre, where many continue to run large cattle properties.

Distinct from the Caldoches are those who were born in New Caledonia from families that had settled more recently, and are called simply Caledonians. The Metropolitan French-born migrants who come to New Caledonia are called &quot;Métros&quot; or &quot;Zoreilles&quot;, indicating their origins in metropolitan France. There is also a community of about 2,000 pieds noirs, descended from European settlers in France&#x27;s former North African colonies; some of them are prominent in anti-independence politics, including Pierre Maresca, a leader of the RPCR.

A 2015 documentary by Al Jazeera English asserted that up to 10% of New Caledonia&#x27;s population is descended from around 2,000 Arab-Berber people deported from French Algeria in the late 19th century to prisons on the island in reprisal for the Mokrani Revolt in 1871. After serving their sentences, they were released and given land to own and cultivate as part of colonisation efforts on the island. As the overwhelming majority of the Algerians imprisoned on New Caledonia were men, the community was continued through intermarriage with women of other ethnic groups, mainly French women from nearby women&#x27;s prisons. Despite facing both assimilation into the Euro-French population and discrimination for their ethnic background, descendants of the deportees have succeeded in preserving a common identity as Algerians, including maintaining certain cultural practices (such as Arabic names) and in some cases Islamic religion. Some travel to Algeria as a rite of passage, though obtaining Algerian citizenship is often a difficult process. The largest population of Algerian-Caledonians lives in the commune of Bourail (particularly in the district, where there is an Islamic cultural centre and ), with smaller communities in Nouméa, Koné, Pouembout, and Yaté.

=== Languages ===
The French language began to spread with the establishment of French settlements, and French is now spoken even in the most secluded villages. For a long time the level of fluency varied significantly across the population as a whole, primarily due to the absence of universal access to public education before 1953, and also due to immigration and ethnic diversity, but the French language has now become universal among the younger generations as shown by the censuses of population. At the 2009 census, 97.3% of people aged 15 or older reported that they could speak, read and write French, whereas only 1.1% reported that they had no knowledge of French. No questions regarding the knowledge of French were asked in the 2014 and 2019 censuses, on account of the population&#x27;s nearly universal understanding of it.

The 28 Kanak languages spoken in New Caledonia are part of the Oceanic group of the Austronesian family. Eight of these can be chosen by parents as optional subjects for their children from kindergarten to high school (four languages are taught up to the bachelor&#x27;s degree) and an academy is responsible for their promotion. The three most widely spoken indigenous languages are Drehu (spoken in Lifou), Nengone (spoken on Maré) and Paicî (northern part of Grande Terre). Others include Iaai (spoken on Ouvéa). At the 2019 census, 44.0% of people whose age was 15 or older reported that they had some form of knowledge of at least one Kanak language (up from 41.3% at the 2009 census), whereas 56.0% reported that they had no knowledge of any of the Kanak languages (down from 58.7% at the 2009 census).

Other significant language communities among immigrant populations include speakers of Wallisian, Futunian, Tahitian, Javanese, Vietnamese, Chinese, and Bislama.

=== Religion ===

The predominant religion is Christianity; half of the population is Catholic, including most of the Europeans, West Uveans, and Vietnamese and half of the Melanesian and Polynesian minorities. Catholicism was introduced by French colonists. The island also has numerous Protestant churches, of which the Free Evangelical Church and the Evangelical Church in New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands have the largest number of adherents; their memberships are almost entirely Melanesian. Protestantism gained ground in the late 20th century and continues to expand. There are also numerous other Christian groups and more than 6,000 Muslims. (See Islam in New Caledonia and Baháʼí Faith in New Caledonia.) Nouméa is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Nouméa.

== Education ==
Education in New Caledonia is based on the French curriculum and delivered by both French teachers and French-trained teachers. Under the terms of the 1998 Nouméa Accord, primary education is the responsibility of the three provinces. As of 2010, secondary education was in the process of being transferred to the provinces. The majority of schools are located in Nouméa but some are found in the islands and the north of New Caledonia. When students reach high school age, most are sent to Nouméa to continue their secondary education. Education is compulsory from the age of six years.

New Caledonia&#x27;s main tertiary education institution is the University of New Caledonia (&quot;Université de la Nouvelle-Calédonie&quot;), which was founded in 1993 and comes under the supervision of the Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation. It is based in Nouméa and offers a range of vocational, Bachelor, MA, and PhD programs and courses. The University of New Caledonia consists of three academic departments, one institute of technology, one PhD school, and one teachers&#x27; college. As of 2013, the university has approximately 3,000 students, 107 academics, and 95 administrative and library staff. Many New Caledonian students also pursue scholarships to study in metropolitan France. As part of the Nouméa Accord process, a &quot;Cadre Avenir&quot; provides scholarships for Kanak professionals to study in France.

== Economy ==

New Caledonia has one of the largest economies in the South Pacific, with a GDP of US$9.48 billion in 2019. The nominal GDP per capita was US$34,939 (at market exchange rates) in 2019. It is lower than the nominal GDP per capita of Hawaii, Australia, New Zealand, and Guam, but higher than all other independent and non-sovereign countries and territories in Oceania, although there is significant inequality in income distribution, and long-standing structural imbalances between the economically dominant South Province and the less developed North Province and Loyalty Islands. The currency in use in New Caledonia is the CFP franc, as of May 2020, pegged to the euro at a rate of 119.3 CFP to 1.00 euros. It is issued by the Institut d&#x27;Émission d&#x27;Outre-Mer.

Real GDP grew by an average of +3.3% per year in the first half of the 2010s, boosted by rising worldwide nickel prices and an increase in domestic demand due to rising employment, as well as strong business investments, but by only +0.2% per year in the second half of the 2010s, as the local nickel industry entered a period of crisis and the repeated independence referendums have generated economic uncertainty. In 2017, exports of goods and services from New Caledonia amounted to 1.93 billion US dollars, 77.5% of which were mineral products and alloys (mainly nickel ore and ferronickel) and 5.0% exports of hotel and restaurant services (i.e. international tourism in New Caledonia). Imports of goods and services amounted to 3.48 billion US dollars. 40.9% of the imports of goods came from Metropolitan France and its overseas departments, 11.7% from Singapore (essentially fuel), 11.5% from Australia, 5.0% from other countries in the European Union, 4.2% from China and Hong Kong, 4.1% from New Zealand, 3.7% from South Korea, 2.4% from Japan, 2.0% from the United States, 1.9% from Canada, and 12.6% from other countries. The trade deficit in goods and services stood at 1.55 billion US dollars in 2017.

Financial support from France is substantial, representing more than 15% of the GDP, and contributes to the health of the economy. Tourism is underdeveloped, with 100,000 visitors a year, compared to 400,000 in the Cook Islands and 200,000 in Vanuatu. Much of the land is unsuitable for agriculture, and food accounts for about 20% of imports. According to FAOSTAT, New Caledonia is a significant producer of: yams (33rd); taro (44th); plantains (50th); coconuts (52nd). The exclusive economic zone of New Caledonia covers . The construction sector accounts for roughly 12% of GDP, employing 9.9% of the salaried population in 2010. Manufacturing is largely confined to small-scale activities such as the transformation of foodstuffs, textiles and plastics.









=== Nickel sector ===

New Caledonian soils contain about 25% of the world&#x27;s nickel resources. The late-2000s recession has gravely affected the nickel industry, as the sector faced a significant drop in nickel prices (−31.0% year-on-year in 2009) for the second consecutive year. The fall in prices has led a number of producers to reduce or stop altogether their activity, resulting in a reduction of the global supply of nickel by 6% compared to 2008.

This context, combined with bad weather, has forced the operators in the sector to revise downwards their production target. Thus, the activity of mineral extraction has declined by 8% in volume year on year. The share of the nickel sector as a percentage of GDP fell from 8% in 2008 to 5% in 2009. A trend reversal and a recovery in demand have been recorded early in the second half of 2009, allowing a 2.0% increase in the local metal production. A March 2020 report stated that &quot;New Caledonia is the world&#x27;s fourth largest nickel producer, which has seen a 26% rally in prices in the past year&quot;. According to industry sources however, the Goro mine has never met its potential capacity to produce &quot;60,000 tpy of nickel in the form of nickel oxide, due to design flaws and operational commissioning issues&quot; In 2019, it produced slightly over a third of its annual capacity&quot;.

In March 2021, Tesla agreed to a partnership with the Goro Mine, a &quot;technical and industrial partnership to help with product and sustainability standards along with taking nickel for its battery production, according to the agreement&quot;, according to a BBC News report. The majority owner, Vale, said that the deal will be of long-term benefit in terms of jobs and the economy. Tesla is a heavy user of nickel for making the lithium-ion batteries and wanted to &quot;secure its long-term supply&quot;.

Also in March 2021, a part of Vale&#x27;s nickel business was sold &quot;to a consortium called Prony, which includes Swiss commodity trader Trafigura&quot;. Provincial authorities and businesses in New Caledonia would have a 51% stake in the Vale operation.

== Culture ==
Wood carving, especially of the houp (&quot;Montrouziera cauliflora&quot;), is a contemporary reflection of the beliefs of the traditional tribal society, and includes totems, masks, chambranles, or flèche faîtière, a kind of arrow that adorns the roofs of Kanak houses. Basketry is a craft widely practised by tribal women, creating objects of daily use.

The Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre, designed by Italian architect Renzo Piano and opened in 1998, is the icon of the Kanak culture.

The Kaneka is a form of local music, inspired by reggae and originating in the 1980s.

The Mwâ Ka is a totem pole commemorating the French annexation of New Caledonia, and was inaugurated in 2005.

== Media ==
&#x27; is the only daily newspaper in the archipelago. A monthly publication, &#x27;, parodies the news from New Caledonia.

There are five radio stations: the public service broadcaster RFO radio Nouvelle-Calédonie, Océane FM (the collectivity&#x27;s newest station), the youth-oriented station NRJ, Radio Djiido (established by Jean-Marie Tjibaou), and Radio Rythmes Bleus. The last two stations are primarily targeted to the various Kanak groups who are indigenous to New Caledonia (&quot;Djiido&quot; is a term from the Fwâi language, spoken in Hienghène in the North Province, denoting a metal spike used to secure straw thatching to the roof of a traditional Kanak house).

As for television, the public service broadcaster France Télévisions operates a local channel, Réseau Outre-Mer 1re, along with France 2, France 3, France 4, France 5, France 24 and Arte. Canal Plus Calédonie carries 17 digital channels in French, including Canal+ and TF1. Analogue television broadcasts ended in September 2011, completing the digital television transition in New Caledonia. Bids for two new local television stations, NCTV and NC9, were considered by the French broadcasting authorities. NCTV was launched in December 2013.

The media are considered to be able to operate freely, but Reporters Without Borders raised concerns in 2006 about &quot;threats and intimidation&quot; of RFO staff by members of a pro-independence group.

== Sport ==

The largest sporting event to be held in New Caledonia is a round of the FIA Asia Pacific Rally Championship (APRC).

The New Caledonia football team began playing in 1950, and was admitted into FIFA, the international association of football leagues, in 2004. Prior to joining FIFA, New Caledonia held observer status with the Oceania Football Confederation, and became an official member of the OFC with its FIFA membership. They have won the South Pacific Games five times, most recently in 2007, and have placed third on two occasions in the OFC Nations Cup. Christian Karembeu is a prominent New Caledonian former footballer. The under-17 team qualified for the FIFA under 17 World Cup in 2017.

The sport of basketball gets much public attention in New Caledonia by both press and fans. Its national team has won plenty of medals in the Oceania region. New Caledonia&#x27;s top basketball club teams are &quot;AS 6e Km&quot; and &quot;AS Dumbea&quot;.

Horse racing is also very popular in New Caledonia, as are women&#x27;s cricket matches.

The rugby league team participated in the Pacific Cup in 2004. In 2020, plans were formed to create a Rugby League team in New Caledonia, Pacifique Trieze, to eventually join the majority Australian Queensland Cup.

New Caledonia also has a national synchronised swimming team, which tours abroad.

The &quot;Tour Cycliste de Nouvelle-Calédonie&quot; is a multi-day cycling stage race that is held usually in October. The race is organised by the Comite Cycliste New Caledonia. The race attracts riders from Australia, New Zealand, France, Réunion, Europe and Tahiti. Australian Brendan Washington has finished last three times in the race between 2005 and 2009, and is known in New Caledonia as &quot;The Lanterne Rouge&quot;.

The New Caledonia Handball team won the Oceania Handball Nations Cup in 2008 held in Wellington, New Zealand. They beat Australia in the final.

The Internationaux de Nouvelle-Calédonie is a tennis tournament that is held in the first week of January. Since 2004, the tournament is part of the ATP Challenger Tour, and players usually compete as a preparation for the Australian Open. the first Grand Slam of the year.

The New Caledonia women&#x27;s national volleyball team won the gold medal on several occasions.

== Cuisine ==
Due to low levels of domestic horticulture, fresh tropical fruits feature less highly in New Caledonian cuisine than in other Pacific nations, instead relying on rice, fish and root vegetables such as taro. One way this is frequently prepared is in a buried-oven-style feast, known as &quot;bougna&quot;. Wrapped in banana leaves, the fish, taro, banana and other seafood are buried with hot rocks to cook, then dug up and eaten.

== Transport ==

La Tontouta International Airport is northwest of Nouméa, and connects New Caledonia with the airports of Paris, Tokyo, Sydney, Auckland, Brisbane, Melbourne, Osaka, Papeete, Nadi, Wallis and Port Vila. Most internal air services are operated by the International carrier Aircalin. Cruise ships dock at the Gare Maritime in Nouméa. The passenger-and-cargo boat &quot;Havannah&quot; sails to Port Vila, Malicolo and Santo in Vanuatu once a month.

New Caledonia&#x27;s road network consists of:

* Route territoriale 1 (RT1), going from the exit from Nouméa to the Néhoué River, north of Koumac;
* Route territoriale 2, on Lifou Island and from the Lifou Airport to the south of Wé;
* Route territoriale 3, from the junction with RT1 in Nandi up to the Tiwaka River;
* Route territoriale 4, from the junction with RT1 near Muéo to the power plant.

== See also ==
*Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front

== Notes ==

== References ==
==Sources==

== External links ==

* Government of New Caledonia 
* New Caledonia : picture post card beautiful – Official Government of France website (in English)
* Tourism New Caledonia 
* Biodiversité Néo-Calédonienne </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="0" end="13" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="59" end="72" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="87" end="94" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="107" end="116" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="131" end="150" title="Metropolitan France" label="Metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="163" end="199" title="Overseas France#Sui generis collectivity" label="&amp;quot;sui generis&amp;quot; collectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="207" end="222" title="French Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203396" start="249" end="264" title="overseas France" label="overseas France"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="312" end="331" title="French Constitution" label="French Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="363" end="372" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256293" start="412" end="424" title="Grande Terre (New Caledonia)" label="Grande Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="430" end="445" title="Loyalty Islands" label="Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070802" start="451" end="471" title="Chesterfield Islands" label="Chesterfield Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33661626" start="477" end="482" title="Belep" label="Belep"/>
<link wikidata="Q292500" start="500" end="513" title="Isle of Pines (New Caledonia)" label="Isle of Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q82931" start="576" end="585" title="Coral Sea" label="Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="707" end="729" title="Kanak people#Agitation for independence" label="Pro-independence Kanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="848" end="858" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="859" end="871" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak people"/>
<link wikidata="Q844266" start="974" end="1015" title="Overseas Countries and Territories" label="Overseas Countries and Territories (OCTs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1043" end="1057" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="1112" end="1120" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612920" start="1127" end="1132" title="North Province, New Caledonia" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q965632" start="1137" end="1142" title="South Province, New Caledonia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="1199" end="1223" title="Loyalty Islands Province" label="Loyalty Islands Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655796" start="1315" end="1320" title="Ouvéa Island" label="Ouvéa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655792" start="1322" end="1327" title="Lifou Island" label="Lifou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094900" start="1329" end="1333" title="Tiga Island" label="Tiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9729" start="1339" end="1343" title="Maré Island" label="Maré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612920" start="1465" end="1470" title="North Province, New Caledonia" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="1475" end="1499" title="Loyalty Islands Province" label="Loyalty Islands Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="1517" end="1529" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak people"/>
<link wikidata="Q965632" start="1561" end="1575" title="South Province, New Caledonia" label="South Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478459" start="1622" end="1630" title="Caldoche" label="Caldoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="1636" end="1655" title="Metropolitan France" label="Metropolitan French"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="1658" end="1663" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="1688" end="1697" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1736" end="1750" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="1753" end="1762" title="Pied-Noir" label="Pied-Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836039" start="1768" end="1781" title="Algerians of the Pacific" label="North African"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="1824" end="1830" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="1887" end="1896" title="Zealandia" label="Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="1938" end="1946" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="2080" end="2086" title="Lapita" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q254651" start="2197" end="2207" title="navigators" label="navigators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781198" start="2212" end="2226" title="agriculturists" label="agriculturists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2361" end="2371" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048625" start="2496" end="2505" title="Caledonia" label="Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2560" end="2568" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q294478" start="2623" end="2641" title="Jean-François de Galaup, comte de Lapérouse" label="Comte de Lapérouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017393" start="2814" end="2827" title="William Raven" label="William Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122366" start="3247" end="3257" title="sandalwood" label="sandalwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q880704" start="3345" end="3357" title="blackbirding" label="blackbirding"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="3469" end="3481" title="Vanuatu" label="New Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3524" end="3531" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="3533" end="3543" title="indentured servitude" label="indentured"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="3547" end="3560" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="3568" end="3577" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="3578" end="3588" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="3593" end="3597" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="3602" end="3612" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="3705" end="3715" title="Australians" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="3853" end="3868" title="Loyalty Islands" label="Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="4737" end="4762" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q53769" start="4771" end="4786" title="Marist Brothers" label="Marist Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="4907" end="4924" title="Human cannibalism" label="Human cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="5044" end="5056" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871189" start="5066" end="5085" title="Auguste Febvrier Despointes" label="Febvrier Despointes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260702" start="5135" end="5174" title="Louis-Marie-François Tardy de Montravel" label="Louis-Marie-François Tardy de Montravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="5183" end="5197" title="Port-de-France" label="Port-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140316" start="5323" end="5335" title="penal colony" label="penal colony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5706" end="5716" title="Communards#Life in New Caledonia" label="Communards"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="5744" end="5757" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q642060" start="5777" end="5795" title="Victor Henri Rochefort, Marquis de Rochefort-Luçay" label="Henri de Rochefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q216092" start="5800" end="5813" title="Louise Michel" label="Louise Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="6031" end="6037" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q279485" start="6073" end="6085" title="Diahot River" label="Diahot River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6267" end="6272" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="6278" end="6295" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="6301" end="6317" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="6429" end="6441" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9727" start="6603" end="6609" title="La Foa" label="La Foa"/>
<link wikidata="Q346828" start="6781" end="6798" title="Maurice Leenhardt" label="Maurice Leenhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589743" start="7152" end="7170" title="Jean-Marie Tjibaou" label="Jean-Marie Tjibaou"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="7224" end="7232" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="7237" end="7244" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="7466" end="7480" title="fall of France" label="fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19758733" start="7486" end="7501" title="General councils (France)" label="General Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="7539" end="7555" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7655" end="7676" title="Georges-Marc Pélicier" label="Georges-Marc Pélicier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407957" start="7717" end="7735" title="French Constitutional Law of 1940" label="Constitutional Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="7851" end="7868" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="7899" end="7910" title="Free France" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131985" start="7935" end="7947" title="Henri Sautot" label="Henri Sautot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041190" start="8010" end="8031" title="French aviso Dumont d&amp;#x27;Urville" label="Dumont d&amp;#x27;Urville"/>
<link wikidata="Q368008" start="8211" end="8236" title="HMAS Adelaide (1918)" label="HMAS &amp;quot;Adelaide&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910978" start="8937" end="8944" title="Qastina" label="Qastina"/>
<link wikidata="Q836128" start="9103" end="9123" title="Battle of Bir Hakeim" label="Battle of Bir Hakeim"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="9697" end="9703" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="9755" end="9773" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="9856" end="9869" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="9877" end="9900" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Battle of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9950" end="9976" title="Pacific Islands home front during World War II#Employment" label="stationed on New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164879" start="10152" end="10170" title="French citizenship" label="French citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="10681" end="10691" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="10797" end="10802" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723564" start="11327" end="11372" title="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front" label="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587406" start="11637" end="11666" title="1985 New Caledonian legislative election" label="regional elections went ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714196" start="11754" end="11785" title="1986 French legislative election" label="elected in France in March 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403801" start="12103" end="12128" title="Ouvéa cave hostage taking" label="Ouvéa cave hostage taking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450661" start="12177" end="12210" title="1988 French presidential election" label="1988 French presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9736" start="12248" end="12253" title="Ouvéa" label="Ouvéa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822856" start="12537" end="12556" title="Matignon Agreements (1988)" label="Matignon Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q321912" start="12617" end="12630" title="Nouméa Accord" label="Nouméa Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723992" start="12891" end="12934" title="2018 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="referendum on full independence from France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579995" start="12985" end="13001" title="Édouard Philippe" label="Édouard Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723992" start="13335" end="13353" title="2018 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="on 4 November 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q65123200" start="13413" end="13433" title="2020 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="held in October 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q105547062" start="13670" end="13686" title="2021 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="third referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q87648388" start="13836" end="13853" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New Caledonia" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125935907" start="13998" end="14025" title="2024 New Caledonia unrest" label="riots broke out amid debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203396" start="14112" end="14121" title="sui generis collectivity" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14122" end="14145" title="Sui generis#Politics and society" label="&amp;quot;sui generis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164879" start="14230" end="14248" title="French nationality law" label="French nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="14266" end="14285" title="president of France" label="president of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="14335" end="14354" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993118" start="14386" end="14406" title="Congress of New Caledonia" label="Territorial Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q63092159" start="14533" end="14550" title="Colonial and Departmental Heads of New Caledonia" label="High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q632552" start="14609" end="14626" title="French Parliament" label="French Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q487666" start="14668" end="14701" title="2012 French presidential election" label="2012 French presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="14707" end="14720" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226266" start="14838" end="14851" title="The Rally–UMP" label="The Rally–UMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202705" start="14909" end="14924" title="Avenir Ensemble" label="Avenir Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723564" start="15039" end="15084" title="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front" label="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302964" start="16636" end="16655" title="judicial corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9725" start="16846" end="16852" title="Koumac" label="Koumac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16854" end="16860" title="Nandaï, New Caledonia" label="Nandaï"/>
<link wikidata="Q892783" start="16862" end="16870" title="La Tontouta International Airport" label="Tontouta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205294" start="16872" end="16876" title="Plum, New Caledonia" label="Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="16882" end="16888" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32634787" start="17293" end="17298" title="Patrouilleur Outre-mer" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474251" start="17770" end="17819" title="Dassault Falcon 20" label="Falcon 200 Gardian maritime surveillance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q26790" start="17891" end="17911" title="Dassault Falcon 2000" label="Falcon 2000 Albatros"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498" start="17942" end="17952" title="CASA/IPTN CN-235" label="Casa CN235"/>
<link wikidata="Q794586" start="17982" end="17986" title="Aérospatiale SA 330 Puma" label="Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q181251" start="18099" end="18122" title="Aérospatiale Alouette III" label="Alouette III helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39663" start="18202" end="18223" title="Eurocopter AS365 Dauphin" label="Eurocopter Dauphin N3"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="18238" end="18254" title="French Air Force" label="French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q190973" start="18325" end="18331" title="Dassault Rafale" label="Rafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496" start="18355" end="18360" title="Airbus A400M Atlas" label="A400M"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492" start="18384" end="18400" title="Airbus A330 MRTT" label="A330 MRTT Phénix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422336" start="18508" end="18528" title="National Gendarmerie" label="National Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555185" start="18888" end="18906" title="Vedette côtière de surveillance maritime" label="&amp;quot;Dumbea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="18980" end="18997" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q530843" start="19096" end="19138" title="United Nations Committee on Decolonization" label="United Nations Committee on Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="19173" end="19226" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006306" start="19231" end="19254" title="1987 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q321912" start="19346" end="19359" title="Nouméa Accord" label="Nouméa Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932884" start="19447" end="19459" title="1998 New Caledonian Nouméa Accord referendum" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723992" start="19563" end="19589" title="2018 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="referendum on independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q65123200" start="19717" end="19748" title="2020 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="another independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105547062" start="19911" end="19939" title="2021 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="was held on 12 December 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993118" start="20708" end="20733" title="Congress of New Caledonia" label="Congress of New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="20771" end="20776" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723564" start="20811" end="20816" title="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front" label="FLNKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43192" start="20831" end="20847" title="Flag of France" label="French tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q693569" start="20852" end="20879" title="Flag of New Caledonia" label="dual flags of the territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q965632" start="21538" end="21552" title="South Province, New Caledonia" label="South Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="21601" end="21607" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612920" start="21668" end="21682" title="North Province, New Caledonia" label="North Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9721" start="21732" end="21736" title="Koné, New Caledonia" label="Koné"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="21796" end="21820" title="Loyalty Islands Province" label="Loyalty Islands Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9728" start="21882" end="21887" title="Lifou" label="Lifou"/>
<link wikidata="Q9750" start="22027" end="22031" title="Poya, New Caledonia" label="Poya"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="22328" end="22337" title="Zealandia" label="Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="22365" end="22373" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="22408" end="22415" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945432" start="22706" end="22716" title="Mont Panié" label="Mont Panié"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22737" end="22750" title="Mont Humboldt" label="Mont Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q279485" start="22966" end="22978" title="Diahot River" label="Diahot River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23098" end="23118" title="Baie d&amp;#x27;Harcourt" label="Baie d&amp;#x27;Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330981" start="23444" end="23470" title="New Caledonia Barrier Reef" label="New Caledonia Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="23483" end="23489" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="23490" end="23509" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="23745" end="23753" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="24016" end="24027" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24260" end="24268" title="Galarino" label="Galarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="24370" end="24377" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="24407" end="24427" title="tropical depressions" label="tropical depressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="24432" end="24440" title="cyclones" label="cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q105765023" start="24567" end="24580" title="Cyclone Niran" label="Cyclone Niran"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="24893" end="24900" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167631" start="24968" end="25015" title="List of countries by carbon dioxide emissions per capita" label="emits a high level of carbon dioxide per person"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="25252" end="25273" title="biodiversity hotspots" label="biodiversity hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979427" start="25294" end="25312" title="Bruno Van Peteghem" label="Bruno Van Peteghem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506625" start="25329" end="25356" title="Goldman Environmental Prize" label="Goldman Environmental Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159243" start="25483" end="25498" title="Jacques Lafleur" label="Jacques Lafleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226266" start="25506" end="25510" title="Rally for Caledonia in the Republic" label="RPCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269002" start="25763" end="25767" title="INCO" label="INCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330981" start="25858" end="25885" title="New Caledonian barrier reef" label="New Caledonian barrier reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="25966" end="25992" title="UNESCO World Heritage List" label="UNESCO World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="26123" end="26131" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="26299" end="26309" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133097" start="26498" end="26514" title="Parasitaxus usta" label="Parasitaxus usta"/>
<link wikidata="Q157214" start="26562" end="26571" title="Araucaria" label="Araucaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="26678" end="26693" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q310470" start="26701" end="26721" title="Amborella trichopoda" label="Amborella trichopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="26842" end="26846" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711565" start="26854" end="26872" title="Cyathea intermedia" label="Cyathea intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q121608" start="27095" end="27102" title="Cyathea" label="Cyathea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27124" end="27148" title="Cyathea novae-caledoniae" label="Cyathea novae-caledoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q218274" start="27254" end="27264" title="Nothofagus" label="Nothofagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q667552" start="27364" end="27370" title="maquis shrubland" label="maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104759263" start="27378" end="27391" title="maquis minier" label="maquis minier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006277" start="27836" end="27862" title="New Caledonia rain forests" label="New Caledonia rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079350" start="27867" end="27892" title="New Caledonia dry forests" label="New Caledonia dry forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q334206" start="28150" end="28169" title="New Caledonian crow" label="New Caledonian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109139" start="28192" end="28203" title="tool use in animals" label="tool-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q669634" start="28446" end="28450" title="kagu" label="kagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="28638" end="28647" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639899" start="28655" end="28668" title="Rhynochetidae" label="Rhynochetidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q147907" start="28676" end="28690" title="Eurypygiformes" label="Eurypygiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610" start="28753" end="28760" title="Decapoda" label="decapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="28761" end="28772" title="crustaceans" label="crustaceans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28835" end="28846" title="Neogalaxias" label="Neogalaxias"/>
<link wikidata="Q223939" start="28885" end="28893" title="nautilus" label="nautilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q228002" start="28940" end="28948" title="ammonite" label="ammonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010538" start="29080" end="29091" title="List of fishes of the Coral Sea" label="marine fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q82931" start="29155" end="29164" title="Coral Sea" label="Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q913115" start="29380" end="29394" title="Ducula goliath" label="Ducula goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193333" start="29457" end="29481" title="Rhacodactylus leachianus" label="Rhacodactylus leachianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q94878" start="29527" end="29548" title="Phoboscincus bocourti" label="Phoboscincus bocourti"/>
<link wikidata="Q763978" start="29598" end="29610" title="Lazarus taxon" label="rediscovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q146664" start="29720" end="29730" title="Sylviornis" label="Sylviornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133604" start="29816" end="29825" title="Meiolania" label="Meiolania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="30251" end="30275" title="Loyalty Islands Province" label="Loyalty Islands Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612920" start="30291" end="30305" title="North Province, New Caledonia" label="North Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q965632" start="30326" end="30340" title="South Province, New Caledonia" label="South Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="30758" end="30772" title="Nouméa" label="Greater Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="30810" end="30830" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="30987" end="30992" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="31055" end="31061" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478459" start="31065" end="31073" title="Caldoche" label="Caldoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576099" start="31078" end="31086" title="Zoreilles" label="Zoreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="31474" end="31498" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallisians and Futunians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757311" start="31564" end="31575" title="Overseas Indonesian" label="Indonesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q107361075" start="31593" end="31614" title="Javanese New Caledonians" label="Javanese ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282763" start="31668" end="31677" title="Tahitians" label="Tahitians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290668" start="31745" end="31755" title="Ni-Vanuatu" label="Ni-Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="31799" end="31809" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="31881" end="31895" title="Overseas Chinese" label="ethnic Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="32018" end="32028" title="Multiracial people" label="mixed race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="32825" end="32835" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="32928" end="32932" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="33159" end="33183" title="Loyalty Islands Province" label="Loyalty Islands Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413717" start="33334" end="33343" title="Europeans in Oceania" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478459" start="33600" end="33611" title="Caldoche" label="native-born"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576099" start="33633" end="33652" title="Zoreilles" label="Metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="33671" end="33687" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="33705" end="33722" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478459" start="33803" end="33811" title="Caldoche" label="Caldoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="34216" end="34235" title="Metropolitan France" label="Metropolitan French"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="34422" end="34433" title="Pied-Noir" label="pieds noirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386116" start="34584" end="34598" title="Pierre Maresca" label="Pierre Maresca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226266" start="34616" end="34620" title="Rally for Caledonia in the Republic" label="RPCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296040" start="34645" end="34663" title="Al Jazeera English" label="Al Jazeera English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="34754" end="34758" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="34759" end="34765" title="Imazighen" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="34787" end="34801" title="French Algeria" label="French Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140316" start="34830" end="34851" title="Penal colony" label="prisons on the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458306" start="34872" end="34886" title="Mokrani Revolt" label="Mokrani Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836039" start="35065" end="35102" title="Algerians of the Pacific" label="Algerians imprisoned on New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="35545" end="35550" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9709" start="35747" end="35754" title="Bourail" label="Bourail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="35863" end="35869" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9721" start="35871" end="35875" title="Koné, New Caledonia" label="Koné"/>
<link wikidata="Q9744" start="35877" end="35886" title="Pouembout" label="Pouembout"/>
<link wikidata="Q9758" start="35892" end="35896" title="Yaté" label="Yaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="35921" end="35936" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091221" start="36747" end="36762" title="Kanak languages" label="Kanak languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q324457" start="36803" end="36810" title="Oceanic languages" label="Oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="36824" end="36836" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039319" start="37124" end="37129" title="Drehu" label="Drehu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9728" start="37141" end="37146" title="Lifou" label="Lifou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338052" start="37149" end="37156" title="Nengone language" label="Nengone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9729" start="37168" end="37172" title="Maré" label="Maré"/>
<link wikidata="Q732131" start="37178" end="37183" title="Paicî" label="Paicî"/>
<link wikidata="Q282888" start="37232" end="37236" title="Iaai language" label="Iaai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9736" start="37248" end="37253" title="Ouvéa" label="Ouvéa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36979" start="37637" end="37646" title="Wallisian" label="Wallisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35334" start="37648" end="37656" title="Futunan language" label="Futunian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="37658" end="37666" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="37668" end="37676" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="37678" end="37688" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="37690" end="37697" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35452" start="37703" end="37710" title="Bislama" label="Bislama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="37759" end="37771" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="37799" end="37807" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36837" start="37842" end="37852" title="West Uvean" label="West Uvean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="38001" end="38011" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931319" start="38035" end="38058" title="Free Evangelical Church" label="Free Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586164" start="38067" end="38126" title="Evangelical Church in New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands" label="Evangelical Church in New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116089" start="38374" end="38396" title="Islam in New Caledonia" label="Islam in New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843018" start="38401" end="38430" title="Baháʼí Faith in New Caledonia" label="Baháʼí Faith in New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q633695" start="38459" end="38495" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Nouméa" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q614380" start="38557" end="38574" title="Education in France" label="French curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q321912" start="38670" end="38683" title="Nouméa Accord" label="Nouméa Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="38878" end="38884" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q734332" start="39167" end="39194" title="University of New Caledonia" label="University of New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29968038" start="39311" end="39364" title="Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation" label="Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="40198" end="40204" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="40206" end="40215" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="40217" end="40228" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="40234" end="40238" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="40325" end="40332" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q214393" start="40591" end="40600" title="CFP franc" label="CFP franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301159" start="40739" end="40747" title="Real gross domestic product" label="Real GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q907347" start="41321" end="41332" title="ferronickel" label="ferronickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="41538" end="41557" title="Metropolitan France" label="Metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="41566" end="41585" title="overseas department" label="overseas department"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="41684" end="41698" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="42171" end="42183" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="42199" end="42206" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465416" start="42313" end="42320" title="FAOSTAT" label="FAOSTAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="42366" end="42370" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="42379" end="42383" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="42392" end="42401" title="Plantain (cooking)" label="plantains"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="42410" end="42417" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="42431" end="42454" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="42805" end="42811" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="42827" end="42847" title="late-2000s recession" label="late-2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999666" start="43842" end="43851" title="Goro mine" label="Goro mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="44108" end="44113" title="Tesla, Inc." label="Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="44355" end="44363" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="44879" end="44891" title="Wood carving" label="Wood carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020518" start="44923" end="44946" title="Montrouziera cauliflora" label="Montrouziera cauliflora"/>
<link wikidata="Q263443" start="45047" end="45052" title="totem" label="totem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753397" start="45062" end="45072" title="chambranle" label="chambranle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463749" start="45078" end="45093" title="flèche faîtière" label="flèche faîtière"/>
<link wikidata="Q373017" start="45150" end="45158" title="Basketry" label="Basketry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521577" start="45240" end="45274" title="Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre" label="Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q190148" start="45306" end="45317" title="Renzo Piano" label="Renzo Piano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45377" end="45383" title="Kaneka (music)" label="Kaneka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="45422" end="45428" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45464" end="45470" title="Mwâ Ka" label="Mwâ Ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q83809" start="45476" end="45486" title="totem pole" label="totem pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513499" start="45770" end="45798" title="Outre-Mer 1ère" label="RFO radio Nouvelle-Calédonie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45800" end="45809" title="Océane FM" label="Océane FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961361" start="45879" end="45882" title="NRJ" label="NRJ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45884" end="45896" title="Radio Djiido" label="Radio Djiido"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589743" start="45913" end="45931" title="Jean-Marie Tjibaou" label="Jean-Marie Tjibaou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45938" end="45957" title="Radio Rythmes Bleus" label="Radio Rythmes Bleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="46019" end="46024" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091331" start="46107" end="46120" title="Fwâi language" label="Fwâi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9714" start="46132" end="46141" title="Hienghène" label="Hienghène"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612920" start="46149" end="46163" title="North Province, New Caledonia" label="North Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124861" start="46313" end="46331" title="France Télévisions" label="France Télévisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513499" start="46358" end="46378" title="Réseau Outre-Mer 1re" label="Réseau Outre-Mer 1re"/>
<link wikidata="Q525894" start="46391" end="46399" title="France 2" label="France 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322641" start="46401" end="46409" title="France 3" label="France 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q575876" start="46411" end="46419" title="France 4" label="France 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440772" start="46421" end="46429" title="France 5" label="France 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q166180" start="46431" end="46440" title="France 24" label="France 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073" start="46445" end="46449" title="Arte TV" label="Arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936132" start="46451" end="46471" title="CanalSat Calédonie" label="Canal Plus Calédonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032540" start="46521" end="46527" title="Canal+ (French TV channel)" label="Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q214683" start="46532" end="46535" title="TF1" label="TF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330048" start="46608" end="46637" title="digital television transition" label="digital television transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="46866" end="46891" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096676" start="47099" end="47134" title="FIA Asia Pacific Rally Championship" label="FIA Asia Pacific Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q328295" start="47148" end="47175" title="New Caledonia national football team" label="New Caledonia football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="47221" end="47225" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180344" start="47354" end="47384" title="Oceania Football Confederation" label="Oceania Football Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q114699" start="47471" end="47490" title="South Pacific Games" label="South Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q213070" start="47572" end="47587" title="OFC Nations Cup" label="OFC Nations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q286511" start="47589" end="47607" title="Christian Karembeu" label="Christian Karembeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="47740" end="47750" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q719508" start="47823" end="47836" title="New Caledonia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="47985" end="47997" title="Horse racing" label="Horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="48057" end="48064" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="48079" end="48091" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360184" start="48117" end="48128" title="Pacific Cup" label="Pacific Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414041" start="48274" end="48288" title="Queensland Cup" label="Queensland Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315624" start="48781" end="48795" title="Lanterne rouge" label="Lanterne Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="48822" end="48830" title="Handball" label="Handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193854" start="48844" end="48872" title="Oceania Handball Nations Cup" label="Oceania Handball Nations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="48889" end="48899" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="48901" end="48912" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q721443" start="48924" end="48933" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national handball team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q557548" start="48953" end="48989" title="BNP Paribas de Nouvelle-Calédonie" label="Internationaux de Nouvelle-Calédonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q299345" start="49098" end="49117" title="ATP Challenger Tour" label="ATP Challenger Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="49172" end="49187" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593965" start="49228" end="49279" title="New Caledonia women&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="New Caledonia women&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="49537" end="49541" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921567" start="49627" end="49633" title="bougna" label="bougna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521309" start="49652" end="49665" title="banana leaves" label="banana leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q892783" start="49784" end="49817" title="La Tontouta International Airport" label="La Tontouta International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q408408" start="50056" end="50064" title="Aircalin" label="Aircalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37806" start="50175" end="50184" title="Port Vila" label="Port Vila"/>
<link wikidata="Q618594" start="50186" end="50194" title="Malakula" label="Malicolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q876557" start="50199" end="50204" title="Luganville" label="Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="50208" end="50215" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="50334" end="50340" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9725" start="50371" end="50377" title="Koumac" label="Koumac"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655792" start="50406" end="50418" title="Lifou Island" label="Lifou Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q144278" start="50432" end="50445" title="Lifou Airport" label="Lifou Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862378" start="50462" end="50464" title="Wé" label="Wé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50520" end="50525" title="Nandi, New Caledonia" label="Nandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810468" start="50536" end="50548" title="Tiwaka River" label="Tiwaka River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50606" end="50610" title="Muéo" label="Muéo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723564" start="50648" end="50693" title="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front" label="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21344" wikidata="Q3098269" url="?curid=21344" title="Geography of New Caledonia">
<text>The geography of [[New Caledonia]] (&quot;Nouvelle-Calédonie&quot;), an overseas collectivity of France located in the subregion of Melanesia, makes the continental island group unique in the southwest Pacific. Among other things, the island chain has played a role in preserving unique biological lineages from the Mesozoic. It served as a waystation in the expansion of the predecessors of the Polynesians, the Lapita culture. Under the Free French it was a vital naval base for Allied Forces during the War in the Pacific.

The archipelago is located east of Australia, north of New Zealand, south of the Equator, and just west of Fiji and Vanuatu. New Caledonia comprises a main island, Grande Terre, the Loyalty Islands, and several smaller islands. Approximately half the size of Taiwan, the group has a land area of . The islands have a coastline of . New Caledonia claims an exclusive fishing zone to a distance of and a territorial sea of from shore.

New Caledonia is one of the northernmost parts of an almost entirely (93%) submerged continent called Zealandia which rifted away from Antarctica between 130 and 85 million years ago (mya), and from Australia 85–60 mya. (Most of the elongated triangular continental mass of Zealandia is a subsurface plateau. New Zealand is a mountainous above-water promontory in its center, and New Caledonia is a promontory ridge on the continent&#x27;s northern edge.) New Caledonia itself drifted away from Australia 66 mya, and subsequently drifted in a north-easterly direction, reaching its present position about 50 mya. Given its long stability and isolation, New Caledonia serves as a unique island refugium—a sort of biological &#x27;ark&#x27;—hosting a unique ecosystem and preserving Gondwanan plant and animal lineages no longer found elsewhere.

==Composition==
New Caledonia is made up of a main island, the Grande Terre, and several smaller islands, the Belep archipelago to the north of the Grande Terre, the Loyalty Islands to the east of the Grande Terre, the Isle of Pines to the south of the Grande Terre, the Chesterfield Islands and Bellona Reefs further to the west. Each of these four island groups has a different geological origin:

* The New Caledonia archipelago, which includes Grande Terre, Belep, and the Île des Pins was born as a series of folds of the Earth&#x27;s mantle between the Permian period (251–299 mya) and the Paleogene and Neogene periods (1.5–66 mya). This mantle obduction created large areas of peridotite and a bedrock rich in nickel.
* The Loyalty Islands, a hundred kilometers to the east, are coral and limestone islands built on top of ancient collapsed volcanoes originating due to subduction at the Vanuatu trench.
* The Chesterfield Islands, to the northwest, are reef outcroppings of the oceanic plateau.
* The Matthew and Hunter Islands, at east, respectively, are volcanic islands that form the southern end of the arc of the New Hebrides.

The Grande Terre is by far the largest of the islands, and the only mountainous island. It has an area of , and is elongated northwest–southeast, in length and wide. A mountain range runs the length of the island, with five peaks over . The highest point is Mont Panié at elevation. The total area of New Caledonia is , of those being land.

A territorial dispute exists with regard to the uninhabited Matthew and Hunter Islands, which are claimed by both France (as part of New Caledonia) and Vanuatu.

==Zealandian origin==
The New Caledonian archipelago is a microcontinental island chain which originated as a fragment of Zealandia, a nearly submerged continent or microcontinent which was part of the southern supercontinent of Gondwana during the time of the dinosaurs. The Grande Terre group of New Caledonia, with Mont Panié at as its highest point, is the most elevated part of the Norfolk Ridge, a long and mostly underwater arm of the continent. While they were still one landmass, Zealandia and Australia combined broke away from Antarctica between 85 and 130 million years ago. Australia and Zealandia split apart 60–85 million years ago. Although biologists consider it contrary to the evidence of surviving Gondwanan lineages, geologists consider the logical possibility that Zealandia may have been completely submerged about 23 million years ago. While a continent like Australia consists of a large body of land surrounded by a fringe of continental shelf, Zealandia consists almost entirely of continental shelf, with the vast majority, some 93%, submerged beneath the Pacific Ocean. This viewpoint is not universal. Bernard Pelletier argues that Grande Terre was completely submerged for millions of years, and hence the origin of the flora may not be local in nature, but due to long distance-dispersal.

Zealandia is in area, larger than Greenland or India, and almost half the size of Australia. It is unusually slender, stretching from New Caledonia in the north to beyond New Zealand&#x27;s subantarctic islands in the south (from latitude 19° south to 56° south, analogous to ranging from Haiti to Hudson Bay or from Sudan to Sweden in the Northern Hemisphere). New Zealand is the greatest part of Zealandia above sea level, followed by New Caledonia.

Given its continental origin as a fragment of Zealandia, unlike many of the islands of the Pacific such as the Hawaiian chain, New Caledonia is not of geographically recent volcanic provenance. Its separation from Australia at the end of the Cretaceous (65 mya) and from New Zealand in the mid-Miocene has led to a long period of evolution in near complete isolation. New Caledonia&#x27;s natural heritage significantly comprises species whose ancestors were ancient and primitive flora and fauna present on New Caledonia when it broke away from Gondwana millions of years ago, not only species but entire genera and even families are unique to the island, and survive nowhere else.

Since the age of the dinosaurs, as the island moved north due to the effects of continental drift, some geologists assert that it may have been fully submerged at various intervals. Botanists, however, argue that there must have been some areas that remained above sea level, serving as refugia for the descendants of the original flora that inhabited the island when it broke away from Gondwana. The isolation of New Caledonia was not absolute, however. New species came to New Caledonia while species of Gondwanan origin were able to penetrate further eastward into the Pacific Island region.

==Climate==

The climate of New Caledonia is tropical, modified by southeasterly trade winds. It is hot and humid. Natural hazards are posed in New Caledonia by cyclones, which occur most frequently between November and March. While rainfall in the neighboring Vanuatu islands averages two meters annually, from the north of New Caledonia to the south the rain decreases to a little over . The mean annual temperature drops over the same interval from , and seasonality becomes more pronounced. The capital, Nouméa, located on a peninsula on the southwestern coast of the island normally has a dry season which increases in intensity from August until mid-December, ending suddenly with the coming of rain in January. The northeastern coast of the island receives the most rain, with having been recorded near sea level in Pouébo.



==Terrain==
The terrain of Grande Terre consists of coastal plains, with mountains in the interior. The lowest point is the Pacific Ocean, with an elevation of 0 m, and the highest is Mont Panie, with an elevation of .

The Diahot River is the longest river of New Caledonia, flowing for some . It has a catchment area of 620 square kilometres and opens north-westward into the Baie d&#x27;Harcourt, flowing towards the northern point of the island along the western escarpment of the Mount Panie.

In 1993, 12% of New Caledonian land was used for permanent pasture, with 39% occupied by forests and woodland. In 1991, of the land was irrigated. A current environmental issue is erosion caused by mining exploitation and forest fires.

==Biological isolation==

Given its geographical isolation since the end of the Cretaceous, New Caledonia is a refugium, in effect a biological &quot;Noah&#x27;s Ark&quot;, an island home to both unique living plants and animals and also to its own special fossil endowment. Birds such as the crested and almost flightless kagu (French, &quot;cagou&quot;) &quot;Rhynochetos jubatus&quot;, whose closest relative may be the distantly related sunbittern of South America, and plants such as &quot;Amborella trichopoda&quot;, the only known member of the most basal living branch of flowering plants, make this island a treasure trove and a critical concern for biologists and conservationists. The island was home to horned fossil turtles (&quot;Meiolania mackayi&quot;) and terrestrial fossil crocodiles (&quot;Mekosuchus inexpectatus&quot;) which became extinct shortly after human arrival. There are no native amphibians, with geckos holding many of their niches. The crested gecko (&quot;Correlophus ciliatus&quot;), thought to have gone extinct, was rediscovered in 1994. At 14 inches, Leach&#x27;s giant gecko (&quot;Rhacodactylus leachianus&quot;), the world&#x27;s largest and a predator of smaller lizards is another native. The only native mammals are four species of bat including the endemic New Caledonia flying fox.

New Caledonia is home to 13 of the 19 extant species of evergreens in the genus &quot;Araucaria&quot;. The island has been called &quot;a kind of &#x27;Jurassic Park&#x27;&quot; because of the archaic characteristics of its highly endemic vegetation. In addition to the basal angiosperm plant genus &quot;Amborella&quot;, for example, the island is home to more gymnosperm species than any other tropic landmass, with 43 of its 44 conifer species being unique to the island, which is also home to the world&#x27;s only known parasitic gymnosperm, the rootless conifer &quot;Parasitaxus usta&quot;.

Given their prehistoric appearance, the dry forests of western New Caledonia were chosen as the location for filming the first episode of the BBC miniseries Walking with Dinosaurs, which was set in the Arizona of the late Triassic.

==Mineral wealth==

After a formation discovered in Oman in the 1970s, New Caledonia has the planet&#x27;s largest known outcrop of ultrabasic rock, derived not from the crust, but from an upthrust fold of the more deeply underlying mantle of the earth. These mineral-rich rocks are a source of nickel, chromium, iron, cobalt, manganese, silver, gold, lead and copper. The toxicity of the mineral-rich soil has helped preserve the endemic vegetation, which has long been adapted to it, from competition from would-be colonizers which find it unsuitable.

==Human geography==

===Before Western contact===
Anthropologically, New Caledonia is considered the southernmost archipelago of Melanesia, grouping it with the more close by islands to its north, rather than its geologically associated neighbour, New Zealand, to the south. The New Caledonian languages, whose speakers are called Kanaks, and the dialects of the Loyalty Islands find their closest relatives in the languages of Vanuatu to the east. Together, these comprise the Southern Oceanic language family, a member of the Oceanic language branch of the Austronesian language family. The Fijian languages, the Māori language of New Zealand, and other Polynesian languages such as Tahitian, Samoan and Hawaiian are cousins of the New Caledonian languages within the Oceanic language family.

Linguistic analysis using the comparative method provides a detailed family tree of the Austronesian languages to which the native languages of New Caledonia belong. The Lapita culture, hypothesized to have spoken proto-Oceanic, and defined by its typical style of pottery, originated to the northwest in the Bismarck Archipelago around 1500 BC. The earliest known human settlement of New Caledonia, dated to 1240 ±220 BC at the Tiwi rockshelter, is attributed to the Lapitans, who then moved on to Fiji by approximately 900 BC, whence the Polynesian expansion would begin.

===Since Western contact===
Western colonization of the area began in the 18th century. The British explorer James Cook sighted Grande Terre in 1774 and named it New Caledonia, Caledonia being Latin for Scotland. In 1853, under Napoleon III, the area was made a French colony. The French brought colonial subjects such as Arabs from the Maghreb to settle in the territory. Given its strategic location and that it was unoccupied by Japanese troops it played a vital role under the Free French Forces as an Allied Forces naval base during the Second World War.

Today, while French is the official language, 28 indigenous tongues are still spoken. At the 2004 census, 97.0% reported they could speak French, whereas only 0.97% reported that they had no knowledge of French. In the same census, 37.1% reported that they could speak (but not necessarily read or write) one of the 28 indigenous Austronesian languages.

At the 1996 census, the indigenous Melanesian Kanak community represented around44.6% of the whole population. and estimated at over 41% in 2023. They are no longer a majority, their proportion of the population having declined due to immigration and other factors. The rest of the population is made up of ethnic groups that arrived in New Caledonia in the last 150 years: Europeans (34.5%) (predominantly French, with German, British and Italian minorities), Polynesians (Wallisians, Tahitians) (11.8%), Indonesians (2.6%), Vietnamese (1.4%), Ni-Vanuatu (1.2%), and various other groups (3.9%), Tamils, other South Asians, Berbers, Japanese, Chinese, Fijians, Arabs, West Indian (mostly from other French territories) and a small number of ethnic Africans.

==See also==

* d&#x27;Entrecasteaux Ridge
* List of islands of New Caledonia

&quot;Other microcontinental islands:&quot;
* Madagascar
* Seychelles
* Socotra

==References==

==External links==
* Croixdusud.info a site in both English and French including information on the geography, geology, and biodiversity of the area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3098269" start="0" end="34" title="Geography of New Caledonia" label="The geography of [[New Caledonia]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q719487" start="72" end="93" title="overseas collectivity" label="overseas collectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="97" end="103" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631958" start="119" end="128" title="subregion" label="subregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="132" end="141" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="192" end="209" title="Oceania" label="southwest Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="316" end="324" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="413" end="419" title="Lapita" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="439" end="450" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="481" end="494" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="506" end="524" title="War in the Pacific" label="War in the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="652" end="665" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="683" end="689" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q256293" start="691" end="703" title="Grande Terre (New Caledonia)" label="Grande Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="709" end="724" title="Loyalty Islands" label="Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="786" end="792" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="844" end="853" title="coastline" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="1046" end="1055" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="1063" end="1072" title="Zealandia (continent)" label="Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="1079" end="1083" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="1145" end="1148" title="mya (unit)" label="mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435290" start="1654" end="1662" title="Refugium (population biology)" label="refugium"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="1742" end="1751" title="Gondwanan" label="Gondwanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q256293" start="1869" end="1881" title="Grande Terre (New Caledonia)" label="Grande Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q33661626" start="1916" end="1921" title="Belep" label="Belep"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="1972" end="1987" title="Loyalty Islands" label="Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q292500" start="2025" end="2038" title="Isle of Pines (New Caledonia)" label="Isle of Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070802" start="2077" end="2097" title="Chesterfield Islands" label="Chesterfield Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33661626" start="2268" end="2273" title="Belep" label="Belep"/>
<link wikidata="Q292500" start="2283" end="2295" title="Île des Pins" label="Île des Pins"/>
<link wikidata="Q101949" start="2333" end="2352" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="2365" end="2379" title="Permian period" label="Permian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="2389" end="2392" title="mya (unit)" label="mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="2402" end="2411" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="2416" end="2423" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="2451" end="2457" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q772239" start="2458" end="2467" title="obduction" label="obduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q239918" start="2491" end="2501" title="peridotite" label="peridotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="2524" end="2530" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="2538" end="2553" title="Loyalty Islands" label="Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="2593" end="2598" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2603" end="2612" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="2702" end="2709" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070802" start="2724" end="2744" title="Chesterfield Islands" label="Chesterfield Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909475" start="2816" end="2842" title="Matthew and Hunter Islands" label="Matthew and Hunter Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q752431" start="2933" end="2945" title="New Hebrides" label="New Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945432" start="3206" end="3216" title="Mont Panié" label="Mont Panié"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="3442" end="3449" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="3510" end="3539" title="Continental island" label="microcontinental island chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="3574" end="3583" title="Zealandia (continent)" label="Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="3604" end="3613" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094611" start="3617" end="3631" title="microcontinent" label="microcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833" start="3663" end="3677" title="supercontinent" label="supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="3681" end="3689" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="3701" end="3722" title="Mesozoic" label="time of the dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945432" start="3770" end="3780" title="Mont Panié" label="Mont Panié"/>
<link wikidata="Q420368" start="3839" end="3852" title="Norfolk Ridge" label="Norfolk Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="3990" end="4000" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="4020" end="4037" title="million years ago" label="million years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4536" end="4549" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="4808" end="4817" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4821" end="4826" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q46275" start="4945" end="4984" title="New Zealand Subantarctic Islands" label="New Zealand&amp;#x27;s subantarctic islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390354" start="5013" end="5022" title="19th parallel south" label="19° south"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391030" start="5026" end="5035" title="56th parallel south" label="56° south"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="5063" end="5068" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="5072" end="5082" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="5091" end="5096" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="5100" end="5106" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="5136" end="5147" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="5188" end="5197" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="5303" end="5325" title="Oceania" label="islands of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="5338" end="5352" title="Hawaiian chain" label="Hawaiian chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="5400" end="5408" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="5469" end="5479" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="5484" end="5487" title="mya (unit)" label="mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="5521" end="5528" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="5557" end="5566" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="5833" end="5839" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="5849" end="5857" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="5991" end="6008" title="continental drift" label="continental drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="6015" end="6024" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="6093" end="6101" title="Botanist" label="Botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="6170" end="6185" title="above sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435290" start="6198" end="6205" title="refugium (population biology)" label="refugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="6524" end="6531" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="6552" end="6560" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="6588" end="6599" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="6668" end="6675" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="7015" end="7021" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9742" start="7330" end="7336" title="Pouébo" label="Pouébo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="7401" end="7406" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="7414" end="7422" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945432" start="7525" end="7535" title="Mont Panie" label="Mont Panie"/>
<link wikidata="Q279485" start="7565" end="7577" title="Diahot River" label="Diahot River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7719" end="7739" title="Baie d&amp;#x27;Harcourt" label="Baie d&amp;#x27;Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945432" start="7826" end="7837" title="Mount Panie" label="Mount Panie"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="7899" end="7906" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="7929" end="7935" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="7976" end="7985" title="irrigation" label="irrigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="8020" end="8027" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="8157" end="8167" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435290" start="8188" end="8196" title="Refugium (population biology)" label="refugium"/>
<link wikidata="Q669634" start="8439" end="8458" title="Rhynochetos jubatus" label="Rhynochetos jubatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q601107" start="8518" end="8528" title="sunbittern" label="sunbittern"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="8532" end="8545" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q310470" start="8572" end="8592" title="Amborella trichopoda" label="Amborella trichopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="8657" end="8672" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q133604" start="8821" end="8838" title="Meiolania" label="Meiolania mackayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q604542" start="8887" end="8910" title="Mekosuchus" label="Mekosuchus inexpectatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394001" start="9067" end="9087" title="Correlophus ciliatus" label="Correlophus ciliatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193333" start="9198" end="9222" title="Rhacodactylus leachianus" label="Rhacodactylus leachianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q558908" start="9379" end="9403" title="New Caledonia flying fox" label="New Caledonia flying fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q157214" start="9492" end="9501" title="Araucaria" label="Araucaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="9682" end="9692" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q310470" start="9711" end="9720" title="Amborella" label="Amborella"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="9768" end="9778" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="9966" end="9973" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q133097" start="9980" end="9996" title="Parasitaxus usta" label="Parasitaxus usta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10147" end="10150" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q743334" start="10162" end="10184" title="Walking with Dinosaurs" label="Walking with Dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="10207" end="10214" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="10227" end="10235" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="10290" end="10294" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143398" start="10370" end="10385" title="ultrabasic rock" label="ultrabasic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="10471" end="10477" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="10533" end="10539" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="10541" end="10549" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="10551" end="10555" title="Iron ore" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="10557" end="10563" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="10565" end="10574" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="10576" end="10582" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="10584" end="10588" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="10590" end="10594" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="10599" end="10605" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="10922" end="10931" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="11124" end="11130" title="Kanak people" label="Kanaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="11156" end="11171" title="Loyalty Islands" label="Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="11221" end="11228" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039118" start="11271" end="11303" title="Southern Oceanic languages" label="Southern Oceanic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q324457" start="11321" end="11337" title="Oceanic language" label="Oceanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="11352" end="11380" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130237" start="11386" end="11402" title="Fijian languages" label="Fijian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="11408" end="11422" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="11449" end="11468" title="Polynesian language" label="Polynesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="11478" end="11486" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="11488" end="11494" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="11499" end="11507" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q324457" start="11563" end="11570" title="Oceanic languages" label="Oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="11589" end="11599" title="Linguistics" label="Linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="11619" end="11637" title="comparative method (linguistics)" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="11759" end="11765" title="Lapita" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="11898" end="11918" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="12088" end="12092" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12129" end="12149" title="Polynesia#History of the Polynesian people" label="Polynesian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="12273" end="12283" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12357" end="12362" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="12367" end="12375" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="12392" end="12404" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="12486" end="12491" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="12501" end="12508" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="12670" end="12683" title="Allied forces (World War II)" label="Allied Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12706" end="12722" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="13055" end="13077" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="13115" end="13124" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="13126" end="13131" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="13454" end="13463" title="European ethnic groups" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="13487" end="13493" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="13500" end="13506" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="13508" end="13515" title="British people" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="13520" end="13527" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13541" end="13551" title="Polynesia#Cultures of Polynesia" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="13554" end="13564" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282763" start="13566" end="13575" title="Tahitians" label="Tahitians"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="13586" end="13595" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="13606" end="13616" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290668" start="13625" end="13635" title="Ni-Vanuatu" label="Ni-Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="13677" end="13683" title="Tamil people" label="Tamils"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="13691" end="13701" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836039" start="13705" end="13712" title="Kabyles du Pacifique" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="13714" end="13722" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="13724" end="13731" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q794439" start="13733" end="13740" title="Fijians" label="Fijians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="13742" end="13747" title="Arab people" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15949440" start="13749" end="13760" title="West Indian" label="West Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225174" start="13856" end="13882" title="d&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux Ridge" label="d&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294699" start="13885" end="13917" title="List of islands of New Caledonia" label="List of islands of New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094611" start="13931" end="13955" title="Continental fragment" label="microcontinental islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="13965" end="13975" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="13978" end="13988" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82859" start="13991" end="13998" title="Socotra" label="Socotra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21345" wikidata="Q5256044" url="?curid=21345" title="Demographics of New Caledonia">
<text>Demographic features of the population of New Caledonia include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Population==

===Structure of the population===


==Vital statistics==

Births and deaths 
ISEE - Démographie

== Ethnic groups ==

Ethnic Melanesians known as Kanak constituted 41.2% of the population in 2019, followed by Europeans (Caldoche and Zoreille) with 24.1%. The Europeans are the largest ethnic group in the South Province, where they make up a plurality, while Kanak are the majority in the two other provinces. The remainder of the population are Wallis and Futunan (8.3%), Tahitian (2.0%), Indonesians (1.4%), Ni-Vanuatu (0.9%), Vietnamese, other Asian (0.4%), Mixed (11.3%), and belong to other ethnic groups (9.5%).
An estimate of 15,000 Caledonians were of Algerian descent.

==Languages==
*French (official)
*33 Melanesian-Polynesian dialects

==Religion==
*Roman Catholic 60%
*Protestant 30%
*Other 10%

==See also==
*New Caledonia
*Europeans in Oceania
* Demographics of France

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demographic" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="42" end="55" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="355" end="366" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="376" end="381" title="Kanak people" label="Kanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="439" end="448" title="Europeans" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478459" start="450" end="458" title="Caldoche" label="Caldoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576099" start="463" end="471" title="Zoreille" label="Zoreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q965632" start="535" end="549" title="South Province, New Caledonia" label="South Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="676" end="693" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282763" start="703" end="711" title="Tahitians" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757311" start="720" end="731" title="Overseas Indonesians" label="Indonesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290668" start="740" end="750" title="Ni-Vanuatu" label="Ni-Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233666" start="759" end="769" title="Overseas Vietnamese" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="777" end="781" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="791" end="796" title="Multiracial people" label="Mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="890" end="897" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="924" end="930" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456227" start="946" end="956" title="Melanesian languages" label="Melanesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="957" end="967" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="992" end="1006" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1012" end="1022" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="1053" end="1066" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413717" start="1068" end="1088" title="Europeans in Oceania" label="Europeans in Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172523" start="1091" end="1113" title="Demographics of France" label="Demographics of France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21346" wikidata="Q3394908" url="?curid=21346" title="Politics of New Caledonia">
<text>New Caledonia is a French sui generis collectivity with a system of government based on parliamentarism and representative democracy. The President of the Government is the head of government, and there is a multi-party system, with Executive power being exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the executive and the Congress of New Caledonia. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

== Political developments ==
Article 77 of the Constitution of France and the Organic Law 99-209 confers a unique status on New Caledonia between that of an independent country and a regular &quot;collectivité d&#x27;outre-mer&quot; or overseas &quot;collectivité&quot; of France. A territorial congress and government have been established, and the 1998 Nouméa Accord organized a devolution of powers. Key areas such as taxation, labor law, health and hygiene and foreign trade are already in the hands of the Congress. Further powers will supposedly be given to the Congress in the near future.

Under article 4 of the Organic Law 99-209 a New Caledonian citizenship has also been introduced: only New Caledonian citizens (defined by article 188) have the right to vote in the local elections. This measure has been criticized, because it creates a second-class status for French citizens living in New Caledonia who do not possess New Caledonian citizenship (because they settled in the territory only recently). New Caledonia is also allowed to engage in international cooperation with independent countries of the Pacific Ocean. Finally, the territorial Congress is allowed to pass statutes that are contrary to French law in a certain number of areas.

On the other hand, New Caledonia remains an integral part of the French Republic. Inhabitants of New Caledonia are French citizens and carry French passports. They take part in the legislative and presidential French elections. New Caledonia sends two representatives to the French National Assembly and two senators to the French Senate. The representative of the French central state in New Caledonia is the High Commissioner of the Republic (&quot;Haut-Commissaire de la République&quot;, locally known as &quot;haussaire&quot;), who is the head of civil services, and who sits in the government of the territory.

The Nouméa Accord stipulates that the Congress will have the right to call for a referendum on independence after 2014, at a time of its choosing. Following the timeline set by the Nouméa Accord, the groundwork was laid for a Referendum on full independence from France at a meeting chaired by the French Prime Minister Édouard Philippe on 2 November 2017, with the referendum to be held by November 2018. Voter list eligibility had been a subject of a long dispute, but the details were resolved at this meeting. In the 2018 referendum, voters narrowly chose to remain a part of France. Two further referendums were permitted, being held in 2020 and 2021. 2020 saw slimmer margins than in the 2018 referendum, with 46.74% in favor of independence, while the 2021 vote overwhelmingly rejected independence, with 96.49% against it but on only a 43.87% turnout. Kanak communities largely boycotted this referendum, advised by their leadership and still in mourning following mortality in the covid-19 pandemic. 

The current president of the government elected by the Congress is Louis Mapou, from the pro-independence Palika political party.

In May 2024, riots broke out following controversial voting reforms. See 2024 New Caledonia unrest.

==Executive branch==

|High Commissioner
|Louis Le Franc
|6 February 2023
|President of the Government
|Louis Mapou
|National Union for Independence-Palika
|22 July 2021

The high commissioner is appointed by the French president on the advice of the French Ministry of Interior. The president of the government is elected by the members of the Territorial Congress.

==Legislative branch==
The Congress (&quot;Congrès&quot;) has 54 members, being the members of the three regional councils, all elected for a five-year term by proportional representation. Furthermore, there is a 16-member Kanak Customary Senate (two members from each of the eight customary aires).

==Political parties and elections==
===2019 territorial election===
===Parliamentarians===

====French National Assembly====
*Nicolas Metzdorf (first constituency, Générations NC, GNC) elected 2024; previously represented the second constituency
*Emmanuel Tjibaou (second constituency, Caledonian Union, UC) elected 2024

====French Senate====
*Georges Naturel (The Rally, R-LR) elected 2023
*Robert Xowie (Caledonian Union, UC) elected 2023

==Judicial branch==
Court of Appeal or Cour d&#x27;Appel; County Courts; Joint Commerce Tribunal Court; Children&#x27;s Court

==Administrative divisions==

New Caledonia is divided into three provinces: &quot;Province des Îles&quot;, &quot;Province Nord&quot;, and &quot;Province Sud&quot; - which are further subdivided into 33 communes.

==International organization participation==
*French-Pacific Banking Agreement
*International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
*Pacific Islands Forum (associate)
* The Pacific Community (SPC)
*United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (associate)
*World Federation of Trade Unions
*World Meteorological Organization.

==See also ==

* Ouvéa cave hostage taking

==References==
==External links==

===French===
* French ministry of overseas territories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="0" end="13" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26" end="50" title="Overseas departments and territories of France#Special collectivity" label="sui generis collectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="88" end="103" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="108" end="132" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="173" end="191" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="208" end="226" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="233" end="248" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="284" end="301" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="324" end="333" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993118" start="342" end="367" title="Congress of New Caledonia" label="Congress of New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="373" end="382" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="484" end="506" title="Constitution of France" label="Constitution of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076487" start="515" end="526" title="Organic Law" label="Organic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q719487" start="634" end="663" title="collectivité d&amp;#x27;outre-mer" label="collectivité d&amp;#x27;outre-mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q321912" start="792" end="805" title="Nouméa Accord" label="Nouméa Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076487" start="1058" end="1069" title="Organic Law" label="Organic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q756296" start="1079" end="1105" title="Subnational citizenship" label="New Caledonian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="1556" end="1569" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195493" start="1654" end="1664" title="French law" label="French law"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1944" end="1963" title=":Category:French legislative constituencies in New Caledonia" label="two representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="1971" end="1995" title="French National Assembly" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="2020" end="2033" title="French Senate" label="French Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="2106" end="2139" title="High Commissioner of the Republic" label="High Commissioner of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q321912" start="2318" end="2331" title="Nouméa Accord" label="Nouméa Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="2395" end="2405" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="2409" end="2421" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579995" start="2634" end="2650" title="Édouard Philippe" label="Édouard Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723992" start="2705" end="2718" title="2018 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="November 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q65123200" start="2956" end="2960" title="2020 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q105547062" start="2965" end="2969" title="2021 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q78223158" start="3392" end="3403" title="Louis Mapou" label="Louis Mapou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366347" start="3431" end="3437" title="Party of Kanak Liberation" label="Palika"/>
<link wikidata="Q125935907" start="3529" end="3554" title="2024 New Caledonia unrest" label="2024 New Caledonia unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q78223158" start="3661" end="3672" title="Louis Mapou" label="Louis Mapou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550394" start="3674" end="3705" title="National Union for Independence" label="National Union for Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366347" start="3706" end="3712" title="Party of Kanak Liberation" label="Palika"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="4085" end="4112" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32557023" start="4352" end="4368" title="Nicolas Metzdorf" label="Nicolas Metzdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402006" start="4370" end="4388" title="New Caledonia&amp;#x27;s 1st constituency" label="first constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q80196524" start="4390" end="4404" title="Générations NC" label="Générations NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025139" start="4452" end="4471" title="New Caledonia&amp;#x27;s 2nd constituency" label="second constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q127233075" start="4473" end="4489" title="Emmanuel Tjibaou" label="Emmanuel Tjibaou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025139" start="4491" end="4510" title="New Caledonia&amp;#x27;s 2nd constituency" label="second constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550048" start="4512" end="4528" title="Caledonian Union" label="Caledonian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103258" start="4571" end="4586" title="Georges Naturel" label="Georges Naturel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226266" start="4588" end="4597" title="The Rally (New Caledonia)" label="The Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436591" start="4619" end="4631" title="Robert Xowie" label="Robert Xowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550048" start="4633" end="4649" title="Caledonian Union" label="Caledonian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000944" start="4689" end="4704" title="Court of Appeal (France)" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q583865" start="4862" end="4871" title="Collectivité territoriale" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="4879" end="4896" title="Province des Îles" label="Province des Îles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612920" start="4910" end="4923" title="Province Nord" label="Province Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q965632" start="4941" end="4953" title="Province Sud" label="Province Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="4999" end="5007" title="Communes of France" label="communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q214393" start="5056" end="5088" title="French-Pacific Banking Agreement" label="French-Pacific Banking Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="5090" end="5138" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="5140" end="5161" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="5180" end="5197" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="5205" end="5275" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific" label="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="5289" end="5321" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="World Federation of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="5323" end="5356" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403801" start="5376" end="5401" title="Ouvéa cave hostage taking" label="Ouvéa cave hostage taking"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21347" wikidata="Q3578679" url="?curid=21347" title="Economy of New Caledonia">
<text>New Caledonia is a major source for nickel and contains roughly 10% of the world&#x27;s known nickel supply. The islands contain about 7,100,000 tonnes of nickel. With the annual production of about 107,000 tonnes in 2009, New Caledonia was the world&#x27;s fifth largest producer after Russia (266,000), Indonesia (189,000), Canada (181,000) and Australia (167,000). In recent years, the economy has suffered because of depressed international demand for nickel due to the 2007-2008 global financial crisis. Only a negligible amount of the land is suitable for cultivation, and food accounts for about 20% of imports. In addition to nickel, the substantial financial support from France and tourism are keys to the health of the economy. In the 2000s, large additions were made to nickel mining capacity. The Goro Nickel Plant is expected to be one of the largest nickel producing plants on Earth. This plant produces an estimated 20% of the global nickel supply. However, the need to respond to environmental concerns over the country&#x27;s globally recognized ecological heritage, may increasingly need to be factored into capitalization of mining operations.

The GDP of New Caledonia in 2007 was 8.8 billion US dollars at market exchange rates, the fourth-largest economy in Oceania after Australia, New Zealand, and Hawaii. The GDP per capita was 36,376 US dollars in 2007 (at market exchange rates, not at PPP), lower than in Australia and Hawaii, but higher than in New Zealand.

In 2007, exports from New Caledonia amounted to 2.11 billion US dollars, 96.3% of which were mineral products and alloys (essentially nickel ore and ferronickel). Imports amounted to 2.88 billion US dollars. 26.6% of imports came from Metropolitan France, 16.1% from other European countries, 13.6% from Singapore (mostly fuel), 10.7% from Australia, 4.0% from New Zealand, 3.2% from the United States, 3.0% from China, 3.0% from Japan, and 22.7% from other countries.

== Tourism ==
As of 2007, about 200 Japanese couples travel to New Caledonia each year for their wedding and honeymoon. &quot;Oceania Flash&quot; reported in 2007 that one company planned to build a new wedding chapel to accommodate Japanese weddings to supplement the Le Meridien Resort in Nouméa.

New Caledonia is a popular destination for Australian high school students who are studying French.

== See also ==

* Economy of France in: French Guiana, French Polynesia, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Réunion, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Wallis and Futuna
* Taxation in France
* Economic history of France
* Poverty in France

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="0" end="13" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028290" start="245" end="280" title="Nickel mining in New Caledonia" label="world&amp;#x27;s fifth largest producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="474" end="507" title="financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="2007-2008 global financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="681" end="687" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586767" start="810" end="827" title="Goro, New Caledonia" label="Goro Nickel Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1169" end="1172" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="1281" end="1288" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="1414" end="1417" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="1623" end="1629" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q907347" start="1638" end="1649" title="ferronickel" label="ferronickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="1724" end="1743" title="Metropolitan France" label="Metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9733" start="2250" end="2256" title="Nouméa" label="Nouméa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578671" start="2400" end="2413" title="Economy of French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578682" start="2415" end="2431" title="Economy of French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="2433" end="2443" title="Economy of Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578676" start="2445" end="2455" title="Economy of Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297045" start="2457" end="2464" title="Economy of Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578632" start="2481" end="2488" title="Economy of Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25362" start="2490" end="2506" title="Economy of Saint Barthélemy" label="Saint Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333762" start="2508" end="2520" title="Economy of Saint Martin (France)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34617" start="2522" end="2547" title="Economy of Saint Pierre and Miquelon" label="Saint Pierre and Miquelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148762" start="2549" end="2566" title="Economy of Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112435" start="2569" end="2587" title="Taxation in France" label="Taxation in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138130" start="2590" end="2616" title="Economic history of France" label="Economic history of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372902" start="2619" end="2636" title="Poverty in France" label="Poverty in France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21348" wikidata="Q7695993" url="?curid=21348" title="Telecommunications in New Caledonia">
<text>== Telephones ==
Country calling code: 687

Telephones - main lines in use:
53,300 (2004) (up from 44,000 in 1995)

Telephones - mobile cellular:
116,400 (2004) (up from 825 in 1995)
There is a single network operator, OPT-NC.

Telephone system:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;domestic:&quot;
NA
&lt;br&gt;&quot;international:&quot;
satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

== Radio and television ==
Radio broadcast stations:
AM 1, FM 5, Digital Radio Oceane, shortwave 0 (2009)

Radios:
107,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations:
6 (plus 25 low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions:
52,000 (1997)

== Internet ==
Internet Service Providers (ISPs):
1 (1999)

Country code (Top level domain): NC

== See also ==
* Telephone numbers in New Caledonia

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="17" end="37" title="Country calling codes" label="Country calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="44" end="53" title="Telephone" label="Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="201" end="217" title="Mobile network operator" label="network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="318" end="327" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="346" end="354" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="356" end="369" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="399" end="404" title="Radio" label="Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="405" end="414" title="broadcasting" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="437" end="457" title="Digital Radio Oceane" label="Digital Radio Oceane"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="503" end="513" title="Television" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="617" end="642" title="Internet Service Provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="662" end="674" title="Country code" label="Country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696628" start="716" end="750" title="Telephone numbers in New Caledonia" label="Telephone numbers in New Caledonia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21353" wikidata="Q1773900" url="?curid=21353" title="Geography of New Zealand">
<text>New Zealand () is an island country located in the southwestern Pacific Ocean, near the centre of the water hemisphere. It consists of a large number of islands, estimated around 700, mainly remnants of a larger landmass now beneath the sea. The land masses by size are the South Island () and the North Island (), separated by the Cook Strait. The third-largest is Stewart Island / Rakiura, located off the tip of the South Island across Foveaux Strait. Other islands are significantly smaller in area. The three largest islands stretch across latitudes 35° to 47° south. New Zealand is the sixth-largest island country in the world, with a land size of .

New Zealand&#x27;s landscapes range from the fiord-like sounds of the southwest to the sandy beaches of the subtropical Far North. The South Island is dominated by the Southern Alps while a volcanic plateau covers much of the central North Island. Temperatures commonly fall below and rise above then conditions vary from wet and cold on the South Island&#x27;s west coast to dry and continental a short distance away across the mountains and to the tundra like climate in the Deep South of Southland.

About two-thirds of the land is economically useful, with the remainder being mountainous. The North Island is the most populous island with 4 million residents, and Auckland being by far the largest metropolitan area in the country by population and urban area. The South Island is the second-most populated island, with over 1.18 million people, but is geographically larger than the North.

New Zealand is situated on the boundary of the Pacific and Australian tectonic plates, making it one of the most active earthquake and volcanic regions in the world. The country has experienced several devastating earthquakes throughout its history.

The New Zealand mainland is about east of the Australian mainland across the Tasman Sea, the closest foreign neighbour to its main islands being Norfolk Island (Australia) about to the north west. Other island groups to the north are New Caledonia, Tonga and Fiji. It is the southernmost nation in Oceania. The relative close proximity of New Zealand to Antarctica has made the South Island a major gateway for scientific expeditions to the continent.

==Physical geography==

===Overview===

New Zealand is located in the South Pacific Ocean at , near the centre of the water hemisphere. It is a long and narrow country, extending along its north-north-east axis with a maximum width of . The land size of makes it the sixth-largest island country. New Zealand consists of a large number of islands, estimated around 600. The islands give it of coastline and extensive marine resources. New Zealand claims the ninth largest exclusive economic zone in the world, covering , more than 15 times its land area.

The South Island is the largest land mass of New Zealand, and is the 12th-largest island in the world. The island is divided along its length by the Southern Alps. The east side of the island has the Canterbury Plains while the West Coast is famous for its rough coastlines, high rainfall, very high proportion of native bush (forest), and glaciers.

The North Island is the second-largest island, and the 14th-largest in the world. It is separated from the South Island by the Cook Strait, with the shortest distance being . The North Island is less mountainous than the South Island, although a series of narrow mountain ranges form a roughly north-east belt that rises up to . Much of the surviving forest is located in this belt, and in other mountain areas and rolling hills. The North Island has many isolated volcanic peaks.

Besides the North and South Islands, the five largest inhabited islands are Stewart Island / Rakiura ( due south of the South Island), Chatham Island (&quot;Wharekauri&quot; in Māori or &quot;Rēkohu&quot; in Moriori) (some east of the South Island), Great Barrier Island (in the Hauraki Gulf), Rangitoto ki te Tonga / D&#x27;Urville Island (in the Marlborough Sounds) and Waiheke Island (about from central Auckland).

====Extreme points====

The phrase &quot;From Cape Reinga to The Bluff&quot; is frequently used within New Zealand to refer to the extent of the whole country. Cape Reinga / Te Rerenga Wairua is the northwesternmost tip of the Aupōuri Peninsula, at the northern end of the North Island. Bluff is Invercargill&#x27;s port, located near the southern tip of the South Island, below the 46th parallel south. However, the extreme points of New Zealand are in fact located in several outlying islands.

The points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location in New Zealand are as follows:

*The northernmost point is in Nugent Island in the Kermadec Islands ().
*The southernmost point is Jacquemart Island in the Campbell Island group ().
*The easternmost point is situated in a group of islands within the Chatham Islands called the Forty-Fours ().
*The westernmost point is Cape Lovitt on Auckland Island ().

====Antipodes====
New Zealand is largely antipodal to the Iberian Peninsula of Europe. The northern half of the South Island corresponds to Galicia and northern Portugal. Most of the North Island corresponds to central and southern Spain, from Valladolid (opposite the southern point of the North Island, Cape Palliser), through Madrid and Toledo to Cordoba (directly antipodal to Hamilton), Lorca (opposite East Cape), Málaga (Cape Colville), and Gibraltar. Parts of the Northland Peninsula oppose Morocco, with Whangārei nearly coincident with Tangiers. The antipodes of the Chatham Islands lie in France, just north of the city of Montpellier. The Antipodes Islands were named for their supposed antipodal position to Britain; although they are the closest land to the true antipodes of Britain, their location 49°41′S 178°48′E is directly antipodal to a point a few kilometres to the east of Cherbourg on the north coast of France.

In Europe the term &quot;Antipodes&quot; is often used to refer to New Zealand and Australia (and sometimes other South Pacific areas), and &quot;&quot; to their inhabitants.

===Geology===


New Zealand is part of Zealandia, a microcontinent nearly half the size of Australia that gradually submerged after breaking away from the Gondwana supercontinent. Zealandia extends a significant distance east into the Pacific Ocean and south towards Antarctica. It also extends towards Australia in the north-west. This submerged continent is dotted with topographic highs that sometimes form islands. Some of these, such as the main islands (North and South), Stewart Island, New Caledonia, and the Chatham Islands, are settled. Other smaller islands are eco-sanctuaries with carefully controlled access.
The New Zealand land mass has been uplifted due to transpressional tectonics between the Indo-Australian plate and Pacific plates (these two plates are grinding together with one riding up and over the other). This is the cause of New Zealand&#x27;s numerous earthquakes.
To the east of the North Island the Pacific plate is forced under the Indo-Australian plate. The North Island of New Zealand has widespread back-arc volcanism as a result of this subduction. There are many large volcanoes with relatively frequent eruptions. There are also several very large calderas, with the most obvious forming Lake Taupō. Taupō has a history of incredibly powerful eruptions, with the Oruanui eruption 26,500 years ago ejecting of material and causing the downward collapse of several hundred square kilometres to form the lake. The most recent eruption occurred and ejected at least of material, and has been correlated with red skies seen at the time in Rome and China. The associated geothermal energy from this volcanic area is used in numerous hydrothermal power plants. Some volcanic places are also famous tourist destinations, such as the Rotorua geysers.

The subduction direction is reversed through the South Island, with the Indo-Australian plate forced under the Pacific plate. The transition between these two different styles of continental collision occurs through the top of the South Island. This area has significant uplift and many active faults; large earthquakes are frequent occurrences here. The most powerful in recent history, the M8.3 Wairarapa earthquake, occurred in 1855. This earthquake generated more than of vertical uplift in places, and caused a localised tsunami. Fortunately casualties were low due to the sparse settlement of the region. In 2013, the area was rattled by the M6.5 Seddon earthquake, but this caused little damage and no injuries. New Zealand&#x27;s capital city, Wellington is situated in the centre of this region.

The subduction of the Indo-Australian plate drives rapid uplift in the centre of the South Island (approx. per year). This uplift forms the Southern Alps. These roughly divide the island, with a narrow wet strip to the west and wide and dry plains to the east. The resulting orographic rainfall enables the hydroelectric generation of most of the electricity in New Zealand. A significant amount of the movement between the two plates is accommodated by lateral sliding of the Indo-Australian plate north relative to the Pacific plate. The plate boundary forms the nearly long Alpine Fault. This fault has an estimated rupture reoccurrence interval of ~330 years, and last ruptured in 1717 along of its length. It passes directly under many settlements on the West Coast of the South Island and shaking from a rupture would likely affect many cities and towns throughout the country.

The rapid uplift and high erosion rates within the Southern Alps combine to expose high grade greenschist to amphibolite facies rocks, including the gemstone pounamu. Geologists visiting the West Coast can easily access high-grade metamorphic rocks and mylonites associated with the Alpine Fault, and in certain places can stand astride the fault trace of an active plate boundary. The South Island also has two major goldfields in Otago and the West Coast.
To the south of New Zealand the Indo-Australian plate is subducting under the Pacific plate, and this is beginning to result in back-arc volcanism. The youngest (geologically speaking) volcanism in the South Island occurred in this region, forming the Solander Islands (&lt;2 million years old). This region is dominated by the rugged and relatively untouched Fiordland, an area of flooded glacially carved valleys with little human settlement.

===Mountains, volcanoes and glaciers===
The South Island is much more mountainous than the North, but shows fewer manifestations of recent volcanic activity. There are 18 peaks of more than in the Southern Alps, which stretch for down the South Island. The closest mountains surpassing it in elevation are found not in Australia, but in New Guinea and Antarctica. As well as the towering peaks, the Southern Alps include huge glaciers such as Franz Josef and Fox. The country&#x27;s highest mountain is Aoraki / Mount Cook; its height since 2014 is listed as (down from before December 1991, due to a rockslide and subsequent erosion). The second highest peak is Mount Tasman, with a height of .
The North Island Volcanic Plateau covers much of central North Island with volcanoes, lava plateaus, and crater lakes. The three highest volcanoes are Mount Ruapehu (), Mount Taranaki () and Mount Ngauruhoe (). Ruapehu&#x27;s major eruptions have historically been about 50 years apart, in 1895, 1945 and 1995–1996. The 1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera, located near Rotorua, was New Zealand&#x27;s largest and deadliest eruption in the last 200 years, killing over 100 people. Another long chain of mountains runs through the North Island, from Wellington to East Cape. The ranges include Tararua and Kaimanawa.

The lower mountain slopes are covered in native forest. Above this are shrubs, and then tussock grasses. Alpine tundra consists of cushion plants and herbfields; many of these plants have white and yellow flowers.


===Caves===
New Zealand&#x27;s cave systems have three main origins, the chemical weathering of limestone by water (karst), lava caves and erosion by waves (sea caves). Therefore, the distribution of limestone, marble (metamorphosed limestone) and volcanoes defines the location of caves in inland New Zealand. The main regions of karst topography are the Waitomo District and Takaka Hill in the Tasman District. Other notable locations are on the West Coast (Punakaiki), Hawke&#x27;s Bay and Fiordland.

Lava caves (lava tubes) usually form in pāhoehoe lava flows, which are less viscous and typical formed from basalt. When an eruption occurs the outer layer of the lava flow hardens, while the interior remains liquid. The liquid lava flows out as it is insulated by the hardened crust above. These caves are found where there are relatively recent basaltic volcanoes in New Zealand, such as the Auckland volcanic field particularly on Rangitoto, Mount Eden and Matukutūruru.

The distribution of sea caves is more sporadic, with their location and orientation being controlled by weakness in the underlying rock. As cave systems take many thousands of years to develop they can now be isolated from the water that formed them, whether through change in sea level or groundwater flow. If as a cave grows it breaks through to the surface somewhere else it becomes a natural arch, like the Ōpārara Basin Arches near Karamea.

===Rivers and lakes===
The proportion of New Zealand&#x27;s area (excluding estuaries) covered by rivers, lakes and ponds, based on figures from the New Zealand Land Cover Database, is (357526 + 81936) / (26821559 – 92499–26033 – 19216) = 1.6%. If estuarine open water, mangroves, and herbaceous saline vegetation are included, the figure is 2.2%.
The mountainous areas of the North Island are cut by many rivers, many of which are swift and unnavigable. The east of the South Island is marked by wide braided rivers, such as the Wairau, Waimakariri and Rangitata; formed from glaciers, they fan out into many strands on gravel plains. The total length of the country&#x27;s rivers is over . The Waikato, flowing through the North Island, is the longest, with a length of . New Zealand&#x27;s rivers feature hundreds of waterfalls; the most visited set of waterfalls are the Huka Falls that drain Lake Taupō.
Lake Taupō, located near the centre of the North Island, is the largest lake by surface area in the country. It lies in a caldera created by the Oruanui eruption, the largest eruption in the world in the past 70,000 years. There are 3,820 lakes with a surface area larger than one hectare. Many lakes have been used as reservoirs for hydroelectric projects.

===Coastal wetlands===
Wetlands support the greatest concentration of wildlife out of any other habitat. New Zealand has six sites covering almost that are included in the List of Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar sites), including the Whangamarino Wetland.

A 2016 global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were of tidal flats in New Zealand, making it the 29th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.

===Climate===
The main geographic factors that influence New Zealand&#x27;s climate are the temperate latitude, with prevailing westerly winds; the oceanic environment; and the mountains, especially the Southern Alps. The climate is mostly temperate with mean temperatures ranging from in the South Island to in the North Island. January and February are the warmest months, July the coldest. New Zealand does not have a large temperature range, apart from central Otago, but the weather can change rapidly and unexpectedly. Near subtropical conditions are experienced in Northland.
Most settled, lowland areas of the country have between of rainfall, with the most rain along the west coast of the South Island and the least on the east coast of the South Island and interior basins, predominantly on the Canterbury Plains and the Central Otago Basin (about ). Christchurch is the driest city, receiving about of rain PA, while Hamilton is the wettest, receiving more than twice that amount at PA, followed closely by Auckland. The wettest area by far is the rugged Fiordland region, in the south-west of the South Island, which has between of rain PA, with up to 15,000 mm in isolated valleys, amongst the highest recorded rainfalls in the world.
The UV index can be very high and extreme in the hottest times of the year in the north of the North Island. This is partly due to the country&#x27;s relatively little air pollution compared to many other countries and the high sunshine hours. New Zealand has very high sunshine hours with most areas receiving over 2000 hours per year. The sunniest areas are Nelson/Marlborough and the Bay of Plenty with 2,400 hours per year.
The table below lists climate normals for the warmest and coldest months in New Zealand&#x27;s six largest cities. North Island cities are generally warmest in February. South Island cities are warmest in January.


The combined effects of climate change in New Zealand will result in a multitude of irreversible impacts; by the end of this century New Zealand will experience higher rainfalls, more frequent extreme weather events and higher temperatures. In 2021, the Ministry for the Environment estimated that New Zealand&#x27;s gross emissions were 0.17% of the world&#x27;s total gross greenhouse gas emissions. However, on a per capita basis, New Zealand is a significant emitter, the sixth highest within the Annex I countries, whereas on absolute gross emissions New Zealand is ranked as the 24th highest emitter.

==Human geography==
===Political geography===
New Zealand has no land borders. However, the Ross Dependency, its claim in Antarctica, notionally borders the Australian Antarctic Territory to the west and unclaimed territory to the east. Most other countries do not recognise territorial claims in Antarctica.

New Zealand is divided administratively into sixteen regions: seven in the South Island and nine in the North. There is a physical geographical link, with regional boundaries being based largely on drainage basins. Among the regions, eleven are administered by regional authorities (top tier of local government), while five are unitary authorities that combine the functions of regional authorities and those of territorial authorities (second tier). Regional authorities are primarily responsible for environmental resource management, land management, regional transport, and biosecurity and pest management. Territorial authorities administer local roading and reserves, waste management, building consents, the land use and subdivision aspects of resource management, and other local matters.

The Chatham Islands is not a region, although its council operates as a region under the Resource Management Act. There are a number of outlying islands that are not included within regional boundaries. The Kermadecs and the Subantarctic Islands are inhabited only by a small number of Department of Conservation staff.

===Population geography===


Over the course of the 20th century, the population centre of New Zealand drifted to the north. Today the South Island contains a little under one-quarter of the population. Over three-quarters of New Zealand&#x27;s population live in the North Island, with half living north of Lake Rotorua, and one-third of the total population living in the Auckland Region. Auckland is the fastest-growing region and is projected to account for half of New Zealand&#x27;s population growth by 2050. The majority of the indigenous Māori people live in the North Island (87%), although a little under a quarter (24%) live in Auckland. New Zealand is a predominantly urban country, with % of the population living in an urban area. About % of the population live in the 20 main urban areas (population of 30,000 or more) and % live in the four largest cities of Auckland, Christchurch, Wellington, and Hamilton. (Other major urban areas include Tauranga, Dunedin, and Palmerston North.) New Zealand&#x27;s population density of around inhabitants per square kilometre (or per ) is among the lowest in the world.

New Zealand&#x27;s peoples have been defined by their immigrant origin, the ongoing process of adaptation to a new land, being changed and changing those who came before. This process has led to a distinct distribution of culture across New Zealand. Here language and religion are used as markers for the far richer concept of culture. These metrics unfortunately exclude the political rural-urban divide and also the full effects of the Christchurch earthquakes on New Zealand&#x27;s cultural distribution.

New Zealand&#x27;s most widely spoken language is English (89.8%); however, language, dialect and accent vary spatially both within and between ethnic groups. The Māori language (3.5%) is spoken more commonly in areas with large Māori populations (Gisborne, Bay of Plenty and Northland). There are many sub dialects of Māori, the most pronounced division being between the northern and southern tribes. While migration (typically from north to south) was constant throughout the 16–18th centuries, the south maintained a distinct culture largely due to lack of cultivation possible at that latitude. English is spoken with regional accents relating to the origin of immigrants; for example Scottish and English 19th century immigration in Southland and Canterbury respectively. This has also occurred with more recent immigration, with a wide variety of accents being common in larger cities where immigrant groups have preferentially settled. These immigrant groups change location with time and accents fade over generations.

A wide variety of other languages make up the remaining approximately 6 percent of New Zealanders—with Samoan, Hindi, French and various Chinese dialects being the most common. These minority foreign languages are concentrated in the main cities, particularly Auckland where recent immigration groups have settled.

=== Agricultural geography ===
A relatively small proportion of New Zealand&#x27;s land is arable (1.76 percent), and permanent crops cover 0.27 percent of the land. of the land is irrigated. As the world&#x27;s largest exporter of sheep, New Zealand&#x27;s agricultural industry focuses primarily on pastoral farming, particularly dairy and beef, as well as lambs. Dairy, specifically, is the top export. In addition to pastoral farming, fisherman harvest mussels, oysters and salmon, and horticulture farmers grow kiwifruit, as well as peaches, nectarines and other fruits. New Zealand&#x27;s distance from world markets and spatial variation in rainfall, elevation and soil quality have defined the geography of its agriculture industry.

As of 2007, almost 55 percent of New Zealand&#x27;s total land area was being used for farming, which is standard compared to most developed countries. Three-fourths of it was pastoral land using for raising sheep, cows, deer and other animals. The amount of farmland has decreased since 2002.

New Zealand&#x27;s isolated location has simultaneously led to fewer pests and an agriculture industry with a greater susceptibility to introduced diseases and pests. A major concern for New Zealand farmers is the rapidly growing wild rabbit population. Wild rabbits have been an agricultural nuisance since their introduction to the country in the 1930s. They cause significant damage to farm lands: eating the grass, crops, and causing soil degradation. Many farmers are worried about their livelihoods and the effects that the rabbits will have on food supply and trade, as their numbers are quickly growing out of control. An illegal rabbit-killing virus called the rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) was released in 1997 by a group of vigilante farmers, and was very effective initially. After twenty years, however, the rabbits became immune to it. A new strain of the virus was released in March 2018, a Korean form of the strain called the K5 virus, or RHDV1-K5. This virus was introduced with the goal of exterminating 40 percent of the rabbit population. The new virus works much faster than the last one, expected to kill rabbits within two to four days of exposure. The virus has become a subject of debate among animal rights activists, due to the inhumane manner in which it kills the rabbits. However, farmers unanimously seem to be very grateful for the release of the virus.

Almost half of New Zealand&#x27;s climate change emissions are generated by greenhouse gases, mainly methane and nitrous oxide, which come from farming and agriculture. Organisms that grow inside of grazing animals&#x27; stomachs turn New Zealand&#x27;s grass into methane. The increase of carbon dioxide in the air helps the plants to grow faster, but the long-term effects of climate change threaten farmers with the likelihood of more frequent and severe floods and droughts. Growers of kiwifruit, a major export in the horticulture industry of New Zealand, have experienced difficulties as a result of climate change. In the 2010s, warm winters did not provide the adequate cool temperatures needed for the flowering of kiwifruit, and this resulted in a reduction of the yield sizes. Droughts have also decreased apple production by causing sunburns and a lack of water available for irrigation. In contrast, the dairy industry has not been affected, and has adjusted well to the effects of climate change.

==Natural hazards==
Flooding is the most regular natural hazard. New Zealand is swept by weather systems that bring heavy rain; settlements are usually close to hill-country areas which experience much higher rainfall than the lowlands due to the orographic effect. Mountain streams which feed the major rivers rise rapidly and frequently break their banks covering farms with water and silt. Close monitoring, weather forecasting, , dams, and reafforestation programmes in hill country have ameliorated the worst effects.

New Zealand experiences around 14,000 earthquakes a year, some in excess of magnitude 7 (M7). Since 2010, several large (M7, M6.3, M6.4, M6.2) and shallow (all &lt;7 km) earthquakes have occurred immediately beneath Christchurch. These have resulted in 185 deaths, widespread destruction of buildings and significant liquefaction. These earthquakes are releasing distributed stress in the Pacific plate from the ongoing collision with the Indo-Australian plate to the west and north of the city. Volcanic activity is most common on the central North Island Volcanic Plateau. Tsunamis affecting New Zealand are associated with the Pacific Ring of Fire.

Droughts are not regular and occur mainly in Otago and the Canterbury Plains and less frequently over much of the North Island between January and April. Forest fires were rare in New Zealand before the arrival of humans. During a designated summer season, lighting a fire in the open is banned on public conservation land.

==Environment and ecology==

New Zealand&#x27;s geographic isolation for 80 million years and island biogeography has influenced evolution of the country&#x27;s species of animals, fungi and plants. Physical isolation has not caused biological isolation, and this has resulted in a dynamic evolutionary ecology with examples of very distinctive plants and animals as well as populations of widespread species. There has been long-distance dispersal of plant life between mainland Australia and New Zealand, despite the separation. Evergreens such as the giant kauri and southern beech dominate the bush (native forests). The country also has a diverse range of birds, several of which are flightless such as the kiwi (a national symbol), the kākāpō, the takahē and the weka, and several species of penguins. Around 30 bird species are currently listed as endangered or critically endangered. Conservationists recognised that threatened bird populations could be saved on offshore islands, where, once predators were exterminated, bird life flourished again.
Many bird species, including the giant moa, became extinct after the arrival of Polynesians, who brought dogs and rats, and Europeans, who introduced additional dog and rat species, as well as cats, pigs, ferrets, and weasels. Native flora and fauna continue to be hard-hit by invasive species. New Zealand conservationists have pioneered several methods to help threatened wildlife recover, including island sanctuaries, pest control, wildlife translocation, fostering, and ecological restoration of islands and other selected areas.

Massive deforestation occurred after humans arrived, with around half the forest cover lost to fire after Polynesian settlement. Much of the remaining forest fell after European settlement, being logged or cleared to make room for pastoral farming, leaving forest occupying only 23% of the land. New Zealand had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.12/10, ranking it 55th globally out of 172 countries.

Pollution, particularly water pollution, is one of New Zealand&#x27;s most significant environmental issues. Fresh water quality is under pressure from agriculture, hydropower, urban development, pest invasions and climate change, although much of the country&#x27;s household and industrial waste is now increasingly filtered and sometimes recycled.

===Protected areas===
Some areas of land, the sea, rivers or lakes are protected by law, so their special plants, animals, landforms and other distinctive features are sheltered from harm. New Zealand has three World Heritage Sites, 13 national parks, 34 marine reserves, and thousands of scenic, historic, recreation and other reserves. The Department of Conservation is responsible for managing 8.5 million hectares of public land (approximately 30% of New Zealand&#x27;s total land area).

===Environmental agreements===
New Zealand is party to several multilateral environmental agreements. The major agreements are listed below.

* Antarctic Treaty
* Antarctic-Environmental Protocol
* Basel Convention
* Convention on Biological Diversity
* Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
* Environmental Modification Convention
* International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships
* International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling
* International Tropical Timber Agreement, 1994
* Kyoto Protocol
* United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
* London Dumping Convention
* Minamata Convention on Mercury
* Nouméa Convention
* Ramsar Convention
* Rotterdam Convention
* Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants
* United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
* United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
* Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer
* Waigani Convention
==Popular culture==
New Zealand&#x27;s varied landscape has appeared in television shows, such as &quot;&quot; and &quot;&quot;. An increasing number of feature films have been shot on location in New Zealand for its scenery, including the &quot;Lord of the Rings&quot; trilogy.

New Zealand is often mistakenly omitted from world maps due to the country&#x27;s physical geographic isolation, relatively small size (compared to Australia), and its positioning on the extreme bottom-right in many map projections such as the Mercator. The phenomenon has been popularly referenced and has a dedicated Reddit community.

==See also==

* Australasian realm
* Geography of the South Island
* Geography of the North Island
* Natural history of New Zealand
==References==
==External links==

* Statistics New Zealand
* New Zealand profile at World Atlas
* Natural Environment – Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand
* New Zealand&#x27;s Geological History – 1966 Encyclopaedia of New Zealand</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="0" end="11" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="21" end="35" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q17651246" start="102" end="118" title="water hemisphere" label="water hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476914" start="137" end="160" title="List of islands of New Zealand" label="large number of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="205" end="220" title="Zealandia" label="larger landmass"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="274" end="286" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="298" end="310" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="332" end="343" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="366" end="390" title="Stewart Island / Rakiura" label="Stewart Island / Rakiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043467" start="439" end="453" title="Foveaux Strait" label="Foveaux Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859151" start="592" end="620" title="List of island countries" label="sixth-largest island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="703" end="708" title="fiord" label="fiord"/>
<link wikidata="Q491713" start="714" end="720" title="Sound (geography)" label="sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365839" start="778" end="787" title="Far North District" label="Far North"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="826" end="839" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q190309" start="848" end="864" title="North Island Volcanic Plateau" label="volcanic plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="1020" end="1030" title="West Coast Region" label="west coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q864971" start="1149" end="1158" title="Southland Region" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="1327" end="1335" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="1361" end="1378" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="1602" end="1609" title="Pacific plate" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q783056" start="1614" end="1624" title="Australian plate" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="1625" end="1640" title="tectonic plates" label="tectonic plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000154" start="1749" end="1780" title="List of earthquakes in New Zealand" label="several devastating earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="1883" end="1893" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="1951" end="1965" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="2040" end="2053" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="2055" end="2060" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="2065" end="2069" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="2104" end="2111" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="2160" end="2170" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2329" end="2348" title="Pacific Ocean" label="South Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17651246" start="2377" end="2393" title="water hemisphere" label="water hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476914" start="2582" end="2605" title="List of islands of New Zealand" label="large number of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138395" start="2652" end="2661" title="coastline of New Zealand" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419694" start="2731" end="2754" title="Exclusive economic zone of New Zealand" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="2819" end="2831" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q104176" start="2884" end="2903" title="List of islands by area" label="12th-largest island"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="2964" end="2977" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033781" start="3015" end="3032" title="Canterbury Plains" label="Canterbury Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="3043" end="3053" title="West Coast Region" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3136" end="3140" title="The bush#New Zealand" label="bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365353" start="3155" end="3163" title="Glaciers of New Zealand" label="glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="3170" end="3182" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="3293" end="3304" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="3724" end="3748" title="Stewart Island / Rakiura" label="Stewart Island / Rakiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427436" start="3783" end="3797" title="Chatham Island" label="Chatham Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="3825" end="3830" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741879" start="3856" end="3863" title="Moriori language" label="Moriori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363130" start="3898" end="3918" title="Great Barrier Island" label="Great Barrier Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q767824" start="3927" end="3939" title="Hauraki Gulf" label="Hauraki Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273040" start="3942" end="3987" title="D&amp;#x27;Urville Island (New Zealand)" label="Rangitoto ki te Tonga / D&amp;#x27;Urville Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25455" start="3996" end="4014" title="Marlborough Sounds" label="Marlborough Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q909136" start="4020" end="4034" title="Waiheke Island" label="Waiheke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="4055" end="4063" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034494" start="4227" end="4258" title="Cape Reinga / Te Rerenga Wairua" label="Cape Reinga / Te Rerenga Wairua"/>
<link wikidata="Q773950" start="4294" end="4311" title="Aupōuri Peninsula" label="Aupōuri Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q152028" start="4354" end="4359" title="Bluff, New Zealand" label="Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q31805" start="4363" end="4375" title="Invercargill" label="Invercargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391051" start="4450" end="4469" title="46th parallel south" label="46th parallel south"/>
<link wikidata="Q851132" start="4545" end="4561" title="New Zealand outlying islands" label="outlying islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324496" start="4705" end="4718" title="Nugent Island" label="Nugent Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q114935" start="4726" end="4742" title="Kermadec Islands" label="Kermadec Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677849" start="4774" end="4791" title="Jacquemart Island" label="Jacquemart Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q33654" start="4799" end="4820" title="Campbell Island group" label="Campbell Island group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276733" start="4920" end="4931" title="Forty-Fours" label="Forty-Fours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034454" start="4962" end="4973" title="Cape Lovitt" label="Cape Lovitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q758654" start="4977" end="4992" title="Auckland Island" label="Auckland Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="5056" end="5073" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="5138" end="5145" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="5242" end="5252" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q914119" start="5303" end="5316" title="Cape Palliser" label="Cape Palliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="5327" end="5333" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="5338" end="5344" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="5348" end="5355" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q200028" start="5379" end="5387" title="Hamilton, New Zealand" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47571" start="5390" end="5395" title="Lorca, Spain" label="Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="5418" end="5424" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="5446" end="5455" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474429" start="5470" end="5489" title="Northland Peninsula" label="Northland Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="5497" end="5504" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q744239" start="5511" end="5520" title="Whangārei" label="Whangārei"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="5544" end="5552" title="Tangiers" label="Tangiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="5632" end="5643" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q503712" start="5649" end="5666" title="Antipodes Islands" label="Antipodes Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="5894" end="5903" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="6150" end="6159" title="Zealandia" label="Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094611" start="6163" end="6177" title="microcontinent" label="microcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960" start="6202" end="6211" title="Australia (continent)" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="6266" end="6274" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="6769" end="6777" title="tectonic uplift" label="uplifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835340" start="6785" end="6798" title="transpression" label="transpression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="6801" end="6810" title="plate tectonics" label="tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="6823" end="6844" title="Indo-Australian plate" label="Indo-Australian plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="6849" end="6856" title="Pacific plate" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="7185" end="7195" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="7298" end="7305" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q199903" start="7338" end="7348" title="Lake Taupō" label="Lake Taupō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745099" start="7413" end="7429" title="Oruanui eruption" label="Oruanui eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198391" start="7561" end="7581" title="Hatepe eruption" label="most recent eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="7684" end="7688" title="Roman Empire" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="7693" end="7698" title="Han dynasty" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036221" start="7777" end="7802" title="hydrothermal circulation" label="hydrothermal power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q208948" start="7875" end="7882" title="Rotorua" label="Rotorua"/>
<link wikidata="Q83471" start="7883" end="7889" title="geyser" label="geyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089248" start="8180" end="8192" title="active fault" label="active fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680318" start="8290" end="8310" title="1855 Wairarapa earthquake" label="Wairarapa earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q14167838" start="8546" end="8563" title="Seddon earthquake" label="Seddon earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180474" start="8631" end="8643" title="Capital of New Zealand" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="8645" end="8655" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q901704" start="8974" end="8984" title="orographic" label="orographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954827" start="9006" end="9038" title="Hydroelectric power in New Zealand" label="hydroelectric generation of most"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850372" start="9276" end="9288" title="Alpine Fault" label="Alpine Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="9610" end="9617" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q917402" start="9678" end="9689" title="greenschist" label="greenschist"/>
<link wikidata="Q335239" start="9693" end="9704" title="amphibolite" label="amphibolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q742139" start="9705" end="9711" title="facies" label="facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279509" start="9742" end="9749" title="pounamu" label="pounamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="9815" end="9831" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q904607" start="9837" end="9845" title="mylonite" label="mylonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="10002" end="10006" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573076" start="10016" end="10021" title="Otago gold rush" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984797" start="10030" end="10040" title="West Coast gold rush" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q798367" start="10170" end="10178" title="back-arc basin" label="back-arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298216" start="10294" end="10310" title="Solander Islands" label="Solander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266713" start="10402" end="10411" title="Fiordland" label="Fiordland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="10825" end="10835" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q673150" start="10931" end="10942" title="Franz Josef Glacier / Kā Roimata o Hine Hukatere" label="Franz Josef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147722" start="10947" end="10950" title="Fox Glacier / Te Moeka o Tuawe" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059" start="10991" end="11010" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook" label="Aoraki / Mount Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551962" start="11151" end="11163" title="Mount Tasman" label="Mount Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190309" start="11188" end="11217" title="North Island Volcanic Plateau" label="North Island Volcanic Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144345" start="11270" end="11282" title="lava plateau" label="lava plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q204324" start="11289" end="11300" title="volcanic crater lake" label="crater lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q207284" start="11335" end="11348" title="Mount Ruapehu" label="Mount Ruapehu"/>
<link wikidata="Q850051" start="11353" end="11367" title="Mount Taranaki" label="Mount Taranaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q83060" start="11375" end="11390" title="Mount Ngauruhoe" label="Mount Ngauruhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685818" start="11504" end="11535" title="1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera" label="1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera"/>
<link wikidata="Q208948" start="11550" end="11557" title="Rotorua" label="Rotorua"/>
<link wikidata="Q497196" start="11773" end="11780" title="Tararua Range" label="Tararua"/>
<link wikidata="Q599968" start="11785" end="11794" title="Kaimanawa Range" label="Kaimanawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856836" start="11885" end="11900" title="Tussock grasslands of New Zealand" label="tussock grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149452" start="11902" end="11915" title="Alpine tundra" label="Alpine tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736069" start="11947" end="11956" title="herbfield" label="herbfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="12129" end="12134" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480180" start="12137" end="12146" title="lava cave" label="lava cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052919" start="12170" end="12178" title="sea cave" label="sea cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="12232" end="12245" title="Metamorphic rock" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210773" start="12369" end="12385" title="Waitomo District" label="Waitomo District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389090" start="12390" end="12401" title="Takaka Hill" label="Takaka Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q666142" start="12409" end="12424" title="Tasman District" label="Tasman District"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="12461" end="12471" title="West Coast Region" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q572391" start="12473" end="12482" title="Punakaiki" label="Punakaiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q251825" start="12485" end="12501" title="Hawke&amp;#x27;s Bay Region" label="Hawke&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266713" start="12506" end="12515" title="Fiordland" label="Fiordland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27919" start="12530" end="12539" title="lava tube" label="lava tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="12558" end="12566" title="pāhoehoe" label="pāhoehoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="12626" end="12632" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q758661" start="12912" end="12935" title="Auckland volcanic field" label="Auckland volcanic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422715" start="12952" end="12961" title="Rangitoto Island" label="Rangitoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q477145" start="12963" end="12973" title="Mount Eden" label="Mount Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791967" start="12978" end="12990" title="Matukutūruru" label="Matukutūruru"/>
<link wikidata="Q954501" start="13381" end="13393" title="natural arch" label="natural arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095596" start="13404" end="13424" title="Ōpārara Basin Arches" label="Ōpārara Basin Arches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728935" start="13430" end="13437" title="Karamea" label="Karamea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="13516" end="13525" title="estuaries" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="13725" end="13735" title="Herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q590219" start="13942" end="13955" title="braided river" label="braided river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540733" start="13970" end="13976" title="Wairau River" label="Wairau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535123" start="13978" end="13989" title="Waimakariri River" label="Waimakariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130977" start="13994" end="14003" title="Rangitata River" label="Rangitata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048219" start="14136" end="14143" title="Waikato River" label="Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645079" start="14248" end="14270" title="List of waterfalls of New Zealand" label="hundreds of waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q38477" start="14315" end="14325" title="Huka Falls" label="Huka Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="14471" end="14478" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745099" start="14494" end="14510" title="Oruanui eruption" label="Oruanui eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="14630" end="14637" title="hectare" label="hectare"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="14683" end="14696" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734015" start="14880" end="14924" title="List of Wetlands of International Importance" label="List of Wetlands of International Importance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683138" start="14926" end="14937" title="Ramsar site" label="Ramsar site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990608" start="14955" end="14975" title="Whangamarino Wetland" label="Whangamarino Wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="15045" end="15055" title="tidal flat" label="tidal flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="15239" end="15247" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330018" start="15254" end="15279" title="prevailing winds" label="prevailing westerly winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="15285" end="15292" title="Oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="15667" end="15678" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474429" start="15709" end="15718" title="Northland Peninsula" label="Northland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="15779" end="15787" title="precipitation" label="rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033781" start="15943" end="15960" title="Canterbury Plains" label="Canterbury Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="15999" end="16011" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q200028" start="16066" end="16074" title="Hamilton, New Zealand" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330108" start="16390" end="16398" title="UV index" label="UV index"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="16554" end="16567" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11714837" start="16614" end="16628" title="sunshine hours" label="sunshine hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="17043" end="17050" title="effects of climate change" label="effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133485" start="17054" end="17083" title="climate change in New Zealand" label="climate change in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866590" start="17284" end="17312" title="Ministry for the Environment (New Zealand)" label="Ministry for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="17406" end="17430" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17531" end="17548" title="Kyoto Protocol#Annex I countries" label="Annex I countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="17708" end="17714" title="border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q203073" start="17730" end="17745" title="Ross Dependency" label="Ross Dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q178994" start="17795" end="17825" title="Australian Antarctic Territory" label="Australian Antarctic Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q745767" start="17842" end="17861" title="Marie Byrd Land" label="unclaimed territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q783953" start="17913" end="17945" title="territorial claims in Antarctica" label="territorial claims in Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q216712" start="17993" end="18008" title="regions of New Zealand" label="sixteen regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="18146" end="18160" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664403" start="18243" end="18259" title="local government in New Zealand" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="18277" end="18296" title="unitary authorities" label="unitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q941036" start="18361" end="18384" title="territorial authorities" label="territorial authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q929380" start="18451" end="18484" title="environmental resource management" label="environmental resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001056" start="18486" end="18501" title="land management" label="land management"/>
<link wikidata="Q14477542" start="18512" end="18521" title="transport in New Zealand" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915275" start="18527" end="18538" title="Biosecurity in New Zealand" label="biosecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972821" start="18623" end="18639" title="Waste in New Zealand" label="waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q115459" start="18751" end="18766" title="Chatham Islands" label="Chatham Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427744" start="18836" end="18859" title="Resource Management Act 1991" label="Resource Management Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q851132" start="18883" end="18899" title="New Zealand outlying islands" label="outlying islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q114935" start="18954" end="18963" title="Kermadec Islands" label="Kermadecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q46275" start="18972" end="18992" title="New Zealand Subantarctic Islands" label="Subantarctic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="19033" end="19059" title="New Zealand Department of Conservation" label="Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="19138" end="19155" title="population centre" label="population centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962821" start="19171" end="19191" title="Drift to the north" label="drifted to the north"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192621" start="19376" end="19388" title="Lake Rotorua" label="Lake Rotorua"/>
<link wikidata="Q726917" start="19442" end="19457" title="Auckland Region" label="Auckland Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="19557" end="19574" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="19615" end="19627" title="Māori people" label="Māori people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900093" start="19802" end="19812" title="urban areas of New Zealand" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="19944" end="19952" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="19954" end="19966" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="19968" end="19978" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q200028" start="19984" end="19992" title="Hamilton, New Zealand" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207756" start="20027" end="20035" title="Tauranga" label="Tauranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="20037" end="20044" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212289" start="20050" end="20066" title="Palmerston North" label="Palmerston North"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="20088" end="20106" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="20163" end="20192" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="among the lowest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q151850" start="20633" end="20657" title="Christchurch earthquakes" label="Christchurch earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619053" start="20848" end="20861" title="List of ethnic origins of New Zealanders" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="20867" end="20881" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q140246" start="20952" end="20960" title="Gisborne District" label="Gisborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192924" start="20962" end="20975" title="Bay of Plenty Region" label="Bay of Plenty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474429" start="20980" end="20989" title="Northland Peninsula" label="Northland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="21099" end="21105" title="iwi" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="21336" end="21343" title="Accent (sociolinguistics)" label="accents"/>
<link wikidata="Q864971" start="21443" end="21452" title="Southland, New Zealand" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="21457" end="21467" title="Canterbury Region" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="21836" end="21842" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="21844" end="21849" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="22140" end="22146" title="arable land" label="arable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="22230" end="22239" title="irrigation" label="irrigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="22350" end="22366" title="pastoral farming" label="pastoral farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194" start="22565" end="22574" title="kiwifruit" label="kiwifruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="23155" end="23160" title="Pest (organism)" label="pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045071" start="23524" end="23540" title="soil retrogression and degradation" label="soil degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q994732" start="23756" end="23783" title="rabbit haemorrhagic disease" label="rabbit haemorrhagic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="24561" end="24575" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418920" start="24964" end="24984" title="Kiwifruit industry in New Zealand" label="Growers of kiwifruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209584" start="25402" end="25416" title="Dairy farming in New Zealand" label="dairy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q901704" start="25744" end="25754" title="Orographic precipitation" label="orographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000154" start="26033" end="26077" title="List of earthquakes in New Zealand" label="experiences around 14,000 earthquakes a year"/>
<link wikidata="Q500062" start="26097" end="26106" title="earthquake magnitude" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640641" start="26596" end="26626" title="Tsunamis affecting New Zealand" label="Tsunamis affecting New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="26659" end="26671" title="Ring of Fire" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="27100" end="27112" title="biogeography" label="biogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="27171" end="27178" title="fauna" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="27180" end="27185" title="fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="27190" end="27196" title="flora" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q216113" start="27559" end="27564" title="kauri" label="kauri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27597" end="27601" title="The bush#New Zealand" label="bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853598" start="27643" end="27665" title="list of birds of New Zealand" label="diverse range of birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q43642" start="27711" end="27715" title="Kiwi (bird)" label="kiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179959" start="27741" end="27747" title="kākāpō" label="kākāpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q212302" start="27753" end="27759" title="takahē" label="takahē"/>
<link wikidata="Q756714" start="27768" end="27772" title="weka" label="weka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="27797" end="27804" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="27868" end="27889" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q452969" start="28096" end="28099" title="moa" label="moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821185" start="28334" end="28350" title="Invasive species in New Zealand" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973683" start="28543" end="28565" title="island restoration" label="restoration of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011655" start="28570" end="28590" title="ecological island" label="other selected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251685" start="28601" end="28614" title="Deforestation in New Zealand" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="28912" end="28944" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225744" start="29016" end="29025" title="Pollution in New Zealand" label="Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973581" start="29040" end="29055" title="Water pollution in New Zealand" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="29439" end="29448" title="protected area" label="protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363887" start="29579" end="29599" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Oceania" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q62301" start="29604" end="29618" title="national parks of New Zealand" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846270" start="29623" end="29638" title="marine reserves of New Zealand" label="marine reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="29710" end="29736" title="Department of Conservation (New Zealand)" label="Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646218" start="29924" end="29960" title="multilateral environmental agreement" label="multilateral environmental agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q182814" start="30005" end="30021" title="Antarctic Treaty" label="Antarctic Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991463" start="30024" end="30056" title="Antarctic-Environmental Protocol" label="Antarctic-Environmental Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q775865" start="30059" end="30075" title="Basel Convention" label="Basel Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="30078" end="30112" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="30115" end="30170" title="Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species" label="Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="30173" end="30210" title="Environmental Modification Convention" label="Environmental Modification Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q651219" start="30213" end="30280" title="International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships" label="International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667878" start="30283" end="30337" title="International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling" label="International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="30340" end="30385" title="International Tropical Timber Agreement, 1994" label="International Tropical Timber Agreement, 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="30388" end="30402" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q331520" start="30405" end="30456" title="United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification" label="United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156234" start="30459" end="30484" title="London Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter" label="London Dumping Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862837" start="30487" end="30517" title="Minamata Convention on Mercury" label="Minamata Convention on Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922764" start="30520" end="30537" title="Pacific Regional Environment Programme" label="Nouméa Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="30540" end="30557" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q94947" start="30560" end="30580" title="Rotterdam Convention" label="Rotterdam Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q82908" start="30583" end="30636" title="Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants" label="Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="30639" end="30686" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="30689" end="30742" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q686455" start="30745" end="30800" title="Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer" label="Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590745" start="30803" end="30821" title="Waigani Convention" label="Waigani Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="31062" end="31099" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Lord of the Rings&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q653848" start="31147" end="31156" title="world map" label="world map"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="31346" end="31354" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="31421" end="31427" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077944" start="31456" end="31474" title="Australasian realm" label="Australasian realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q113697506" start="31477" end="31506" title="Geography of the South Island" label="Geography of the South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q113715758" start="31509" end="31538" title="Geography of the North Island" label="Geography of the North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739753" start="31541" end="31571" title="Natural history of New Zealand" label="Natural history of New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21354" wikidata="Q2415918" url="?curid=21354" title="Demographics of New Zealand">
<text>The demographics of New Zealand encompass the gender, ethnic, religious, geographic, and economic backgrounds of the 5.3 million people living in New Zealand. New Zealanders predominantly live in urban areas on the North Island. The five largest cities are Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Hamilton, and Tauranga. Few New Zealanders live on New Zealand&#x27;s smaller islands. Waiheke Island (near Auckland) is easily the most populated smaller island with residents, while Great Barrier Island, the Chatham and Pitt Islands, and Stewart Island each have populations below 1,000. New Zealand is part of a realm and most people born in the realm&#x27;s external territories of Tokelau, the Ross Dependency, the Cook Islands and Niue are entitled to New Zealand passports.

As of the 2018 census, the majority of New Zealand&#x27;s population is of European descent (70 percent; often referred to as Pākehā), with the indigenous Māori being the largest minority (16.5 percent), followed by Asians (15.3 percent), and non-Māori Pacific Islanders known collectively as Pasifika (9.0 percent). This is reflected in immigration, with most new migrants coming from Britain and Ireland, although the numbers from Asia in particular are increasing. Auckland is the most ethnically diverse region in New Zealand with 53.5 percent identifying as Europeans, 28.2 percent as Asian, 11.5 percent as Māori, 15.5 percent as Pasifika, and 2.3 percent as Middle Eastern, Latin American or African (MELAA). New Zealand is considered by some to be unique among Western countries for its high levels of ethnic intermarriage, which has historically been viewed with tolerance. According to a 2006 study, Māori have on average roughly 43% European ancestry, although the notion of being &quot;mixed-race&quot; is uncommon.

English, Māori, and New Zealand Sign Language are the official languages, with English being predominant and understood by the vast majority of Māori speakers. Significant minorities speak Chinese, Samoan, Hindi, French, and Tagalog. New Zealand English is mostly non-rhotic, but has distinct rhotic dialects as well. Rhoticity is widespread among Pasifika and Māori and is becoming increasingly common across the upper North Island. The closest English dialect to non-rhotic New Zealand English is Australian English, but they have several key distinctions, such as the New Zealand centralisation of the short i. The Māori language has undergone a process of revitalisation and is spoken by 4 percent of the population. New Zealand has an adult literacy rate of 99 percent and over half of the population aged 15–29 hold a tertiary qualification. In the adult population 14.2 percent have a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher, 30.4 percent have some form of secondary qualification as their highest qualification and 22.4 percent have no formal qualification. As at the 2018 census, 37 percent of the population identify as Christians, with Hinduism and Buddhism being the largest minority religions; almost half of the population (48.5 percent) is irreligious.

Farming is a major occupation in New Zealand, although more people are employed as sales assistants. Most New Zealanders earn wage or salary income, with a median weekly income in 2022 of NZ$848.

==Terminology==

While the demonym for a New Zealand citizen is New Zealander, the informal &quot;Kiwi&quot; is commonly used both internationally and by locals. The name derives from the kiwi, a native flightless bird, which is the national symbol of New Zealand. The Māori loanword &quot;Pākehā&quot; usually refers to New Zealanders of European descent, although some reject this appellation, and some Māori use it to refer to all non-Polynesian New Zealanders. Most people born in New Zealand or one of the realm&#x27;s external territories (Tokelau, the Ross Dependency, the Cook Islands and Niue) before 2006 are New Zealand citizens. Further conditions apply for those born from 2006 onwards.

==Population size and distribution==

The 2018 census enumerated a resident population of 4,699,755 – a 10.8 percent increase over the population recorded in the 2013 census. As of 03 2025, the total population has risen to an (estimated by extrapolation). The population is increasing at a rate of 1.4–2.0 percent per year. In May 2020, Statistics New Zealand reported that New Zealand&#x27;s population had climbed above 5 million people in March 2020; in September 2020, this was revised six months earlier to September 2019 when population estimates were rebased to the 2018 census.

The median child birthing age was 30 and the total fertility rate is 2.1 births per woman in 2010. In Māori populations the median age is 26 and fertility rate 2.8. In 2010 the age-standardised mortality rate was 3.8 deaths per 1000 (down from 4.8 in 2000) and the infant mortality rate for the total population was 5.1 deaths per 1000 live births. The life expectancy of a New Zealand child born in 2021-23 was 83.7 years for females, and 80.3 years for males, which is among the highest in the world. Life expectancy at birth is forecast to increase from 80 years to 85 years in 2050 and infant mortality is expected to decline. In 2050 the median age is forecast to rise from 36 years to 43 years and the percentage of people 60 years of age and older rising from 18 percent to 29 percent. During early migration in 1858, New Zealand had 131 males for every 100 females, but following changes in migration patterns and the modern longevity advantage of women, females came to outnumber males in 1971. As of 2012 there are 0.99 males per female, with males dominating under 15 years and females dominating in the 65 years or older range.

=== Age structure ===



The age structure of New Zealand is getting increasingly older. Due to undergoing the demographic transition from a &#x27;pre-industrial&#x27; age structure to a &#x27;post-industrial&#x27; age structure, the country has a sub-replacement fertility rate which is consequently leading to an older population and more evenly balanced population pyramid.

The average age of the citizen has gone from 25.8 years old in 1965 to 38 in 2020 and is projected to rise to 43.7 years old in 2050. The population of 90 year olds is also expected to rise dramatically, in the 1930s there were approximately 1,000 90+ year olds, in 2016 the number had risen to 29,000, in 2030 it is expected to exceed 50,000 and by the 2060s it is to rise above 180,000 people.

===Population density===

New Zealand&#x27;s population density is relatively low, at The vast majority of the population live on the main North and South Islands, with New Zealand&#x27;s major inhabited smaller islands being Waiheke Island (), the Chatham and Pitt Islands (), and Stewart Island (381). Over three-quarters of the population (%) live in the North Island, with one-third of the total population (%) living in the Auckland Region. Most Māori live in the North Island (86.0 percent), although less than a quarter (23.8 percent) live in Auckland.

New Zealand is a predominantly urban country, with  percent of the population living in an urban area. About  percent of the population live in the 20 main urban areas (population of 30,000 or more) and  percent live in the four largest cities of Auckland, Christchurch, Wellington, and Hamilton.

Approximately 14 percent of the population live in four different categories of rural areas as defined by Statistics New Zealand. About 18 percent of the rural population live in areas that have a high urban influence (roughly 12.9 people per square kilometre), many working in the main urban area. Rural areas with moderate urban influence and a population density of about 6.5 people per square kilometre account for 26 percent of the rural population. Areas with low urban influence where the majority of the residents work in the rural area house approximately 42 percent of the rural population. Remote rural areas with a density of less than 1 person per square kilometre account for about 14 percent of the rural population.

Before local government reforms in the late 1980s, a borough council with more than 20,000 people could be proclaimed a city. The boundaries of councils tended to follow the edge of the built-up area, so there was little difference between the urban area and the local government area. In 1989, all councils were consolidated into regional councils (top tier) and territorial authorities (second tier) which cover a much wider area and population than the old city councils. Today a territorial authority must have a predominantly urban population of at least 50,000 before it can be officially recognised as a city.

==Vital statistics==
===Vital statistics since 1921===

===Current vital statistics===


===Total fertility rates by region===
== Immigration ==


East Polynesians were the first people to reach New Zealand about 1280, followed by the early European explorers, notably James Cook in 1769 who explored New Zealand three times and mapped the coastline. Following the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840 when the country became a British colony, immigrants were predominantly from Britain, Ireland and Australia. Due to restrictive policies, limitations were placed on non-European immigrants. During the gold rush period (1858–1880s) large number of young men came from California and Victoria to New Zealand goldfields. Apart from British, there were Irish, Germans, Scandinavians, Italians and many Chinese. The Chinese were sent special invitations by the Otago Chamber of Commerce in 1866. By 1873 they made up 40 percent of the diggers in Otago and 25 percent of the diggers in Westland. From 1900 there was also significant Dutch, Dalmatian, and Italian immigration together with indirect European immigration through Australia, North America, South America and South Africa. Following World War II, policies were relaxed and migrant diversity increased. In 2008–09, a target of 45,000 migrants was set by the New Zealand Immigration Service (plus a 5,000 tolerance).

At the 2018 census, 27.4 percent of people counted were not born in New Zealand, up from 25.2 percent in 2013. In 2018, over half (50.7 percent) of New Zealand&#x27;s overseas-born population lived in the Auckland Region, including 70 percent of the country&#x27;s Pacific Island-born population, 61.5 percent of its Asian-born population, and 52 percent of its Middle Eastern and African- born population. In the late 2000s, Asia overtook the British Isles as the largest source of overseas migrants; in 2013 around 32 percent of overseas-born New Zealand residents were born in Asia (mainly China, India, the Philippines and South Korea) compared to 26 percent born in the UK and Ireland. The number of fee-paying international students increased sharply in the late 1990s, with more than 20,000 studying in public tertiary institutions in 2002.

To be eligible for entry under the skilled migrant plan applicants are assessed by an approved doctor for good health, provide a police certificate to prove good character and speak sufficient English. Migrants working in some occupations (mainly health) must be registered with the appropriate profession body before they can work within that area. Skilled migrants are assessed by Immigration New Zealand and applicants that they believe will contribute are issued with a residential visa, while those with potential are issued with a work to resident visa. Under the work to residency process applicants are given a temporary work permit for two years and are then eligible to apply for residency. Applicants with a job offer from an accredited New Zealand employer, cultural or sporting talent, looking for work where there has been a long-term skill shortage or to establish a business can apply for work to residency.

While most New Zealanders live in New Zealand, there is also a significant diaspora abroad, estimated as of 2001 at over 460,000 or 14 percent of the international total of New Zealand-born. Of these, 360,000, over three-quarters of the New Zealand-born population residing outside of New Zealand, live in Australia. Other communities of New Zealanders abroad are concentrated in other English-speaking countries, specifically the United Kingdom, the United States and Canada, with smaller numbers located elsewhere. Nearly one quarter of New Zealand&#x27;s highly skilled workers live overseas, mostly in Australia and Britain, more than any other developed nation. However many educated professionals from Europe and lesser developed countries have recently migrated to New Zealand. A common pathway for New Zealanders to move to the UK is through a job offer via the Tier 2 (General) visa, which grants a 3-year initial stay in the country and can later be extended with three more years. After 5 years the person can apply for permanent residency. Another popular option is the UK Working Holiday visa, also known as &quot;Youth Mobility Scheme&quot; (YMS), which grants New Zealanders 2-year rights to live and work in the UK.

=== Migration data of New Zealand, 2001–present ===
==Ethnicity==
New Zealand is a multiethnic society, and home to people of many different national origins. Originally composed solely of the Māori who arrived in the thirteenth century, the ethnic makeup of the population later became dominated by New Zealanders of European descent. In the nineteenth century, European settlers brought diseases for which the Māori had no immunity. By the 1890s, the Māori population was approximately 40 percent of its size pre-contact. The Māori population increased during the twentieth century, though it remains a minority. The 1961 New Zealand census recorded that the population was 92 percent European and 7 percent Māori, with Asian and Pasifika minorities sharing the remaining 1 percent.

At the census in 2018, 70.2 percent identified as European, 16.5 percent as Māori, 15.1 percent as Asian, 8.1 percent as Pasifika, and 1.2 percent as Middle-Eastern, Latin American, and African (MELAA). Most New Zealanders are of English, Scottish, and Irish ancestry, with smaller percentages of other European ancestries, such as Dutch, Dalmatian, French, German and Scandinavian. Auckland was the most diverse region with 53.5 percent identifying as European, 28.2 percent as Asian, 11.5 percent as Māori, 15.5 percent as Pasifika and 1.1 percent as MELAA. According to Massey University sociologist Paul Spoonley, ethnic intermarriage has consistently been very common in New Zealand since colonisation. Unlike the United States, New Zealand has never prohibited interracial marriages; they have in fact been historically encouraged by many. In 2015, more than half of Maori, or 53.5 per cent, and almost four in 10, or 37.2 per cent of Pasifika, identified with two or more ethnic groups. At current rates of population growth, Asians, Pasifika and Māori will outnumber Europeans in Auckland within the next decade.

All major ethnic groups except European increased when compared with the 2013 census, in which 74 percent identified as European, 14.6 percent as Māori, 11.8 percent as Asian, and 7.4 percent of Pasifika origin. Heightened immigration from Asia and the Pacific, and higher fertility rates amongst Māori and Pasifika, have resulted in the population of Māori, Asian and Pasifika descent growing at a higher rate than those of European descent. Moreover, non-European ethnic groups make up a greater proportion of younger people, whereas European ethnic groups make up a large proportion of older people due to historic immigration trends and lower life expectancy in Māori and Pasifika ethnic groups. For instance, in 2013, the population aged under 15 years was 67 percent European, 27 percent Māori, 14 percent Pacific, 16 percent Asian, and 2 percent MELAA, while the population aged 65 years and older consisted of 86 percent European, 7 percent Māori, 6 percent Asian and 3 percent Pacific.

There was significant public discussion about usage of the term &quot;New Zealander&quot; during the months leading up to the 2006 census. The number of people identifying with this term increased from approximately 80,000 (2.4 percent) in 2001 to just under 430,000 people (11.1 percent) in 2006. The European grouping significantly decreased from 80.0 percent of the population in 2001 to 67.6 percent in 2006, however, this is broadly proportional to the large increase in &quot;New Zealanders&quot;. The number of people identifying as a &quot;New Zealander&quot; dropped back to under 66,000 in 2013, and further declined to about 45,300 in 2018.

Statistics New Zealand has not released official statistical counts of Māori &quot;iwi&quot; (tribes) from the 2018 census due to a low response rate. As last recorded in the 2013 census, the largest &quot;iwi&quot; is Ngāpuhi with 125,601 people (or 18.8 percent of people of Māori descent). Between 2006 and 2013 the number of people of Māori descent stating Ngāpuhi as their &quot;iwi&quot; increased by 3,390 people (2.8 percent). The second-largest was Ngāti Porou, with 71,049 people (down 1.2 percent from 2006). Ngāi Tahu was the largest in the South Island and the third-largest overall, with a count of 54,819 people (an increase of 11.4 percent from 2006). A total of 110,928 people (or 18.5 percent) of Māori descent did not know their &quot;iwi&quot; (an increase of 8.4 percent compared with 2006). A group of Māori migrated to &quot;Rēkohu&quot;, now known as the Chatham Islands, where they developed their distinct Moriori culture. The Moriori population was decimated, first, by disease brought by European sealers and whalers and, second, by Taranaki Māori, with only 101 surviving in 1862 and the last known full-blooded Moriori dying in 1933. The number of people identifying as having Moriori descents increased from 105 in 1991 to 945 in 2006, but decreased to 738 in 2013.

The maps below (taken from 2013 census data) show the percentages of people in each census area unit identifying themselves as European, Māori, Asian, or Pacific Islander (as defined by Statistics New Zealand). As people could identify themselves with multiple groups, percentages are not cumulative.


==Language==
English has long been entrenched as a &quot;de facto&quot; national language due to its widespread use. In the 2018 census, 95.4 percent of respondents spoke English, down from 96.1 percent in 2013. The New Zealand English dialect is mostly non-rhotic with an exception being the Southern Burr found principally in Southland and parts of Otago. It is similar to Australian English and many speakers from the Northern Hemisphere are unable to tell the accents apart. In New Zealand English the short i (as in kit) has become centralised, leading to the phrase &quot;fish and chips&quot; sounding like &quot;fush and chups&quot; to the Australian ear. The words &quot;rarely&quot; and &quot;really&quot;, &quot;reel&quot; and &quot;real&quot;, &quot;doll&quot; and &quot;dole&quot;, &quot;pull&quot; and &quot;pool&quot;, &quot;witch&quot; and &quot;which&quot;, and &quot;full&quot; and &quot;fill&quot; can sometimes be pronounced as homophones. Some New Zealanders pronounce the past participles &quot;grown&quot;, &quot;thrown&quot; and &quot;mown&quot; using two syllables, whereas &quot;groan&quot;, &quot;throne&quot; and &quot;moan&quot; are pronounced as one syllable. New Zealanders often reply to a question or emphasise a point by adding a rising intonation at the end of the sentence.
Initially, the Māori language (&quot;te reo Māori&quot;) was permitted in native schools to facilitate English instruction, but as time went on official attitudes hardened against any use of the language. Māori were discouraged from speaking their own language in schools and work places and it existed as a community language only in a few remote areas. The language underwent a revival beginning in the 1970s, and now more people speak Māori. The future of the language was the subject of a claim before the Waitangi Tribunal in 1985. As a result, Māori was declared an official language in 1987. In the 2013 census, 21.3 percent of Māori people—and 3.7 percent of all respondents, including some non-Māori people—reported conversational fluency in the language. There are now Māori language immersion schools and two Māori Television channels, the only nationwide television channels to have the majority of their prime-time content delivered in Māori. Many places have officially been given dual Māori and English names in recent years.

In the 2018 census, 22,987 people reported the ability to use New Zealand Sign Language. It was declared one of New Zealand&#x27;s official languages in 2006.

Samoan is the most widely spoken non-official language (2.2 percent), followed by &quot;Northern Chinese&quot; (including Mandarin; 2.0 percent), Hindi (1.5 percent) and French (1.2 percent). A considerable proportion of first- and second-generation migrants are multilingual.

==Religion==

The predominant religion in New Zealand is Christianity. As recorded in the 2018 census, about 38 percent of the population identified themselves as Christians, although regular church attendance is estimated at 15 percent. Another 48.5 percent indicated that they had no religion (up from 41.9 percent in 2013 and 34.7 percent in 2006) and around 7.5 percent affiliated with other religions.

The indigenous religion of the Māori population was animistic, but with the arrival of missionaries from the early nineteenth century most of the Māori population converted to Christianity. In the 2018 census, 3,699 Māori identify themselves as adhering to &quot;Māori religions, beliefs and philosophies&quot;.

In the 2018 census, the largest reported Christian affiliations are Anglican (6.7 percent of the population), Roman Catholic (6.3 percent), Presbyterian (4.7 percent). There are also significant numbers of Christians who identify themselves with Methodist, Pentecostal, Baptist and Latter-day Saint churches, and the New Zealand-based Rātana church has adherents among Māori. Immigration and associated demographic change in recent decades has contributed to the growth of minority religions, especially Hinduism, Buddhism and Islam.

==Other subjects==
===Education===
Education follows the three-tier model, which includes primary schools, followed by secondary schools (high schools) and tertiary education at universities or polytechnics. The Programme for International Student Assessment ranked New Zealand&#x27;s education as the seventh highest in 2009. The Education Index, published with the UN&#x27;s 2014 Human Development Index and based on data from 2013, listed New Zealand at 0.917, ranked second after Australia.

 there were 476,240 primary students, 278,266 secondary students, and 58,340 students attending composite (combined primary and secondary) schools. Primary and secondary schooling is compulsory for children aged 6 to 16 with most children starting at 5. Early leaving exemptions may be granted to 15-year-old students that have been experiencing some ongoing difficulties at school or are unlikely to benefit from continued attendance. Parents and caregivers can home school their children if they obtain approval from the Ministry of Education and prove that their child will be taught &quot;as regularly and as well as in a registered school&quot;. There are 13 school years and attending state (public) schools is nominally free from an individual&#x27;s fifth birthday until the end of the calendar year following their 19th birthday.

The academic year in New Zealand varies between institutions, but generally runs from late January until mid-December for primary and secondary schools and polytechnics, and from late February until mid-November for universities. New Zealand has an adult literacy rate of 99 percent, and over half of the population aged 15 to 29 hold a tertiary qualification. In the adult population 14.2 percent have a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher, 30.4 percent have some form of secondary qualification as their highest qualification and 22.4 percent have no formal qualification.

===Income===
New Zealand&#x27;s early economy was based on sealing, whaling, flax, gold, kauri gum, and native timber. During the 1880s agricultural products became the highest export earner and farming was a major occupation within New Zealand. Farming is still a major employer, with 75 000 people indicating farming as their occupation during the 2006 census, although dairy farming has recently taken over from sheep as the largest sector. The largest occupation recorded during the 2018 census was sales assistant with 108,702 people, followed by office managers (65,907 people), chief executives or managing directors (54,480 people), and sales representatives not elsewhere included (51,747 people). The largest industries of employment were cafes and restaurants (67,608 people), supermarkets and grocery stores (57,609 people), primary education (55,779 people), hospitals (52,887 people), and house construction (51,804 people). Most people earn their income from wages or salaries (60.6 percent), with the other sources of income being superannuation or pensions (17.3 percent), interest and investments (16.8 percent) and self-employment (14.8 percent).

In 1982 New Zealand had the lowest per-capita income of all the developed nations surveyed by the World Bank. In 2010 the estimated gross domestic product (GDP) at purchasing power parity (PPP) per capita was roughly US$28,250, between the thirty-first and fifty-first highest for all countries. The median personal income in 2006 was $24,400. This was up from $15,600 in 1996, with the largest increases in the $50,000 to $70,000 bracket. Men earn more than women on average, with the median income for men in 2011 being $31,500, $12,400 more than women. The highest median personal income were for people identifying with the European or &quot;other&quot; ethnic group, while the lowest was from the Asian ethnic group. The median income for people identifying as Māori was $20,900. In 2013, the median personal income had risen slightly to $28,500.

Unemployment peaked above 10 percent in 1991 and 1992, before falling to a record low of 3.7 percent in 2007 (ranking third from twenty-seven comparable OECD nations). Unemployment rose back to 7 percent in late 2009. In the June 2017 quarter, unemployment had fallen to 4.8 percent. This was the lowest unemployment rate since December 2008, after the start of the Great Recession, when it was 4.4%. That census held in 2006 stated that 15% of New Zealanders did some form of voluntary work through any organisation, group or
marae (men 14%, women 17%). Home ownership has declined since 1991, from 73.8 percent to 66.9 percent in 2006.

==See also==

* Demographics of Auckland
* Demographics of the Cook Islands, associated with New Zealand
* Health in New Zealand
* Homelessness in New Zealand
* Housing in New Zealand
* List of cities in New Zealand
* New Zealand census
* Social class in New Zealand
* Demographics of New Zealand Parliament (2014-2017)
* Demographics of New Zealand Parliament (2020-2023)
* Demographics of New Zealand Parliament (2023-2026)

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
*
* 

== External links ==
* New Zealand&#x27;s population clock </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="20" end="31" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q871904" start="159" end="173" title="New Zealanders" label="New Zealanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="215" end="227" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="257" end="265" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="267" end="277" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="279" end="291" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q200028" start="293" end="301" title="Hamilton, New Zealand" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207756" start="307" end="315" title="Tauranga" label="Tauranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q909136" start="380" end="394" title="Waiheke Island" label="Waiheke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363130" start="477" end="497" title="Great Barrier Island" label="Great Barrier Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q115459" start="503" end="526" title="Chatham Islands" label="Chatham and Pitt Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="533" end="547" title="Stewart Island" label="Stewart Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q889033" start="598" end="613" title="Realm of New Zealand" label="part of a realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="679" end="686" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q203073" start="692" end="707" title="Ross Dependency" label="Ross Dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="713" end="725" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="730" end="734" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="785" end="796" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015349" start="850" end="866" title="European New Zealanders" label="European descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="901" end="907" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="930" end="935" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="991" end="996" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="1028" end="1044" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="1068" end="1076" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pasifika"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005161" start="1113" end="1124" title="Immigration to New Zealand" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="1585" end="1605" title="Interracial marriage" label="ethnic intermarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="1773" end="1783" title="Multiracial people" label="mixed-race"/>
<link wikidata="Q44661" start="1804" end="1811" title="New Zealand English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="1813" end="1818" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="1824" end="1849" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="1993" end="2000" title="Sinitic_languages" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="2002" end="2008" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="2010" end="2015" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2017" end="2023" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="2029" end="2036" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="2068" end="2078" title="non-rhotic" label="non-rhotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="2097" end="2103" title="Rhoticity in English" label="rhotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="2152" end="2160" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pasifika"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="2165" end="2170" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="2224" end="2236" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q190885" start="2387" end="2401" title="Central vowel" label="centralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415918" start="2415" end="2416" title="Demographics of New Zealand" label="i"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2696" end="2718" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="2927" end="2937" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="2944" end="2952" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="2957" end="2965" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886714" start="3052" end="3063" title="irreligion in New Zealand" label="irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694064" start="3066" end="3073" title="Agriculture in New Zealand" label="Farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472704" start="3254" end="3257" title="NZ$" label="NZ$"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="3290" end="3297" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q871904" start="3327" end="3340" title="New Zealander" label="New Zealander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552898" start="3361" end="3365" title="Kiwi (nickname)" label="Kiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43642" start="3451" end="3455" title="Kiwi (bird)" label="kiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q865137" start="3466" end="3481" title="flightless bird" label="flightless bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128637" start="3496" end="3511" title="national symbol" label="national symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="3553" end="3559" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015349" start="3584" end="3618" title="European New Zealanders" label="New Zealanders of European descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q889033" start="3774" end="3786" title="Realm of New Zealand" label="realm&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="3809" end="3816" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q203073" start="3822" end="3837" title="Ross Dependency" label="Ross Dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="3843" end="3855" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="3860" end="3864" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016282" start="3882" end="3902" title="New Zealand nationality law" label="New Zealand citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="4006" end="4017" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="4126" end="4137" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819197" start="4302" end="4324" title="Statistics New Zealand" label="Statistics New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="4597" end="4617" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691855" start="4729" end="4745" title="Age adjustment" label="age-standardised"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="4746" end="4760" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="4817" end="4838" title="infant mortality rate" label="infant mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="4905" end="4920" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="5023" end="5053" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="among the highest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="6513" end="6531" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="6607" end="6612" title="North Island" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="6617" end="6629" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q909136" start="6694" end="6708" title="Waiheke Island" label="Waiheke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q115459" start="6717" end="6741" title="Chatham Islands" label="Chatham and Pitt Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="6750" end="6764" title="Stewart Island" label="Stewart Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q726917" start="6897" end="6912" title="Auckland Region" label="Auckland Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="7120" end="7130" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="7407" end="7417" title="rural area" label="rural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819197" start="7433" end="7455" title="Statistics New Zealand" label="Statistics New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8113" end="8128" title="List of former territorial authorities in New Zealand#Borough councils" label="borough council"/>
<link wikidata="Q10929914" start="8167" end="8184" title="city status" label="proclaimed a city"/>
<link wikidata="Q216712" start="8391" end="8408" title="regions of New Zealand" label="regional councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q941036" start="8424" end="8447" title="territorial authorities" label="territorial authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="8947" end="8957" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="9271" end="9280" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="9352" end="9360" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="9704" end="9712" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9859" end="9871" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="10049" end="10060" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500387" start="10758" end="10779" title="international student" label="international student"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="10859" end="10880" title="Tertiary education" label="tertiary institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067399" start="10926" end="10946" title="Skilled Migrant Category (New Zealand)" label="skilled migrant plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589551" start="11020" end="11038" title="police certificate" label="police certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005037" start="11274" end="11297" title="Immigration New Zealand" label="Immigration New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="11891" end="11899" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="13132" end="13151" title="multiethnic society" label="multiethnic society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="13242" end="13247" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="13291" end="13297" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015349" start="13349" end="13383" title="European New Zealanders" label="New Zealanders of European descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="13668" end="13691" title="1961 New Zealand census" label="1961 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="13771" end="13776" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="13781" end="13789" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pasifika"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366180" start="13985" end="13999" title="Ethnic groups in West Asia" label="Middle-Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="14001" end="14014" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690188" start="14021" end="14028" title="African New Zealanders" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134606" start="14408" end="14425" title="Massey University" label="Massey University"/>
<link wikidata="Q95919520" start="14438" end="14451" title="Paul Spoonley" label="Paul Spoonley"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="15604" end="15619" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="16079" end="16090" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="16689" end="16692" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283558" start="16825" end="16832" title="Ngāpuhi" label="Ngāpuhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984414" start="17064" end="17075" title="Ngāti Porou" label="Ngāti Porou"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="17126" end="17135" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q115459" start="17485" end="17500" title="Chatham Islands" label="Chatham Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758372" start="17538" end="17545" title="Moriori" label="Moriori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685391" start="17667" end="17675" title="Taranaki (iwi)" label="Taranaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="18331" end="18342" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q44661" start="18423" end="18450" title="New Zealand English" label="New Zealand English dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="18461" end="18471" title="Rhotic and non-rhotic accents" label="non-rhotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864971" start="18535" end="18544" title="Southland, New Zealand" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="18558" end="18563" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q44679" start="18582" end="18600" title="Australian English" label="Australian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="18671" end="18678" title="Accent (dialect)" label="accents"/>
<link wikidata="Q190885" start="18744" end="18755" title="Central vowel" label="centralised"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="19154" end="19163" title="homophone" label="homophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="19200" end="19216" title="Participle" label="past participles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="19286" end="19294" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757681" start="19470" end="19487" title="high rising terminal" label="rising intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="19531" end="19545" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980102" start="19590" end="19604" title="native schools" label="native schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q493511" start="19894" end="19903" title="Māori language revival" label="a revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q901014" start="20026" end="20043" title="Waitangi Tribunal" label="Waitangi Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390977" start="20241" end="20263" title="language proficiency" label="conversational fluency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022343" start="20336" end="20352" title="Māori Television" label="Māori Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617537" start="20472" end="20483" title="List of dual place names in New Zealand" label="Many places"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="20620" end="20645" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="20718" end="20724" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="20840" end="20848" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="20864" end="20869" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="20888" end="20894" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="20981" end="20993" title="multilingual" label="multilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="21053" end="21065" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188412" start="21188" end="21205" title="church attendance" label="church attendance"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886714" start="21279" end="21290" title="Irreligion in New Zealand" label="no religion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21408" end="21427" title="Religion of Māori people#Traditional Māori religion" label="indigenous religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="21456" end="21465" title="animistic" label="animistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="21491" end="21503" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q814997" start="21567" end="21576" title="Religious conversion" label="converted"/>
<link wikidata="Q540754" start="21785" end="21793" title="Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202380" start="21827" end="21841" title="Roman Catholic Church in New Zealand" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421596" start="21857" end="21869" title="Presbyterian Church of Aotearoa New Zealand" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823759" start="21963" end="21972" title="Methodist Church of New Zealand" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="21974" end="21985" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857692" start="21987" end="21994" title="Baptist Union of New Zealand" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722953" start="21999" end="22015" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in New Zealand" label="Latter-day Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468049" start="22052" end="22058" title="Rātana" label="Rātana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="22221" end="22229" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="22231" end="22239" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="22244" end="22249" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22446" end="22458" title="Institute of technology#New Zealand" label="polytechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="22464" end="22510" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="Programme for International Student Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566274" start="22583" end="22598" title="Education Index" label="Education Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="22634" end="22657" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="23439" end="23461" title="State school" label="state (public) schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="23993" end="24015" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639799" start="24238" end="24242" title="Phormium" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737159" start="24250" end="24259" title="kauri gum" label="kauri gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="25208" end="25234" title="Pension" label="superannuation or pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q320863" start="25422" end="25436" title="World Bank Group" label="the World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="25492" end="25515" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875663" start="25768" end="25792" title="Gender pay gap in New Zealand" label="Men earn more than women"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="26547" end="26562" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q186685" start="26708" end="26713" title="marae" label="marae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255986" start="26836" end="26860" title="Demographics of Auckland" label="Demographics of Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044355" start="26863" end="26895" title="Demographics of the Cook Islands" label="Demographics of the Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q60521394" start="26927" end="26948" title="Health in New Zealand" label="Health in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180843" start="26951" end="26978" title="Homelessness in New Zealand" label="Homelessness in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761663" start="26981" end="27003" title="Housing in New Zealand" label="Housing in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q375643" start="27006" end="27035" title="List of cities in New Zealand" label="List of cities in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="27038" end="27056" title="New Zealand census" label="New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550979" start="27059" end="27086" title="Social class in New Zealand" label="Social class in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27089" end="27139" title="51st New Zealand Parliament#Demographics_of_elected_MPs" label="Demographics of New Zealand Parliament (2014-2017)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27142" end="27192" title="53rd New Zealand Parliament#Demographics_of_elected_MPs" label="Demographics of New Zealand Parliament (2020-2023)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27195" end="27245" title="54th New Zealand Parliament#Demographics" label="Demographics of New Zealand Parliament (2023-2026)"/>
</links>
</doc>
