<doc id="20994" wikidata="Q172030" url="?curid=20994" title="McLaren">
<text>McLaren Racing Limited ( ) is a British motor racing team based at the McLaren Technology Centre in Woking, Surrey, England. The team is a subsidiary of the McLaren Group, which owns a majority of the team. McLaren is best known as a Formula One chassis constructor, the second-oldest active team and the second-most successful Formula One team after Ferrari, having won races, 12 Drivers&#x27; Championships, and nine Constructors&#x27; Championships. McLaren also has a history in American open wheel racing as both an entrant and a chassis constructor, and has won the Canadian-American Challenge Cup (Can-Am) sports car racing championship. McLaren is one of only three constructors, and the only team, to complete the Triple Crown of Motorsport (wins at the Indianapolis 500, 24 Hours of Le Mans, and Monaco Grand Prix).

Founded in 1963 by New Zealander Bruce McLaren, the team won its first Grand Prix at the 1968 Belgian Grand Prix, but their greatest initial success was in Can-Am, which they dominated from 1967 to 1971. Further American triumph followed, with Indianapolis 500 wins in McLaren cars for Mark Donohue in 1972 and Johnny Rutherford in 1974 and 1976. After Bruce McLaren died in a testing accident in 1970, Teddy Mayer took over and led the team to their first Formula One Constructors&#x27; Championship in , with Emerson Fittipaldi and James Hunt winning the Drivers&#x27; Championship in 1974 and respectively. The year 1974 also marked the start of a long-standing sponsorship by the Marlboro cigarette brand.

In 1981, McLaren merged with Ron Dennis&#x27; Project Four Racing; Dennis took over as team principal, and shortly afterwards organised a buyout of the original McLaren shareholders to take full control of the team. This began the team&#x27;s most successful era; with Porsche and Honda engines, Niki Lauda, Alain Prost, and Ayrton Senna won seven Drivers&#x27; Championships between them and the team took six Constructors&#x27; Championships. The combination of Prost and Senna was particularly dominant—together they won all but one race in —but later their rivalry soured and Prost left for Ferrari. Fellow English team Williams offered the most consistent challenge during this period, the two winning every constructors&#x27; title between and . By the mid-1990s, Honda had withdrawn from Formula One, Senna had moved to Williams, and the team went three seasons without a win. With Mercedes-Benz engines, West sponsorship, and former Williams designer Adrian Newey, further championships came in and with driver Mika Häkkinen, and during the 2000s the team were consistent front-runners, with Lewis Hamilton taking their latest drivers&#x27; title in .

Ron Dennis retired as McLaren team principal in 2009, handing over to long-time McLaren employee Martin Whitmarsh. At the end of 2013, after the team&#x27;s worst season since 2004, Whitmarsh was ousted. McLaren announced in 2013 that they would be using Honda engines from 2015 onwards, replacing Mercedes-Benz. The team raced as McLaren Honda for the first time since 1992 at the 2015 Australian Grand Prix. In September 2017, McLaren announced they had agreed on an engine supply with Renault from 2018 to 2020. McLaren is using Mercedes-Benz engines from the 2021 season until at least 2030. The team&#x27;s ninth Constructors&#x27; Championship, and first since 1998, was won in 2024. McLaren is the joint second-most successful Formula One team of all time with nine Constructors&#x27; Championships, a record shared with Williams as of the end of the 2024 season.

After initially returning to the Indianapolis 500 in 2017 as a backer of Andretti Autosport to run Fernando Alonso and then in 2019 as an independent entry, McLaren announced in August 2019 that they would run in conjunction with Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports starting in 2020 to run the full IndyCar Series, the combined entry being named Arrow McLaren SP. Initially having no ownership interest in the team, McLaren would purchase 75% of the operation in 2021. McLaren entered the electric off-road racing series Extreme E in 2022, and also joined Formula E in the 2022–23 season.

==History==
Bruce McLaren Motor Racing was founded in 1963 by New Zealander Bruce McLaren. Bruce was a works driver for the British Formula One team Cooper with whom he had won three Grands Prix and come second in the World Championship. Wanting to compete in the Australasian Tasman Series, Bruce approached his employers, but when team owner Charles Cooper insisted on using 1.5-litre Formula One-specification engines instead of the 2.5-litre motors permitted by the Tasman rules, Bruce decided to set up his own team to run him and his prospective Formula One teammate Timmy Mayer with custom-built Cooper cars.

Bruce won the 1964 series, but Mayer was killed in practice for the final race at the Longford Circuit in Tasmania. When Bruce McLaren approached Teddy Mayer to help him with the purchase of the Zerex sports car from Roger Penske, Teddy Mayer and Bruce McLaren began discussing a business partnership resulting in Teddy Mayer buying in to Bruce McLaren Motor Racing Limited (BMMR) and ultimately becoming its largest shareholder.

The team, competing under a British racing licence, was based in Feltham, England from 1963 to 1964, and in Colnbrook, England from 1965 until 1981, and it has been based in Woking, England since 1981. Despite this, Bruce never used the traditional British racing green on his cars. Instead, he used colour schemes that were not based on national principles (e.g. his first Formula One car, the McLaren M2B car, raced at the 1966 Monaco Grand Prix, was painted white with a green stripe, to represent a fictional Yamura team in John Frankenheimer&#x27;s film &quot;Grand Prix&quot;).

During this period, Bruce drove for his team in sports car races in the United Kingdom and North America and also entered the 1965 Tasman Series with Phil Hill, but did not win it. He continued to drive in Grands Prix for Cooper, but judging that team&#x27;s form to be waning, decided to race his own cars in 1966.

==Racing history: Formula One==
===Early days (1966–1967)===

Bruce McLaren made the team&#x27;s Grand Prix debut at the 1966 Monaco race (of the current Formula One teams, only Ferrari is older). His race ended after nine laps due to a terminal oil leak. The car was the M2B designed by Robin Herd, but the programme was hampered by a poor choice of engines: a 3.0-litre version of Ford&#x27;s Indianapolis 500 engine and a Serenissima V8 were used, the latter scoring the team&#x27;s first point in Britain, but both were underpowered and unreliable. For Bruce decided to use a British Racing Motors (BRM) V12 engine, but due to delays with the engine, was forced initially to use a modified Formula Two car called the M4B powered by a 2.1-litre BRM V8, later building a similar but slightly larger car called the M5A for the V12. Neither car brought great success, the best result being a fourth at Monaco.

===Ford-Cosworth DFV engines (1968–1982)===
For , after driving McLaren&#x27;s sole entry for the previous two years, Bruce was joined by 1967 champion and fellow New Zealander Denny Hulme, who was already racing for McLaren in Can-Am. That year&#x27;s new M7A car, Herd&#x27;s final design for the team, was powered by Cosworth&#x27;s new and soon to be ubiquitous DFV engine (the DFV would go on to be used by McLaren until 1983) and with it a major upturn in form proceeded. Bruce won the Race of Champions at the Brands Hatch circuit and Hulme won the International Trophy at Silverstone, both non-championship races, before Bruce took the team&#x27;s first championship win at the Belgian Grand Prix. Hulme also won the Italian and Canadian Grands Prix later in the year, helping the team to second in the Constructors&#x27; Championship. Using an updated &#x27;C&#x27; version on the M7, a further three podium finishes followed for Bruce in , but the team&#x27;s fifth win had to wait until the last race of the 1969 championship when Hulme won the Mexican Grand Prix. That year, McLaren experimented with four-wheel drive in the M9A, but the car had only a single outing driven by Derek Bell at the British Grand Prix; Bruce described driving it as like &quot;trying to write your signature with somebody jogging your elbow&quot;.

The year started with a second-place each for Hulme and Bruce in the first two Grands Prix, but in June, Bruce was killed in a crash at Goodwood while testing the new M8D Can-Am car. After his death, Teddy Mayer took over effective control of the team; Hulme continued with Dan Gurney and Peter Gethin partnering him. Gurney won the first two Can-Am events at Mosport and St. Jovite and placed ninth in the third, but left the team mid-season, and Gethin took over from there. While began promisingly when Hulme led the opening round in South Africa before retiring with broken suspension, ultimately Hulme, Gethin (who left for BRM mid-season,) and Jackie Oliver again failed to score a win. The 1972 season saw improvements though: Hulme won the team&#x27;s first Grand Prix for years in South Africa and he and Peter Revson scored ten other podiums, the team finishing third in the Constructors&#x27; Championship. McLaren gave Jody Scheckter his Formula One debut at the final race at Watkins Glen. All McLaren drivers used the Ford-Cosworth engines, except for Andrea de Adamich and Nanni Galli who used engines from Alfa Romeo in 1970.

The McLaren M23, designed by Gordon Coppuck, was the team&#x27;s new car for the season. Sharing parts of the design of both McLaren&#x27;s Formula One M19 and Indianapolis M16 cars (itself inspired by Lotus&#x27;s 72), it was a mainstay for four years. Hulme won with it in Sweden and Revson took the only Grand Prix wins of his career in Britain and Canada. In , Emerson Fittipaldi, world champion with Lotus two years earlier, joined McLaren. Hulme, in his final Formula One campaign, won the Argentinian season-opener; Fittipaldi, with wins in Brazil, Belgium and Canada, took the Drivers&#x27; Championship. It was a close fight for Fittipaldi, who secured the title with a fourth at the season-ending United States Grand Prix, putting him three points ahead of Ferrari&#x27;s Clay Regazzoni. With Hulme and multiple motorcycle world champion Mike Hailwood, he also sealed McLaren&#x27;s first Constructors&#x27; Championship. The year was less successful for the team: Fittipaldi was second in the championship behind Niki Lauda. Hulme&#x27;s replacement Jochen Mass took his sole GP win in Spain.

At the end of 1975, Fittipaldi left to join his brother&#x27;s Fittipaldi/Copersucar team. With the top drivers already signed to other teams, Mayer turned to James Hunt, a driver on whom biographer Gerald Donaldson reflected as having &quot;a dubious reputation&quot;. In , Lauda was again strong in his Ferrari; at midseason, he led the championship with 56 points while Hunt had only 26 despite wins in Spain (a race from which he was initially disqualified) and France. At the German Grand Prix, though, Lauda crashed heavily, was nearly killed, and missed the next two races. Hunt capitalised by winning four more Grands Prix giving him a three-point deficit going into the finale in Japan. Here it rained torrentially, Lauda retired because of safety concerns, and Hunt sealed the Drivers&#x27; Championship by finishing third. McLaren, though, lost the Constructors&#x27; Championship to Ferrari.

In , the M23 was gradually replaced with the M26, the M23&#x27;s final works outing being Gilles Villeneuve&#x27;s Formula One debut with the team in a one-off appearance at the British Grand Prix. Hunt won on three occasions that year, but the Lauda and Ferrari combination proved too strong, Hunt and McLaren managing just fifth and third in the respective championships. From there, results continued to worsen. Lotus and Mario Andretti took the titles with their 78 and 79 ground-effect cars and neither Hunt nor Mass&#x27;s replacement Patrick Tambay were able to seriously challenge with the nonground-effect M26. Hunt was dropped at the end of 1978 in favour of Lotus&#x27;s Ronnie Peterson, but when Peterson was killed by a crash at the Italian Grand Prix, John Watson was signed, instead. No improvement occurred in ; Coppuck&#x27;s M28 design was described by Mayer as &quot;ghastly, a disaster&quot; and &quot;quite diabolical&quot; and the M29 did little to change the situation. Tambay scored no points and Watson only 15 to place the team eighth at the end of the year.

The 1980s started much as the 1970s had ended: Alain Prost took over from Tambay but Watson and he rarely scored points. Under increasing pressure since the previous year from principal sponsor Philip Morris and their executive John Hogan, Mayer was coerced into merging McLaren with Ron Dennis&#x27;s Project Four Formula Two team, also sponsored by Philip Morris. Dennis had designer John Barnard who, inspired by the carbon-fibre rear wings of the BMW M1 race cars that Project Four was preparing, had ideas for an innovative Formula One chassis constructed from carbon-fibre instead of conventional aluminium alloy. On their own, they lacked the money to build it, but with investment that came with the merger it became the McLaren MP4 (later called MP4/1) of , driven by Watson and Andrea de Cesaris. In the MP4, Watson won the British Grand Prix and had three other podium finishes. Soon after the merger, McLaren moved from Colnbrook to a new base in Woking and Dennis and Mayer initially shared the managing directorship of the company; by 1982, Mayer had departed and Tyler Alexander&#x27;s and his shareholdings had been bought by the new owners.

===TAG-Porsche and Honda engines (1983–1992)===
In the early 1980s, teams like Renault, Ferrari and Brabham were using 1.5-litre turbocharged engines in favour of the 3.0-litre naturally aspirated engines that had been standard since 1966. Having seen in 1982 the need for a turbo engine of their own, Dennis had convinced Williams backer Techniques d&#x27;Avant Garde (TAG) to fund Porsche-built, TAG-branded turbo engines made to Barnard&#x27;s specifications; TAG&#x27;s founder Mansour Ojjeh would later become a McLaren shareholder. In the meantime, they continued with Cosworth engines as old rival Lauda came out of retirement in 1982 to drive alongside Watson in that year&#x27;s 1B development of the MP4. They each won two races, Watson notably from 17th place on the grid in Detroit, and at one stage of the season McLaren were second in the constructors&#x27; championship. As part of a dispute with FISA, they boycotted the San Marino Grand Prix. Although was not so fruitful, Watson did win again in the United States, this time from 22nd on the grid at Long Beach.

Having been fired by Renault, Prost returned to McLaren once again for . Now using the TAG engines, the team dominated, scoring 12 wins and times as many constructors&#x27; points as nearest rival Ferrari. In the Drivers&#x27; Championship, Lauda prevailed over Prost by half a point, the narrowest margin ever. The McLaren-TAGs were again strong in ; a third Constructors&#x27; Championship came their way while this time Prost won the Drivers&#x27; Championship. In , the Williams team were resurgent with their Honda engine and drivers Nigel Mansell and Nelson Piquet, while at McLaren, Lauda&#x27;s replacement, 1982 champion Keke Rosberg could not gel with the car. Williams took the Constructors&#x27; Championship, but for Prost, wins in San Marino, Monaco, and Austria combined with the fact that the Williams drivers were taking points from each other meant that he retained a chance going into the last race, the Australian Grand Prix. There, a puncture for Mansell and a precautionary pit stop for Piquet gave Prost the race win and his second title, making him the first driver to win back-to-back championships since Jack Brabham in and 1960. In Barnard departed for Ferrari to be replaced by Steve Nichols (who himself joined Ferrari in 1989). In the hands of Prost and Stefan Johansson, though, Nichols&#x27;s MP4/3 and the TAG engine could not match the Williams-Honda.

For , Honda switched their supply to McLaren and, encouraged by Prost, Dennis signed Ayrton Senna to drive. Despite regulations reducing the boost pressure and fuel capacity (and therefore, power) of the turbo cars, Honda persisted with a turbocharged engine. In the MP4/4, Senna and Prost engaged in a season-long battle, winning 15 of the 16 races (at the other race at Monza, Senna had been leading comfortably, but collided with back-marker Jean-Louis Schlesser). At the Portuguese Grand Prix, their relationship soured when Senna squeezed Prost against the pit wall; Prost won, but afterwards said, &quot;It was dangerous. If he wants the world championship that badly he can have it.&quot; Prost scored more points that year, but because only the best 11 results counted, Senna took the title at the penultimate race in Japan.

The next year, with turbos banned, Honda supplied a new 3.5-L naturally aspirated V10 engine and McLaren again won both titles with the MP4/5. Their drivers&#x27; relationship continued to deteriorate, though, especially when, at the San Marino Grand Prix, Prost felt that Senna had reneged on an agreement not to pass each other at the first corner. Believing that Honda and Dennis were favouring Senna, Prost announced mid-season that he would leave to drive at Ferrari the following year. For the second year in succession, the Drivers&#x27; Championship was decided at the Japanese Grand Prix, this time in Prost&#x27;s favour after Senna and he collided (Senna initially recovered and won the race, but was later disqualified).


With former McLaren men Nichols and Prost (Barnard had moved to the Benetton team), Ferrari pushed the British team more closely in . McLaren, in turn, brought in Ferrari&#x27;s Gerhard Berger, but like the two seasons before, the Drivers&#x27; Championship was led by Prost and Senna and settled at the penultimate race in Japan. Here, Senna collided with Prost at the first corner, forcing both to retire, but this time Senna escaped punishment and took the title; McLaren also won the Constructors&#x27; Championship. The year was another for McLaren and Senna, with the ascendant Renault-powered Williams team their closest challengers. By , Williams, with their advanced FW14B car, had overtaken McLaren, breaking their four-year run as champions, despite the latter winning five races that year.

===Ford, Lamborghini and Peugeot engines (1993–1994)===
As Honda withdrew from the sport at end of 1992, McLaren sought a new engine supplier. A deal to secure Renault engines fell through, subsequently McLaren switched to customer Ford engines for the season. Senna—who initially agreed only to a race-by-race contract before later signing for the whole year—won five races, including a record-breaking sixth victory at Monaco and a win at the European Grand Prix, where he went from fifth to first on the opening lap. His teammate, 1991 CART champion Michael Andretti, fared much worse; he scored only seven points, and was replaced by test driver Mika Häkkinen for the final three rounds of the season. Williams ultimately won both titles and Senna—who had flirted with moving there for 1993—signed with them for the season. During the 1993 season McLaren took part in a seven part BBC Television documentary called &quot;A Season With McLaren&quot;.

McLaren tested a Lamborghini V12 engine ahead of the season, as part of a potential deal with the then-Lamborghini owner Chrysler, before eventually deciding to use Peugeot engines. With Peugeot power, the MP4/9 was driven by Häkkinen and Martin Brundle, despite achieving eight podiums over the season no wins were achieved. Peugeot was dropped after a single year due to multiple engine failures/unreliability which cost McLaren potential race victories and they switched to a Mercedes-Benz-branded, Ilmor-designed engine.

===Mercedes partnership (1995–2014)===
====1995–2009: Works Mercedes partnership====
For 1995 season onwards, McLaren ended their engine deal with Peugeot Sport and started an engine full-works partnership with Mercedes-Benz High Performance Engines for the first time, after the German manufacturer spent one year in partnership with the Sauber team. The partnership included free engines from Mercedes-Benz that built and assembled by Ilmor Engineering, Mercedes-Benz official team vehicles, financial support, also earned full-factory support from Daimler AG and Mercedes-Benz and also Mercedes-Benz and Ilmor staff would work with the team at their Woking base.

McLaren&#x27;s Formula One car for the season, the MP4/10, was not a front-runner and Brundle&#x27;s replacement, former champion Nigel Mansell, was unable to fit into the car at first and departed after just two races, with Mark Blundell taking his place.

While Williams dominated in , McLaren, now with David Coulthard alongside Häkkinen, went a third successive season without a win. In , however, Coulthard broke this run by winning the season-opening Australian Grand Prix; Häkkinen and he would each win another race before the end of the season, and highly rated designer Adrian Newey joined the team from Williams in August that year. Despite the car&#x27;s improved pace, unreliability proved costly throughout the season, with retirements at the British and Luxembourg Grands Prix occurring whilst Häkkinen was in the lead. It was also at the start of this season that saw long time sponsor, Marlboro, shift its support to long time rival Ferrari. For the first time since the 1974 season, McLaren would have a new identity, shifting to fellow tobacco sponsor West. This saw the traditional red and white replaced with silver, grey, white and red. McLaren would retain this colour scheme (or very similar) for twenty years until 2017.

With Newey able to take advantage of new technical regulations for , and with Williams losing their works Renault engines following Renault&#x27;s temporary withdrawal from the sport, McLaren were once again able to challenge for the championship. Häkkinen and Coulthard won five of the first six races despite the banning of the team&#x27;s &quot;brake steer&quot; system, which allowed the rear brakes to be operated individually to reduce understeer, after a protest by Ferrari at the second race in Brazil. Schumacher and Ferrari provided the greatest competition, the former levelled on points with Häkkinen with two races to go, but wins for Häkkinen at the Luxembourg and Japanese Grands Prix gave both him the Drivers&#x27; Championship and McLaren the Constructors&#x27; Championship. Häkkinen won his second Drivers&#x27; Championship the following season, but due to a combination of driver errors and mechanical failures, the team lost the constructors&#x27; title to Ferrari.

In McLaren won seven races in a close fight with Ferrari, but ultimately Ferrari and Schumacher prevailed in both competitions. This marked the start of a decline in form as Ferrari cemented their dominance of Formula One and also beryllium engine material banned in Formula One that affected Mercedes engine performance. In , Häkkinen was outscored by Coulthard for the first time since 1997 and retired (ending Formula One&#x27;s longest ever driver partnership), his place taken by Kimi Räikkönen, then in , Coulthard took their solitary win at Monaco while Ferrari repeated McLaren&#x27;s 1988 feat of 15 wins in a season.

The year started promisingly, with one win each for Coulthard and Räikkönen at the first two Grands Prix. However, they were hampered when the MP4-18 car designed for that year suffered crash test and reliability problems, forcing them to continue using a &#x27;D&#x27; development of the year-old MP4-17 for longer than they had initially planned. Despite this, Räikkönen scored points consistently and challenged for the championship up to the final race, eventually losing by two points. The team began with the MP4-19, which technical director Adrian Newey described as &quot;a debugged version of [the MP4-18]&quot;. It was not a success, though, and was replaced mid-season by the MP4-19B. With this, Räikkönen scored the team&#x27;s and his only win of the year at the Belgian Grand Prix, as McLaren finished fifth in the Constructors&#x27; Championship, their worst ranking since 1983.

Coulthard left for Red Bull Racing in to be replaced by former CART champion Juan Pablo Montoya for what was McLaren&#x27;s most successful season in several years as he and Räikkönen won ten races. However, both the team not being able to work out why the car could not heat its tyres properly in the early stages of the season and the overall unreliability of the MP4-20 cost several race victories when Räikkönen had been leading or in contention to win and also costing him grid positions in some qualifying sessions, which allowed Renault and their driver Fernando Alonso to capitalise and win both titles.

In , the superior reliability and speed of the Ferraris and Renaults prevented the team from gaining any victories for the first time in a decade. Montoya parted company acrimoniously with the team to race in NASCAR after the United States Grand Prix, where he crashed into Räikkönen at the start; test driver Pedro de la Rosa deputised for the remainder of the season. The team also lost Räikkönen to Ferrari at the end of the year.

Steve Matchett argued that the poor reliability of McLaren in 2006 and recent previous years was due to a lack of team continuity and stability. His cited examples of instability are logistical challenges related to the move to the McLaren Technology Centre, Adrian Newey&#x27;s aborted move to Jaguar and later move to Red Bull, the subsequent move of Newey&#x27;s deputy to Red Bull, and personnel changes at Ilmor.

After scoring no victories in 2006, the team returned to competitive status in . That year saw Fernando Alonso race alongside Formula One debutant and long-time McLaren protégé Lewis Hamilton. The pair scored four wins each and led the Drivers&#x27; Championship for much of the year, but tensions arose within the team, BBC Sport claimed that Alonso was unable to cope with Hamilton&#x27;s competitiveness. At the Hungarian Grand Prix, Alonso was judged to have deliberately impeded his teammate during qualifying, so the team were not allowed to score Constructors&#x27; points at the event. An internal agreement within the McLaren team stated that drivers would alternatively have an extra lap for qualifying, however, Lewis Hamilton refused to accept for the Hungarian Grand Prix. Subsequently, the McLaren team was investigated by the FIA for having proprietary technical blueprints of Ferrari&#x27;s car – the so-called &quot;Spygate&quot; controversy. At the first hearing, McLaren management consistently denied all knowledge, blaming a single &quot;rogue engineer&quot;. However, in the final hearing, McLaren was found guilty and the team was excluded from the Constructors&#x27; Championship and fined $100 million. The drivers were allowed to continue without penalty, and while Hamilton led the Drivers&#x27; Championship heading into the final race in Brazil, Räikkönen in the Ferrari won the race and the Drivers&#x27; Championship, a single point ahead of both McLaren drivers. In November, Alonso and McLaren agreed to terminate their contract by mutual consent, Heikki Kovalainen filling the vacant seat alongside Hamilton.

In , a close fight ensued between Hamilton and the Ferraris of Felipe Massa and Räikkönen; Hamilton won five times and despite also crossing the finish line first at the Belgian Grand Prix, he was deemed to have gained an illegal advantage by cutting a chicane during an overtake and was controversially demoted to third. Going into the final race in Brazil, Hamilton had a seven-point lead over Massa. Massa won there, but Hamilton dramatically clinched his first Drivers&#x27; Championship by moving into the necessary fifth position at the final corner of the final lap of the race. Despite winning his first Grand Prix in Hungary, Kovalainen finished the season only seventh in the overall standings, allowing Ferrari to take the constructors&#x27; title.

Before the start of the season, Dennis retired as team principal, handing responsibility to Martin Whitmarsh, but the year started badly: the MP4-24 car was off the pace and the team was given a three-race suspended ban for misleading stewards at the Australian and Malaysian Grands Prix. Despite these early problems, a late revival had Hamilton win at the Hungarian and Singapore Grands Prix.

====2010–2014: Customer Mercedes engines====

For the 2010 season, McLaren lost its status as the Mercedes works team; Mercedes decided to buy the Brackley-based Brawn team that had won the 2009 titles with its customer engines, Whitmarsh having chosen to abandon their exclusive rights to the Mercedes engines to help Brawn run. Mercedes still continued providing engines to McLaren, albeit under a supplier-customer relationship rather than the works partnership as before, while it sold its 40% shares of McLaren over two years. McLaren signed 2009 champion, Jenson Button, to replace Kovalainen alongside Hamilton in . Button won twice (in Australia and China) and Hamilton three times (in Turkey, Canada, and Belgium), but they and McLaren failed to win their respective championships, that year&#x27;s MP4-25 largely outpaced by Red Bull&#x27;s RB6.

Hamilton and Button remained with the team into , with Hamilton winning three races – China, Germany, and Abu Dhabi and Button also winning three races – Canada, Hungary, and Japan. Button finished the Drivers&#x27; Championship in second place with 270 points behind 2011 Drivers&#x27; Champion Sebastian Vettel of Red Bull Racing, ahead of Hamilton&#x27;s 227 points. McLaren was second in the Constructors&#x27; Championship to Red Bull Racing. Throughout the season, Hamilton was involved in several incidents with other drivers including – most notably – multiple collisions with 2008 title rival Massa.

In , McLaren won the first race of the year in Australia with a dominant victory by Button and a 3rd place from pole for Hamilton, while Hamilton went on to win in Canada, but by the mid-way mark of the season at the team&#x27;s home race at Silverstone, the McLaren cars managed only eighth place (Hamilton) and 10th place (Button), while the drivers&#x27; and Constructors&#x27; Championships were being dominated by Red Bull Racing and Ferrari, whose cars occupied the first four places of the , this was partially due to pit stop problems and Button&#x27;s temporary dip in form after not adapting as well as Hamilton to the new Pirelli tyres. The car also suffered reliability problems which cost the team and its drivers numerous potential points, most notably in Singapore and Abu Dhabi, where Hamilton had been leading from the front in both races and in Italy where the team lost a 1-2 finish when Button&#x27;s car failed with fuel problems on lap 33.

Sergio Pérez replaced Hamilton for , after Hamilton decided to leave for Mercedes. The team&#x27;s car for the season, the MP4-28, was launched on 31 January 2013. The car struggled to compete with the other top teams and the season had McLaren fail to produce a podium finish for the first time since .

Kevin Magnussen replaced Pérez for , and Ron Dennis, who had remained at arm&#x27;s length since stepping down from the team principal role, returned as CEO of the operation. McLaren was the first team to officially launch their 2014 car, the MP4-29, which was revealed on 24 January 2014. They had a largely unsuccessful 2014; their best result was in Australia where – after Daniel Ricciardo&#x27;s disqualification from second place – Magnussen finished second and Button third. Button subsequently finished fourth in Canada, Britain, and Russia. Their highest grid position was in Britain with Button&#x27;s third place on the grid.

===Return to Honda engines (2015–2017)===

For , McLaren ended their engine deal with Mercedes which included buying back the 40% stake that Mercedes held in the team and reforging their historical partnership with Honda. The Honda deal not only meant they would supply engines, but that Honda staff would work with the team at their Woking base as well as received full-factory support from Honda including official team vehicles and free engines. The team announced Fernando Alonso and Jenson Button as their race drivers, with Kevin Magnussen demoted to test driver. During pre-season testing at the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya in February, Alonso suffered a concussion and, as a result, Kevin Magnussen replaced him for the season-opening in March. At that inaugural race of the season, Jenson Button finished 11th, but was lapped twice and finished last of the finishing cars. Following considerable unreliability and initial suggestions that the Honda engine was underpowered relative to its competitors, steady performance gains eventually resulted in Button managing to score the team&#x27;s first (four) points of the season at the sixth round in Monaco. By contrast, Alonso scored his first point three races later at the British Grand Prix.
The Hungarian Grand Prix saw the team score their best result of the season with Alonso and Button finishing fifth and ninth, respectively. However, McLaren did not score points in the next four races until Button finished ninth at the Russian Grand Prix. At the following United States Grand Prix, Button scored his best result of the season with sixth place. The team finished ninth in the constructors&#x27; standings with 27 points, McLaren&#x27;s worst performance since 1980.
McLaren retained the Alonso - Button pairing for the season. The second year of the Honda partnership was better than the first, with the team being able to challenge for top 10 positions on a more regular basis. However, the season started with a massive crash at the Australian Grand Prix in which Fernando Alonso sustained rib fractures and a collapsed lung after colliding with Esteban Gutiérrez and somersaulting into the crash barriers. Alonso, as a result of his injuries, was forced to miss the second round of the Championship, the Bahrain Grand Prix, and was replaced by reserve driver Stoffel Vandoorne. Vandoorne produced an impressive performance in his first race to score the team&#x27;s first point of the season with 10th place. The next points for McLaren came at the Russian Grand Prix with Alonso and Button finishing sixth and 10th respectively. The rain-affected Monaco Grand Prix was one of best races of the season for the team. Alonso finished fifth, having kept Nico Rosberg&#x27;s Mercedes behind him for 46 laps, while Button scored two points with ninth. At the Austrian Grand Prix, Button recorded his best result of the season with a sixth-place after qualifying third in a wet/dry session. After a disappointing display at their home race, the British Grand Prix at Silverstone, the team scored points at the next three rounds with six points in Hungary, four in Germany, and six points again thanks to an impressive seventh-place finish from Alonso at the Belgian Grand Prix. At the United States Grand Prix, McLaren matched their Monaco result with 12 points after an attacking race from Alonso saw him claim fifth position while Button once again finished ninth. After a season of significant progress compared to 2015, Alonso and Button finished the championship in 10th and 15th places respectively with the team ending the season in sixth place in the Constructors&#x27; Championship with 76 points. On 3 September 2016, Jenson Button announced he would take a sabbatical from Formula One for the 2017 season. He then confirmed on 25 November that he would retire from F1 altogether with Vandoorne being Alonso&#x27;s new Teammate for 2017.

In February 2017, McLaren signed Lando Norris to their Young Driver Programme.

Alonso did not take part in the 2017 Monaco Grand Prix as he was participating in the Indianapolis 500. Instead Jenson Button returned for the one race as his replacement. McLaren finished 2017 9th with 30 points in total.

===Renault engines (2018–2020)===

McLaren announced during the 2017 Singapore Grand Prix weekend that they would split from engine supplier Honda at the end of the 2017 season and had agreed on a three-year customer deal to be supplied with Mecachrome-assembled Renault engines. Team boss Éric Boullier described their performance between 2015 and 2017 as a &quot;proper disaster&quot; for the team&#x27;s credibility. was the first season in McLaren&#x27;s history when their cars were powered by Renault engines. McLaren also announced that Fernando Alonso and Stoffel Vandoorne would remain with the team for the 2018 season. On 6 November 2017, the team announced that Lando Norris would be the team&#x27;s test and reserve driver.

At the season-opening Australian Grand Prix, Fernando Alonso scored the team&#x27;s best finish since the 2016 Monaco Grand Prix with fifth, Alonso said that the team&#x27;s target would be Red Bull Racing. McLaren had a relatively good start to the season with points finishes in the next four races, but in the next 16 races after Spain, McLaren only scored 22 points, 8 points less than in the same period in 2017. On 14 August 2018, Fernando Alonso announced he would not compete in Formula One in 2019, ending his four-year spell at the team. Carlos Sainz Jr. was signed as his replacement on a multi-year deal. On 3 September 2018, it was announced that Stoffel Vandoorne would be leaving the team at the end of the season, with Lando Norris being promoted from reserve driver to replace him in 2019. McLaren struggled with performance throughout the season, with the McLaren drivers being knocked out 21 times in the first qualifying session, and McLaren having the second-worst average qualifying ranking of any team, only ahead of Williams. The team finished the disappointing season – after being helped by the exclusion of Force India&#x27;s points from the first 12 races – in 6th place with 62 points, 357 points behind their target, Red Bull Racing, with the same engine.

The 2019 season was much more positive for McLaren, with the team securely establishing themselves as the best constructor behind Mercedes, Ferrari, and Red Bull. At the Brazilian Grand Prix, Sainz recorded the team&#x27;s first podium since the 2014 Australian Grand Prix, finishing fourth on the road but later promoted to third after Lewis Hamilton received a post-race penalty, meaning that the team missed out on the official podium ceremony. McLaren ended the season in 4th place with 145 points, their best result since 2014 and 54 points ahead of their nearest competitor, Renault.

McLaren retained Norris and Sainz for the season. The season was significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The season was shortened to 18 races, with the season opener to take place in Austria. At the Austrian Grand Prix, Norris achieved his first ever podium, finishing in third. Sainz achieved the team&#x27;s second podium in 2020 at the Italian Grand Prix, where he finished second. The team finished the 2020 season third in the constructors&#x27; championship with 202 points. Sainz finished the drivers&#x27; championship in sixth with 105 points and Norris in ninth with 97 points.

===Return to Mercedes engines (2021–)===
McLaren again used Mercedes engines in after their deal with Renault ended. McLaren had previously collaborated with Mercedes from 1995 through 2014 (1995 to 2009 was a works partner and later 2010 to 2014 was a customer partner) but this time a customer role system by pay-lease agreement. Daniel Ricciardo moved from Renault to partner Lando Norris for the 2021 Formula One World Championship on a multi-year deal. Ricciardo replaced Carlos Sainz, who moved to Ferrari. In the season&#x27;s first nine races, the team scored three podiums with Mercedes power, in Italy, Monaco and Austria, all courtesy of Norris.

At the 2021 Italian Grand Prix, Ricciardo scored his first win since the 2018 Monaco Grand Prix, and McLaren&#x27;s first win since the 2012 Brazilian Grand Prix. A second-place finish for Norris also meant that McLaren achieved their first one-two finish since the 2010 Canadian Grand Prix and the only one-two finish for the 2021 season. Norris secured the team&#x27;s first pole position in the hybrid era at the 2021 Russian Grand Prix but was unable to convert it to a win, finishing in seventh place due to the sudden drastic change in weather conditions and team strategy in the last two laps of the race. A subsequent drop in form in the latter part of the season saw McLaren ending up fourth in the constructors&#x27; championship behind Ferrari.

For the season, McLaren retained both Norris and Ricciardo. Ricciardo tested positive for COVID-19 ahead of the pre-season tests in Bahrain, which meant Norris was required to do all the remaining running for the test although a brake problem limited the testing he was able to conduct. Both drivers struggled at the first race in Bahrain, with neither driver reaching Q3 – the first time since the 2020 Turkish Grand Prix – and finishing 14th and 15th in the race. Norris achieved third at the Emilia Romagna Grand Prix. After Norris missed the first day at the track during the São Paulo Grand Prix weekend, McLaren suffered their first double DNF finish since Monaco 2017 as Norris had an electrical fault and Ricciardo was involved in a collision with Haas&#x27; Kevin Magnussen. Compared to his teammate, Ricciardo struggled and many were critical of his performance, with some suggesting that McLaren would drop him. This forced Ricciardo into releasing a statement on Instagram, confirming he would stay through to 2023. In August 2022, Riccardo&#x27;s contract for 2023 was terminated by mutual agreement. Oscar Piastri replaced Ricciardo for the 2023 season after a contract dispute with Alpine F1 Team was resolved in McLaren&#x27;s favour by the FIA Contract Recognition Board. McLaren finished the season in fifth place in the constructors&#x27; championship behind Alpine.

The 2023 season celebrated the 60th anniversary of the team&#x27;s founding, with the season&#x27;s car named the MCL60 in commemoration. The season started with a myriad of issues for the team, causing them to release a public statement after the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix, announcing certain organisational changes; James Key would be replaced as Technical Director and replaced by a Technical Executive Team consisting of three new specialised Technical Director roles consisting of Peter Prodomou as Technical Director, Aerodynamics, David Sanchez (joining in January 2024 after his gardening leave ends) as Technical Director, Car concept and performance, and Neil Houdly, Technical Director Engineer and Design who is a placeholder for Rob Marshall, who, like Sanchez, has been hired from a rival team but is on gardening leave until January 2024. After not scoring points in the first two races, Norris and Piastri finished the chaotic Australian Grand Prix in sixth and eighth place respectively, with Piastri scoring his first points in Formula One and for McLaren. At the Spanish Grand Prix, Norris qualified in a surprising third place whereas Piastri started in ninth. On race day, Norris made contact with Hamilton at the start of the race and damaged his front wing. He dropped down to the bottom end of the grid after making a pit stop for a front wing change and finished the race in 17th whereas Piastri finished in 13th.

McLaren brought new car upgrades for Norris for the Austrian Grand Prix while Piastri received his at the British Grand Prix. With the new car upgrades, Norris qualified in third in the sprint shootout. At the sprint in wet conditions, Norris&#x27; car went into anti-stall due to the lack of grip at turn 3 on the first lap which dropped him immediately to tenth. He finished the sprint in ninth. Norris qualified in fourth for the race and finished in fifth after battling mostly with Hamilton and Sainz throughout the race. Norris got promoted to fourth after Sainz, who finished fourth, was given a post-race ten-second time penalty for exceeding track limits. At the British Grand Prix, with both cars having the new upgrades, Norris and Piastri qualified in second and third respectively, giving McLaren their best qualifying result of the season at that moment. On race day, Norris had a quicker start and overtook Verstappen at the first corner to lead the race for the first four laps before being overtaken by Verstappen on lap five. Piastri, too, had a good start to keep third position and built a sizeable lead against Charles Leclerc. Piastri made his pit stop on lap 29 but two laps later, Kevin Magnussen&#x27;s engine caught fire which called out the virtual safety car and safety car where Hamilton benefitted to jump ahead of Piastri into third after making his pit stop. Norris also pitted during the safety car and came out ahead of Hamilton. Norris, who switched to the hard tyres, defended his position against Hamilton (who switched to the soft tyres) when the race resumed to finish in second place, giving McLaren and Norris their first second-place finish since the 2021 Italian Grand Prix. Piastri finished in fourth place after battling against George Russell in his best Formula One career finish at that point. Norris scored his first ever consecutive podium finish by finishing second at the Hungarian Grand Prix. Unfortunately for Piastri, after being in second place at the start of the race from fourth, he finished in fifth place after suffering floor damage. At the Belgian Grand Prix, Piastri qualified in second position in the sprint shootout, his highest qualifying position to date and missed out on pole position by 11 milliseconds. During the sprint race, Piastri led the race on the second lap for the first time in his Formula One career but was overtaken by Verstappen on lap 5. Piastri finished the sprint in second place whereas Norris finished in sixth.

McLaren introduced further upgrades to the MCL60 at the Singapore Grand Prix, where Piastri, having been impeded by Lance Stroll&#x27;s heavy crash, started seventeenth with Norris in fourth. Both cars would make their way up the Marina Bay Street Circuit; Piastri recovered ten places to finish seventh, while Norris took advantage of George Russell finding the walls and the assistance of his former teammate and race leader Carlos Sainz Jr. to finish second. At the Japanese Grand Prix, Norris and Piastri finished in second and third respectively, giving McLaren their first double podium finish of the season and their first since the 2021 Italian Grand Prix. This is also Piastri&#x27;s first podium finish in Formula One. Piastri won the Qatar Grand Prix sprint race, marking McLaren&#x27;s first sprint race victory in Formula One; both would recover from lower grid positions in the main race to finish second and third respectively. It was in this race that McLaren recorded the fastest pit stop in Formula One, setting a pit stop time of 1.80 seconds, 0.02 quicker than the previous record set by Red Bull Racing in the 2019 Brazilian Grand Prix. At the United States Grand Prix Norris and Piastri finished fourth and fifth respectively in the sprint, while Norris finished third in the main race, only to be promoted to second after Hamilton&#x27;s car was found to be illegal in post race inspections, with Piastri retiring on lap 10 from a damaged intercooler after contact with Ocon on lap 1. The Mexican Grand Prix saw Norris knocked out in Q1 after being unable to set a competitive lap time, due to mistakes and yellow flags. The team decided against running a fresh power unit and incurring penalties despite the low grid position and losing some engine components at the first race in Bahrain and Norris recovered to a brilliant fifth-place finish, ahead of Piastri in eighth. The Brazilian Grand Prix saw Norris take pole for the sprint race with Piastri in tenth, but only could convert that to a second and tenth-place finish respectively. Norris started the race in sixth with Piastri again in tenth. A very good start saw Norris jump to second by the first corner, where he remained for the rest of the race. Meanwhile, Piastri got caught up in a turn one incident which damaged his rear wing and diffuser, the team was able to repair his car under the red flag, but due to needing to pit immediately while the rest of the cars went around for another lap under the safety car he ended up a lap down. He eventually finished in 16th, two laps down.

The Las Vegas Grand Prix saw a double Q1 elimination for the first time since Miami earlier in the year, this being down to the team electing against using a second set of softs for their final runs. The race was not any much better; Norris suffered his first retirement of the season on lap 3 after a heavy crash going around the eleventh corner with his car bottoming out over the bumps, with the car heavy on fuel and the tyre pressures low from the lack of temperature. Norris was admitted to a hospital for precautionary checks but was released soon after. Meanwhile, Piastri fought valiantly up the grid. However, on lap 17 he collided with Hamilton, causing a puncture. Having started on hards, he boxed to hards again in hope for a late safety car. Unfortunately for him, the safety car came out 10 laps later, on lap 27 of 50; at that point, the medium tyres could not be run for that long optimally. At the restart, he was 4th and showed impressive pace against the front runners, staying out until lap 44 to build an overcut on those behind. He would then switch to the mediums and come out twelfth, where he fought up to eventually finish in tenth with the fastest lap. During the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix weekend, McLaren signed an extension to use Mercedes engines until 2030. For the race, Piastri started third with Norris in fifth after a mistake on his final run in Q3 cost him a likely front row. The cars finished the race in fifth for Norris and sixth for Piastri, rounding off the 2023 season for McLaren, seeing them take fourth place in the constructors&#x27; championship, with Norris taking sixth and Piastri taking ninth in the drivers&#x27; championship.

2024: Constructors&#x27; Champion
The success of the MCL60 provided McLaren, who finished the 2023 season in fourth, allowing for more testing time, numerous opportunities to capitalise in performance for the season. Retaining Norris and Piastri, the team hired David Sanchez from Scuderia Ferrari to lead development alongside Peter Prodromou and Neil Houldey (after a restructuring, Rob Marshall would lead development) for the 2024 car, titled the MCL38. The MCL38 marked the first design to be developed in the in-house McLaren wind tunnel. Team principal Andrea Stella set three goals for development of the MCL38, including improving aerodynamic efficiency, mechanical grip, tyre performance, and overall driveability, which had been a long-standing problem of McLaren cars; the latter issue was excaberated with the mid-season upgrades introduced to the MCL60. Stella theorised that field-leading Red Bull Racing, who had dominated the 2023 season, had built up a backlog of upgrades for the RB20.

The MCL38 was first introduced at the 2024 Bahrain Grand Prix and took its first podium with Norris at the 2024 Australian Grand Prix; by this point, the MCL38 proved to be the third-fastest car overall behind Ferrari&#x27;s SF-24. The SF-24 had superior tyre management, but the MCL38 excelled in qualifying. McLaren revealed a substantial upgrade package that would be utilised for the . The upgrade&#x27;s success would be confirmed after Norris took the lead from Verstappen and went on to win the race, marking his maiden Formula One career victory. McLaren expected the upgrades to improve the car&#x27;s performance across all conditions; the upgrade was much more successful than expected, to the point the team needed to investigate it.

The MCL38 displayed consistency following the Miami victory, with either driver being a constant presence on the podium; by the , the MCL38 had been established as the fastest car. Of these successes included a 1-2 finish at the , McLaren&#x27;s first since the 2021 Italian Grand Prix. A mid-season upgrade introduced for the further improved performance, with Norris winning by over 27 seconds ahead of second-placed Verstappen. Piastri&#x27;s triumph at the moved McLaren up to first in the World Constructors&#x27; Championship. This was the first time since that McLaren had led the WCC. McLaren secured the World Constructors&#x27; Championship in Abu Dhabi, with Lando Norris finishing in first to earn McLaren their first Constructors&#x27; Championship since 1998.

==Racing history: Other series==
===Can-Am===
McLaren&#x27;s first racing car designed and built &quot;from the rubber up&quot; by Bruce McLaren Motor Racing was the M1. The car with a small block Oldsmobile had immediate success driven by Bruce McLaren. The car was raced in North America and Europe in 1964 in various A sports and United States Road Racing Championship events. In 1965 the team car was the M1A prototype from which the production Elva M1As were based. In late 1965, the M1B (also known as Mk2) was the team car for the North American races at the end of the year. For the Can-Am Series, which started in 1966, McLaren created the M3 which Bruce and Chris Amon drove – customer cars also appeared in several races in the 1966 season. With the M3, they led two races but scored no wins, and the inaugural title was taken by John Surtees in a Lola T70. The following year, Robin Herd purpose-designed the Chevrolet V8-powered M6A, delays with the Formula One programme allowing the team to spend extra resources on developing the Can-Am car which was the first to be painted in McLaren orange. With Denny Hulme now partnering Bruce, they won five of six races and Bruce won the championship, setting the pattern for the next four years. In the 1968 season, they used a new car, the M8, to win four races; non-works McLarens took the other two, but this time Hulme was victorious overall. In the 1969 season, McLaren domination became total as they won all 11 races with the M8B; Hulme won five, and Bruce won six and the Drivers&#x27; Championship. From 1969 onwards, McLaren M12 – the customer &quot;variant&quot; of the M8 – was driven by several entrants, including a version modified by Jim Hall of Chaparral fame. McLaren&#x27;s success in Can-Am brought with it financial rewards, both prize money and money from selling cars to other teams, that helped to support the team and fund the nascent and relatively poor-paying Formula One programme.

When Bruce was killed testing the 1970 season&#x27;s M8D, he was at first replaced by Dan Gurney, then later by Peter Gethin. They won two and one races, respectively, while Hulme won six on the way to the championship. Private teams competing in the 1970 Can-Am series included older M3Bs as well as the M12 – the customer version of the team&#x27;s M8B. In the 1971 season, the team held off the challenge of 1969 world champion Jackie Stewart in the Lola T260, winning eight races, with Peter Revson taking the title. Hulme also won three Can-Am races in the 1972 season, but the McLaren M20 was defeated by the Porsche 917/10s of Mark Donohue and George Follmer. Faced by the greater resources of Porsche, McLaren decided to abandon Can-Am at the end of 1972 and focus solely on open-wheel racing. When the original Can-Am series ceased at the end of the 1974 season, McLaren was by far the most successful constructor with 43 wins.

===American open-wheel racing===

==== USAC (1970–1979) ====
McLaren first contested the United States Auto Club&#x27;s (USAC) Indianapolis 500 race in 1970, encouraged by their tyre supplier Goodyear, which wanted to break competitor Firestone&#x27;s stranglehold on the event. With the M15 car, Bruce, Chris Amon, and Denny Hulme entered, but after Amon withdrew and Hulme was severely burned on the hands in an incident in practice, Peter Revson and Carl Williams took their places in the race to retire and finish seventh, respectively. The team also contested some of the more prestigious races in the USAC championship that year, as they would do in subsequent years. For 1971 they had a new car, the M16, which driver Mark Donohue said: &quot;...obsoleted every other car on track...&quot; At that year&#x27;s Indianapolis 500, Revson qualified on pole and finished second, whilst in 1972, Donohue won in privateer Team Penske&#x27;s M16B. The 1973 event had Johnny Rutherford join the team; he qualified on pole, but finished ninth, Revson crashed out. McLaren won their first Indianapolis 500 in 1974 with Rutherford. The McLaren and Rutherford combination was second in 1975 and won again in 1976. Developments of the M16 had been used throughout this period until the new M24 car was introduced in 1977. The team did not reproduce their recent success at Indianapolis in 1977, 1978, or 1979, and although they continued to win other USAC races, by the end of 1979, they decided to end their involvement in order to concentrate on their Formula One programme.

==== IndyCar Series ====

===== 2017 and 2019 Indianapolis 500 =====
On 12 April 2017, McLaren revealed they would participate in the 2017 Indianapolis 500 with their current Formula 1 driver Fernando Alonso at the wheel of a Honda-powered McLaren-branded Andretti Autosport IndyCar.
In qualifying, Alonso secured a second-row start from fifth. During the race Alonso led 27 laps in his first Indy 500 start. With 21 laps remaining Alonso was running seventh when his Honda engine failed. He was classified 24th. After his retirement he received a standing ovation from the grandstands. Alonso was praised for his strong debut.

On 10 November 2018, McLaren announced that they would participate in the 2019 Indianapolis 500 with Fernando Alonso and using Chevrolet engines. However, after mechanical difficulties and a severe crash in practice, the team failed to qualify for the race.

===== Full season (2020–) =====

In August 2019, it was announced McLaren would contest the championship full-time in 2020, collaborating with Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports to form Arrow McLaren SP.

Zak Brown stated in an interview with Leigh Diffey that McLaren joining the IndyCar Series full time was spurred by two different objectives. The first was to market the McLaren brand and some of the McLaren Formula One team&#x27;s prominent American based sponsors in a primarily North America centric racing series, as Formula One only had three races in North America in 2021 and only one of those races was in the United States. The second was to branch McLaren&#x27;s engineering expertise into a racing series that the other Formula One teams were not involved in, as Brown thought McLaren would stand out more amongst its competitors in IndyCar than it would in other racing series. Brown also stated that McLaren chose to partner with Schmidt Peterson Motorsports because their previous efforts fielding their team with assistance from Andretti Autosport and Carlin exclusively for the Indianapolis 500 had not been successful and that the purchase of the IndyCar Series by Penske Entertainment gave McLaren more confidence in the long term viability and stability of the series compared to the previous ownership under Tony George.

In August 2021, it was announced that McLaren Racing will acquire a majority stake in the IndyCar Team. The transaction closed by the end of the year and saw McLaren Racing take a 75% share of the team. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.

For the 2022 IndyCar Series, the team&#x27;s first under McLaren ownership, both O&#x27;Ward and Rosenqvist would return to the team as full time entries. The No. 6 car would again return on a part-time basis for the GMR Grand Prix and the 2022 Indianapolis 500 driven by Juan Pablo Montoya. O&#x27;Ward and Rosenqvist would finish second and fourth in the Indianapolis 500 respectively, the team&#x27;s best finish at Indianapolis to date. The team announced they had signed Alexander Rossi to drive a third full time car from 2023 and beyond.

For 2023, the team announced they had signed Alexander Rossi to drive a third full time car. Additionally, team president Taylor Kiel left the team. His duties were parsed and redistributed between Brian Barnhart, who joins the team with Rossi from Andretti Autosport as General Manager, and Gavin Ward. In conjunction with McLaren&#x27;s 60th-anniversary celebration, the team raced a special livery for the 2023 Indianapolis 500 to celebrate McLaren&#x27;s Triple Crown achievement. The liveries of the Nos. 7, 6 and 5 were painted as the McLaren M16C/D that won the 1974 Indianapolis 500, the McLaren MP4/2 that won the 1984 Monaco Grand Prix, and the McLaren F1 GTR that won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans respectively to honour the three winning McLaren cars that forms the Triple Crown.

For 2024, Rosenqvist moved to Meyer Shank Racing and was replaced by David Malukas who moved from Dale Coyne Racing. However, after injuring his left wrist early in the year and missing out the start of the season, Malukas was released from the team and has been replaced by Théo Pourchaire.

=== Electric motorsport ===
Neom is McLaren&#x27;s title partner into their endeavour to electric motorsport as NEOM McLaren Electric Racing.

==== Extreme E ====
In June 2021, McLaren announced it would enter Extreme E in the 2022 season using existing personnel from outside the Formula One program with Tanner Foust and Emma Gilmour (becoming the first woman factory driver for McLaren) as drivers for the team. Entering as McLaren XE, the team was rebranded for their second race and is known as NEOM McLaren Extreme E Team for sponsorship reasons. The team won its first podium by finishing second in the Energy X-Prix. In the process, Gilmour became the first woman podium winner for McLaren. The team finished in fifth place in the Team&#x27;s Championship standings.

McLaren retained Foust and Gilmour for the 2023 season. The team won its second podium by finishing second in Round 4 at the Hydro X-Prix. In Round 7 at the Island X-Prix II, Gilmour suffered a fractured rib and a concussion following a crash during the first free practice session and was ruled out for the rest of the weekend. She was replaced by Extreme E&#x27;s championship reserve driver Tamara Molinaro for Rounds 7 and 8. McLaren withdrew from Round 8 due to the spare car being too heavily damaged in Round 7&#x27;s redemption race after Molinaro colided with JBXE&#x27;s Hedda Hosås on the run down to the first jump at the start of the race and rolled the car. This is the first instance of a team withdrawing from a race in Extreme E. For the final two rounds of the season, McLaren announced that Gilmour was still recovering from her injuries and was replaced by Hosås. McLaren finished in eighth place in the Team&#x27;s Championship standings. At the end of the season, McLaren announced that Foust and Gilmour will leave the team.

For the 2024 season, McLaren announced a new driver pairing of Cristina Gutiérrez and Mattias Ekström, who moved from X44 and Acciona | Sainz XE Team respectively. The team won its first podium of the season by finishing second in Round 1 at the Desert X-Prix. On 6 September 2024, a week before the scheduled Island X-Prix, Extreme E announced that the rounds in Sardinia and Phoenix were cancelled.

==== Formula E ====
In December 2020, Zak Brown announced McLaren&#x27;s interest in entering Formula E once the company&#x27;s battery supplier contract has expired. In January the following year, McLaren signed an option to enter the championship for 2022.

McLaren announced the acquisition of the Mercedes-EQ Formula E Team in May 2022 and debuted in the 2022–23 season as NEOM McLaren Formula E Team using customer Nissan&#x27;s EV powertrain. René Rast, who last raced in the 2020–21 season with Audi Sport ABT Schaeffler, and Jake Hughes were signed as drivers for the team. McLaren made its ePrix debut at the 2023 Mexico City ePrix. Hughes qualified in third and finished the race in fifth place whereas Rast qualified in fifteenth but retired from the race on lap 40 after colliding with Mahindra&#x27;s Oliver Rowland. McLaren achieved several milestones at the Diriyah ePrix. In the first round, Hughes qualified at second place (missing out on pole position by 0.060s) but finished in eighth whereas Rast qualified and finished in fifth place while scoring McLaren&#x27;s first fastest lap in Formula E. In the second round, Hughes secured McLaren&#x27;s maiden pole position in Formula E and Rast qualified in third place. Hughes finished the race in fifth and Rast finished in third place, giving McLaren their maiden podium finish in Formula E. Hughes qualified in second at the Monaco ePrix but was later promoted to pole position after Nissan&#x27;s Sacha Fenestraz was stripped of his pole position for exceeding his power limit in his final run. Hughes finished the race in fifth place whereas Rast finished in seventeenth after suffering from multiple collisions. At the London ePrix, McLaren raced the world&#x27;s first motorsport livery designed using AI. McLaren finished the season in eighth in the Teams&#x27; Championship.

In August 2023, McLaren announced that Hughes had re-signed with the team whereas Rast will leave for the 2023–24 season. Rast was replaced by Sam Bird, moving from Jaguar Racing. Bird won McLaren&#x27;s maiden electric race victory at the São Paulo ePrix. At the Monaco ePrix, Bird suffered a hand injury during the first free practice session and was replaced by reserve and development driver Taylor Barnard. Barnard qualified in 22nd and finished his debut race in 14th while becoming the youngest and the first teenage driver to start a Formula E race at 19 years and 331 days. Barnard continued to deputise for Bird at the Berlin ePrix, where he finished Race 1 in tenth to score his first Formula E points. At the end of the season, Hughes left McLaren to join Maserati MSG Racing and was replaced by Barnard, who was promoted to compete full-time in the 2024–25 season.

At the season opening São Paulo ePrix, Barnard won his maiden podium by finishing in third while also becoming the youngest podium finisher in Formula E at the age of 20 years and 189 days whereas Bird finished in fourth. Barnard followed up with another podium finish by coming in third at Race 1 of the Jeddah ePrix. At Race 2, he scored his first pole position, becoming the youngest Formula E pole sitter at the age of 20 years 259 days but failed to convert it to a win, finishing the race in second.

===Other series===
McLaren is reviewing the LMH/LMDh and GTP regulations for a possible entry into the FIA World Endurance Championship (WEC) Hypercar and IMSA WeatherTech SportsCar Championship GTP classes respectively in the future. On 19 June 2024 it was announced that Zak Brown will planning a McLaren Hypercar class entry using most likely LMDh regulations by the 2027 season.

===Customer racing===
Besides the cars raced by the works team, a variety of McLaren racing cars have also been used by customer teams. In their formative years, McLaren built Formula Two, hillclimbing, Formula 5000 and sports racing cars that were sold to customers. Lacking the capacity to build the desired numbers, Trojan was subcontracted to construct some of them. In Can-Am, Trojan built customer versions of the M6 and M8 cars and ex-works cars were sold to privateers when new models arrived; half of the field was McLarens at some races. Author Mark Hughes says, &quot;over 220&quot; McLarens were built by Trojan. In USAC competition and Formula One, too, many teams used McLarens during the late 1960s and 1970s. A 1972 M8F was rebuilt as the C8 for use in Group C racing in 1982, but had little success.

In the mid-1990s, McLaren Racing&#x27;s sister company, McLaren Cars (now McLaren Automotive) built a racing version of their F1 road car, the F1 GTR which won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans and the 1995 and 1996 BPR Global GT Series. In 2011, a GT3 version of the MP4-12C road car was developed in partnership with CRS Racing, making its competitive debut at the VLN and ADAC GT Masters in 2012. The MP4-12C was succeeded by the McLaren 650S and then the McLaren 720S for GT3 racing, while a GT4 version of the McLaren 570S was also developed as well.

In 2022, McLaren Automotive announced a new GT4 model based on the McLaren Artura, along with an unrestricted version named the Artura Trophy, which is to be used in McLaren&#x27;s planned one-make series.

In October 2023, McLaren Automotive announced its intent to participate in the 2024 24 Hours of Le Mans under the new LMGT3 category through CEO Zak Brown&#x27;s United Autosports as its customer team. McLaren Automotive also announced that it will enter the 2024 IMSA SportsCar Championship under the GT Daytona Pro (GTD Pro) category through Pfaff Motorsports as its customer team. Both United Autosports and Pfaff Motorsports will be using the McLaren 720S GT3 Evo. In the following month, McLaren Automotive confirmed its participation in the 2024 FIA World Endurance Championship season in the LMGT3 category in collaboration with United Autosports.

==Characteristics==
McLaren Racing is majority owned by the McLaren Group, having sold 15% of the team to American investors MSP Sports Capital in 2020, rising to a 33% stake in 2022. The team had previously been wholly owned by the Group since its inception.

===Ownership and management===
After Bruce McLaren died in a testing accident in 1970, Teddy Mayer took over the team. In 1981, McLaren merged with Ron Dennis&#x27; Project Four Racing; Dennis took over as team principal and shortly after organised a buyout of the original McLaren shareholders to take full control of the team. Dennis offered Mansour Ojjeh the chance to purchase 50% of the team in 1983, with McLaren becoming a joint venture with Ojjeh&#x27;s TAG Group. In 2000, after supplying engines to the team through its Mercedes subsidiary for 5 years, DaimlerChrysler (now Daimler AG) exercised an option to buy 40% of the TAG McLaren Group. Dennis and Ojjeh each retained a 30% share, and each sold half of their stake to the Mumtalakat Holding Company (the sovereign wealth fund of the Kingdom of Bahrain) in 2007. Although Daimler were reportedly considering acquiring the remaining 60% from Dennis and Ojjeh, they instead bought Brawn GP (renaming it Mercedes GP) in November 2009; their McLaren shares were sold back to Mumtalakat, Dennis, and Ojjeh in 2010.

Dennis stepped down as both CEO and team principal of McLaren in 2009, handing both roles over to Martin Whitmarsh. However, following the uncompetitive 2013 season, Dennis retook the role in January 2014; Whitmarsh formally left the team later that year. Dennis sought to take a controlling interest in the company, but his relationship with Ojjeh had deteriorated, perhaps as early as 2013. In 2016, Dennis was forced out of his role as CEO by Ojjeh. He sold his remaining shares in the company the next year.

After Dennis&#x27; 2014 return, he had abolished the position of team principal at McLaren, saying it was an &#x27;outdated&#x27; position. Éric Boullier was instead named racing director in January 2014, becoming responsible for the F1 team. After Dennis&#x27; exit, Zak Brown was chosen for the post of Group executive director, with the positions of Group CEO and Racing CEO both being left vacant. While his position was formally within the wider McLaren Group, it was understood that his role would focus only on the F1 team. The increasing awareness of the mediocrity of the car prompted a reshuffle in 2018: Brown was appointed McLaren Racing CEO in April, and when Boullier resigned in July, his position was divided between Gil de Ferran as sporting director and Andrea Stella as performance director. In May 2019, Andreas Seidl was appointed as the new team principal. In December 2022, Seidl left McLaren to join Sauber as CEO with Stella promoted to team principal.

Since 2004 the team has been based at the McLaren Technology Centre in Woking, England. Facilities there include a wind tunnel and a driving simulator which is said to be the most sophisticated in the sport. The team also created the McLaren Driver Development Programme, which currently has eight drivers signed to it as of July 2024.

===Politics===
McLaren has had an uneasy relationship with Formula One&#x27;s governing body, the FIA, and its predecessor FISA, as well as with the commercial rights holders of the sport. McLaren was involved, along with the other teams of the Formula One Constructors Association (FOCA), in a dispute with FISA and Alfa Romeo, Renault, and Ferrari over control of the sport in the early 1980s. During this dispute, known as the FISA-FOCA war, a breakaway series was threatened, FISA refused to sanction one race, and FOCA boycotted another. It was eventually resolved by a revenue-sharing deal called the Concorde Agreement.

Subsequent Concorde Agreements were signed in 1987 and 1992, but in 1996, McLaren was again one of the teams which disputed the terms of a new agreement, this time with former FOCA president Bernie Ecclestone&#x27;s Formula One Promotions and Administration organisation; a new 10-year agreement was eventually signed in 1998. Similar arguments restarted in the mid-2000s, with McLaren and their part-owner Mercedes again threatening to start a rival series, before another Concorde Agreement was signed in 2009. In 2007, McLaren were involved in an espionage controversy after their chief designer Mike Coughlan obtained confidential technical information from Ferrari. McLaren was excluded from the Constructors&#x27; Championship for one year, and the team was fined US$100 million. Although the terms of the most recent agreements, in 2013 and 2021, have been extensively negotiated on, McLaren have not taken as openly hostile a stance as in the past.

==Sponsorship, naming, and livery==
McLaren&#x27;s Formula One team was originally called Bruce McLaren Motor Racing, and for their first season ran white-and-green coloured cars, which came about as a result of a deal with the makers of the film &quot;Grand Prix&quot;. Between and , the team used an orange design, which was also applied to cars competing in the Indianapolis 500 and Can-Am series, and was used as an interim testing livery in later years.

In , the Royal Automobile Club and the FIA relaxed the rules regarding commercial sponsorship of Formula One cars, and in , the Yardley of London cosmetics company became McLaren&#x27;s first title sponsor and the team raced as Yardley Team McLaren. As a result, the livery was changed to a predominantly white one to reflect the sponsor&#x27;s colours. This changed in , when Philip Morris joined as title sponsor through their Marlboro cigarette brand, whilst one car continued to run—ostensibly by a separate team—with Yardley livery for the year. Marlboro&#x27;s red-and-white branding lasted until , during which time the team went by various names incorporating the word &quot;Marlboro&quot;, making it the then longest-running Formula One sponsorship (and still the longest title sponsorship, which has since been surpassed by Hugo Boss&#x27; sponsorship of the team, which ran from to ).

In , Philip Morris moved its Marlboro sponsorship to Ferrari and was replaced by Reemtsma&#x27;s West cigarette branding, with the team entering under the name West McLaren Mercedes. As a result, McLaren adopted a silver and black livery. By mid-2005, a European Union directive banned tobacco advertising in sport, which forced McLaren to end its association with West. In , the team competed without a title sponsor, entering under the name Team McLaren Mercedes. McLaren altered their livery to introduce red into the design, and changed the silver to chrome.

In , McLaren signed a seven-year contract with telecommunications company Vodafone, and became known as Vodafone McLaren Mercedes. The arrangement was due to last until , although the team announced at the 2013 Australian Grand Prix that their partnership would conclude at the end of the 2013 season. Despite explaining the decision to conclude the sponsorship as being a result of Vodafone&#x27;s desire to reconsider its commercial opportunities, it was later reported that the decision to run the 2012 Bahrain Grand Prix despite an ongoing civil uprising and protests against the race, and Vodafone&#x27;s inability to remove their logos from the McLaren cars during the race as being a key factor in the decision to terminate the sponsorship. Diageo-owned whisky brand Johnnie Walker, an associate sponsor since 2005, offered to take over as title sponsor at the end of 2013, but their offer of £43 million was turned down by McLaren chairman Ron Dennis, who believed it to be &quot;too small.&quot;

At the end of 2015, it was announced that McLaren was due to lose sponsor TAG Heuer to Red Bull Racing and thus McLaren brought Richard Mille to replace TAG Heuer from onwards. McLaren chief Ron Dennis later admitted to falling out with TAG Heuer CEO Jean-Claude Biver. In 2015, McLaren was without a title sponsor and was set to lose a further £20 million in sponsorship in 2016. Between 2015 and 2017, the team competed as McLaren Honda due to their engine partnership with Honda. The team has competed as McLaren F1 Team since 2018. CEO Zak Brown has said that he will not be selling the name of the team to a title sponsor to keep the team&#x27;s name intact and will be looking for major sponsors instead.

McLaren&#x27;s cars were originally named with the letter M followed by a number, sometimes also followed by a letter denoting the model. After the 1981 merger with Project Four, the cars were called &quot;MP4/x&quot;, or since 2001 &quot;MP4-x&quot;, where x is the generation of the chassis (e.g. MP4/1, MP4-22). &quot;MP4&quot; stood initially for &quot;Marlboro Project 4&quot;, so that the full title of the cars (McLaren MP4/x) reflected not only the historical name of the team, but also the names of the team&#x27;s major sponsor and its new component part. Since the change of title sponsor in 1997, &quot;MP4&quot; was said to stand for &quot;McLaren Project 4&quot;. From 2017, following Ron Dennis&#x27; departure from the team, the naming scheme of the cars changed to &quot;MCL&quot; followed by a number. Since 2017, McLaren have increasingly adopted orange colours, which the team dubs &quot;papaya&quot;, designed to recall Bruce McLaren&#x27;s liveries.

In , British American Tobacco (BAT) agreed to a global partnership with McLaren under its &quot;A Better Tomorrow&quot; campaign to promote BAT&#x27;s alternative smoking products Vuse (previously Vype) and Velo (previously Lyft). The agreement has enticed a similar controversy to the Mission Winnow sponsorship with Scuderia Ferrari due to the association with tobacco companies. In late 2019, BAT and McLaren announced the signing of an enhanced partnership deal that saw BAT become a principal partner of McLaren with increased branding position and the partnership being extended to the McLaren IndyCar Team. In April 2024, McLaren and BAT announced a partnership extension which includes the partnership being extended to the McLaren Formula E Team.

In July 2020, McLaren announced a multi-year strategic partnership with long time sponsor Gulf Oil International, which includes Gulf Oil being the preferred lubricant supplier to McLaren Automotive and a special Gulf livery for the 2021 Monaco Grand Prix.

In May 2022, OKX signed a multi-year sponsorship deal with McLaren as a primary partner. The deal was expanded in March 2023 with OKX becoming McLaren&#x27;s official primary partner where OKX will receive increased branding presence on the car. The expanded deal also includes OKX supporting the McLaren Shadow esports team.

As part of McLaren&#x27;s 60th-anniversary celebration, the team revealed a special livery for the 2023 Monaco and Spanish Grands Prix to celebrate their Triple Crown achievement. The Triple Crown livery is the amalgamation of the liveries of the three winning McLaren cars that forms the Triple Crown – the papaya of the M16C/D that won the 1974 Indianapolis 500 at the rear, the white of the MP4/2 that won the 1984 Monaco Grand Prix at the middle, and the black of the F1 GTR that won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans at the front of the MCL60. McLaren&#x27;s IndyCar Series sister team also raced their version of the Triple Crown livery for the 2023 Indianapolis 500, with the liveries of the Nos. 7, 6 and 5 painted as the M16C/D, MP4/2 and F1 GTR respectively. For the 2023 British Grand Prix, in conjunction with primary partner Google Chrome, McLaren used a chrome livery in a throwback to the fan favourite livery from 2006 to 2014. The chrome livery was more commonly associated with the Vodafone McLaren years. McLaren and OKX collaborated again for the 2023 Singapore and Japanese Grands Prix to race a predominantly black car with streaks of the standard papaya orange called &quot;Stealth Mode&quot;. McLaren and Vuse collaborated for a 3rd time for the 2023 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix (the previous 2 collaborations being in 2021 and 2022) to race a car with a similar livery to the main livery of 2023, but featuring more papaya on the front wing, along with an updated sidepod which features abstract shapes, influenced by rolling sand dunes and ocean waves.

The MCL39 saw minimal changes from the previous year&#x27;s car, due to a tradition where the team would run the same design the season after a championship win, and that the team would not change the livery substantially during a period of sustained success.

== Race cars ==
As a constructor, McLaren has entered numerous race cars designed in-house into racing events, most prominently Formula One. As of 2024, the only exceptions to this are the Arrow McLaren IndyCar team, who run Dallara-built chassis (initially the IR-12, which was supplemented by the IR-18), McLaren&#x27;s Extreme E team, who run the Spark Odyssey 21, and their Formula E operation, who run Formula E Gen3 with Nissan&#x27;s powertrain.

Currently, McLaren builds only Formula One cars; the most successful McLaren Formula One car is the McLaren MP4/4 of , also one of the most successful Formula One cars of all time. The MP4/4, driven by teammates Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost, took victories and pole positions in all but one race.
==Racing results==
===Formula One results===

* Constructors&#x27; Championships winning percentage: 
* Drivers&#x27; Championships winning percentage: 
* Winning percentage: 
====Drivers&#x27; champions====
Seven drivers have won a total of twelve Drivers&#x27; Championships with McLaren:
* Emerson Fittipaldi ()
* James Hunt ()
* Niki Lauda ()
* Alain Prost (, , )
* Ayrton Senna (, , )
* Mika Häkkinen (, )
* Lewis Hamilton ().

===Esports===

====Esports Drivers&#x27; Champions====

The following drivers won the Formula One Esports Drivers&#x27; Championship for McLaren Shadows:
* Lucas Blakeley (2022).

==== Complete F1 Esports Series results ====
(key) (results in bold indicate pole position; results in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)

* Season still in progress

===American open-wheel racing results===

(key)

# In conjunction with Andretti Autosport.
# In conjunction with Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports.
==== Race wins ====


=== Extreme E results ===

==== Racing overview ====
==== Racing summary ====
==== Complete Extreme E results ====
(Races in bold indicate best qualifiers; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest super sector)
=== Formula E results ===

;Notes
* – Season still in progress.

== See also ==

== References ==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* All Formula One World Championship results are taken from &quot;Formula1.com&quot;. Formula One Administration.
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="0" end="22" title="McLaren" label="McLaren Racing Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="40" end="52" title="auto racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802081" start="71" end="96" title="McLaren Technology Centre" label="McLaren Technology Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q646225" start="100" end="106" title="Woking" label="Woking"/>
<link wikidata="Q173146" start="157" end="170" title="McLaren Group" label="McLaren Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="234" end="245" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002993" start="254" end="265" title="List of Formula One constructors" label="constructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="351" end="358" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172863" start="381" end="408" title="Formula One Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship" label="Drivers&amp;#x27; Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q177410" start="419" end="451" title="Formula One constructors&amp;#x27; championship" label="Constructors&amp;#x27; Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614051" start="483" end="509" title="American open wheel racing" label="American open wheel racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032055" start="572" end="603" title="Can-Am" label="Canadian-American Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="613" end="630" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="723" end="749" title="Triple Crown of Motorsport#Teams and manufacturers" label="Triple Crown of Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="763" end="779" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="781" end="800" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="806" end="823" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173081" start="860" end="873" title="Bruce McLaren" label="Bruce McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901" start="916" end="939" title="1968 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1968 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171732" start="1113" end="1125" title="Mark Donohue" label="Mark Donohue"/>
<link wikidata="Q898755" start="1129" end="1133" title="1972 Indianapolis 500" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q980888" start="1138" end="1155" title="Johnny Rutherford" label="Johnny Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q898507" start="1159" end="1163" title="1974 Indianapolis 500" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q280441" start="1168" end="1172" title="1976 Indianapolis 500" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q173547" start="1230" end="1241" title="Teddy Mayer" label="Teddy Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172849" start="1338" end="1356" title="Emerson Fittipaldi" label="Emerson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="1361" end="1371" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075" start="1511" end="1519" title="Marlboro (cigarette)" label="Marlboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q173208" start="1567" end="1577" title="Ron Dennis" label="Ron Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249093" start="1584" end="1603" title="Project Four Racing" label="Project Four Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q63929540" start="1807" end="1814" title="Porsche in motorsport" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q65961126" start="1819" end="1824" title="Honda in Formula One" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="1834" end="1844" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="1846" end="1857" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="1863" end="1875" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="2162" end="2170" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q173358" start="2427" end="2440" title="Mercedes AMG High Performance Powertrains" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q921466" start="2450" end="2454" title="West (cigarette)" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q173380" start="2497" end="2509" title="Adrian Newey" label="Adrian Newey"/>
<link wikidata="Q172842" start="2557" end="2570" title="Mika Häkkinen" label="Mika Häkkinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="2638" end="2652" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q173376" start="2796" end="2812" title="Martin Whitmarsh" label="Martin Whitmarsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q65961126" start="2954" end="2959" title="Honda in Formula One" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712769" start="3081" end="3107" title="2015 Australian Grand Prix" label="2015 Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="3187" end="3194" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q113628886" start="3383" end="3387" title="2024 Formula One World Championship" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q112920339" start="3508" end="3514" title="List of Formula One constructor records" label="record"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="3604" end="3620" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128279" start="3624" end="3628" title="2017 Indianapolis 500" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q503406" start="3644" end="3662" title="Andretti Autosport" label="Andretti Autosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="3670" end="3685" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933327" start="3698" end="3702" title="2019 Indianapolis 500" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073348" start="3848" end="3852" title="2020 IndyCar Series" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="3869" end="3883" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646582" start="3916" end="3932" title="Arrow McLaren SP" label="Arrow McLaren SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418220" start="4068" end="4083" title="off-road racing" label="off-road racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61999636" start="4091" end="4100" title="Extreme E" label="Extreme E"/>
<link wikidata="Q108402684" start="4104" end="4108" title="2022 Extreme E Championship" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q319565" start="4126" end="4135" title="Formula E" label="Formula E"/>
<link wikidata="Q106452471" start="4143" end="4157" title="2022–23 Formula E World Championship" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q173081" start="4236" end="4249" title="Bruce McLaren" label="Bruce McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384416" start="4263" end="4268" title="factory-backed" label="works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="4292" end="4303" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="4309" end="4315" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="4343" end="4354" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grands Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="4424" end="4435" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q250631" start="4437" end="4450" title="Tasman Series" label="Tasman Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q172268" start="4733" end="4744" title="Timmy Mayer" label="Timmy Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106242" start="4791" end="4802" title="1964 Tasman Series" label="1964 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974003" start="4863" end="4879" title="Longford Circuit" label="Longford Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="4883" end="4891" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5218" end="5258" title="List of Formula One constructors#Team&amp;#x27;s nationality" label="competing under a British racing licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545812" start="5273" end="5280" title="Feltham" label="Feltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846916" start="5316" end="5325" title="Colnbrook" label="Colnbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q646225" start="5382" end="5388" title="Woking" label="Woking"/>
<link wikidata="Q919991" start="5457" end="5477" title="British racing green" label="British racing green"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5546" end="5565" title="List of international auto racing colors#Major competitors" label="national principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002954" start="5582" end="5597" title="Formula One car" label="Formula One car"/>
<link wikidata="Q173461" start="5603" end="5614" title="McLaren M2B" label="McLaren M2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q280105" start="5633" end="5655" title="1966 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1966 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q262820" start="5736" end="5754" title="John Frankenheimer" label="John Frankenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534298" start="5773" end="5783" title="Grand Prix (1966 film)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="5841" end="5857" title="sports car racing" label="sports car races"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748356" start="5919" end="5937" title="1965 Tasman Series" label="1965 Tasman Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112" start="5943" end="5952" title="Phil Hill" label="Phil Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q280105" start="6231" end="6247" title="1966 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1966 Monaco race"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="6288" end="6295" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q173461" start="6382" end="6385" title="McLaren M2B" label="M2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q173850" start="6398" end="6408" title="Robin Herd" label="Robin Herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="6493" end="6497" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="6505" end="6521" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q173770" start="6535" end="6546" title="Scuderia Serenissima" label="Serenissima"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="6547" end="6549" title="V8 engine" label="V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q306485" start="6611" end="6618" title="1966 British Grand Prix" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q173012" start="6690" end="6711" title="British Racing Motors" label="British Racing Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q245272" start="6718" end="6728" title="V12 engine" label="V12 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="6804" end="6815" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067746" start="6831" end="6834" title="McLaren M4B" label="M4B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282899" start="6926" end="6929" title="McLaren M5A" label="M5A"/>
<link wikidata="Q371397" start="7012" end="7018" title="1964 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166" start="7198" end="7209" title="Denny Hulme" label="Denny Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032055" start="7249" end="7255" title="Can-Am" label="Can-Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q173749" start="7278" end="7281" title="McLaren M7A" label="M7A"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="7341" end="7349" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q195996" start="7387" end="7390" title="Cosworth DFV" label="DFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q174080" start="7513" end="7530" title="Race of Champions (Brands Hatch)" label="Race of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q172880" start="7538" end="7550" title="Brands Hatch" label="Brands Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877458" start="7577" end="7597" title="1968 BRDC International Trophy" label="International Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="7601" end="7612" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901" start="7707" end="7725" title="1968 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172028" start="7746" end="7753" title="1968 Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65303" start="7758" end="7766" title="1968 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171778" start="8077" end="8095" title="1969 Mexican Grand Prix" label="Mexican Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="8134" end="8150" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474965" start="8158" end="8161" title="McLaren M9A" label="M9A"/>
<link wikidata="Q165814" start="8210" end="8220" title="Derek Bell (auto racer)" label="Derek Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171868" start="8228" end="8246" title="1969 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q953716" start="8497" end="8505" title="Goodwood Circuit" label="Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q173547" start="8561" end="8572" title="Teddy Mayer" label="Teddy Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="8635" end="8645" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q171511" start="8650" end="8662" title="Peter Gethin" label="Peter Gethin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171697" start="8898" end="8910" title="1970 South African Grand Prix" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171720" start="9011" end="9024" title="Jackie Oliver" label="Jackie Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q171813" start="9151" end="9163" title="1972 South African Grand Prix" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171535" start="9175" end="9187" title="Peter Revson" label="Peter Revson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="9292" end="9306" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q171915" start="9336" end="9346" title="1972 United States Grand Prix" label="final race"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="9350" end="9362" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q173250" start="9427" end="9444" title="Andrea de Adamich" label="Andrea de Adamich"/>
<link wikidata="Q173349" start="9449" end="9460" title="Nanni Galli" label="Nanni Galli"/>
<link wikidata="Q65960697" start="9483" end="9493" title="Alfa Romeo in Formula One" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172468" start="9508" end="9519" title="McLaren M23" label="McLaren M23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662324" start="9656" end="9659" title="McLaren M19A" label="M19"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="9706" end="9711" title="Team Lotus" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172529" start="9719" end="9721" title="Lotus 72" label="72"/>
<link wikidata="Q171690" start="9779" end="9785" title="1973 Swedish Grand Prix" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q171862" start="9844" end="9851" title="1973 British Grand Prix" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q65387" start="9856" end="9862" title="1973 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q172849" start="9869" end="9887" title="Emerson Fittipaldi" label="Emerson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12466" start="10000" end="10011" title="1974 Argentine Grand Prix" label="Argentinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54396" start="10052" end="10058" title="1974 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q20907" start="10060" end="10067" title="1974 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65403" start="10072" end="10078" title="1974 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q172019" start="10211" end="10235" title="1974 United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173284" start="10286" end="10300" title="Clay Regazzoni" label="Clay Regazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q173147" start="10352" end="10365" title="Mike Hailwood" label="Mike Hailwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="10528" end="10538" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q57459" start="10565" end="10576" title="Jochen Mass" label="Jochen Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q171788" start="10601" end="10606" title="1974 Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q171665" start="10672" end="10693" title="Fittipaldi Automotive" label="Fittipaldi/Copersucar"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="10768" end="10778" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q171796" start="11015" end="11020" title="1976 Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q171904" start="11075" end="11081" title="1976 French Grand Prix" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q173129" start="11090" end="11107" title="1976 German Grand Prix" label="German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171614" start="11298" end="11303" title="1976 Japanese Grand Prix" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576152" start="11559" end="11562" title="McLaren M26" label="M26"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="11604" end="11621" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q172150" start="11692" end="11710" title="1977 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="11939" end="11953" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q173269" start="11981" end="11983" title="Lotus 78" label="78"/>
<link wikidata="Q173570" start="11988" end="11990" title="Lotus 79" label="79"/>
<link wikidata="Q11300146" start="11991" end="12004" title="ground effect in cars" label="ground-effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q173020" start="12055" end="12069" title="Patrick Tambay" label="Patrick Tambay"/>
<link wikidata="Q173280" start="12196" end="12211" title="Ronnie Peterson" label="Ronnie Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q171681" start="12260" end="12278" title="1978 Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171422" start="12280" end="12291" title="John Watson (racing driver)" label="John Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379025" start="12357" end="12360" title="McLaren M28" label="M28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561078" start="12467" end="12470" title="McLaren M29" label="M29"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="12647" end="12658" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="12794" end="12807" title="Altria Group" label="Philip Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q132128949" start="12828" end="12838" title="John Hogan (motorsport executive)" label="John Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173208" start="12884" end="12894" title="Ron Dennis" label="Ron Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173549" start="12986" end="12998" title="John Barnard" label="John Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="13020" end="13032" title="carbon-fibre" label="carbon-fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q796574" start="13051" end="13057" title="BMW M1" label="BMW M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q447725" start="13203" end="13218" title="aluminium alloy" label="aluminium alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303685" start="13329" end="13340" title="McLaren MP4/1" label="McLaren MP4"/>
<link wikidata="Q173153" start="13388" end="13405" title="Andrea de Cesaris" label="Andrea de Cesaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q171902" start="13434" end="13452" title="1981 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="13838" end="13845" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q173103" start="13859" end="13866" title="Brabham" label="Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="13888" end="13900" title="Turbocharger" label="turbocharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q795410" start="13936" end="13962" title="naturally aspirated engine" label="naturally aspirated engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="14082" end="14090" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q173224" start="14098" end="14127" title="Techniques d&amp;#x27;Avant Garde" label="Techniques d&amp;#x27;Avant Garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q63929540" start="14142" end="14149" title="Porsche in motorsport" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q173646" start="14241" end="14254" title="Mansour Ojjeh" label="Mansour Ojjeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q171814" start="14545" end="14552" title="1982 Detroit Grand Prix" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="14671" end="14675" title="Fédération Internationale du Sport Automobile" label="FISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q171550" start="14696" end="14717" title="1982 San Marino Grand Prix" label="San Marino Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q599379" start="14827" end="14837" title="1983 United States Grand Prix West" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="15314" end="15322" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q65961126" start="15354" end="15359" title="Honda in Formula One" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="15379" end="15392" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="15397" end="15410" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q171381" start="15470" end="15482" title="Keke Rosberg" label="Keke Rosberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q515820" start="15585" end="15595" title="1986 San Marino Grand Prix" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q418296" start="15597" end="15603" title="1986 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q15585" start="15609" end="15616" title="1986 Austrian Grand Prix" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039" start="15763" end="15784" title="1986 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125" start="15970" end="15982" title="Jack Brabham" label="Jack Brabham"/>
<link wikidata="Q173539" start="16046" end="16059" title="Steve Nichols" label="Steve Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q171474" start="16124" end="16140" title="Stefan Johansson" label="Stefan Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q666220" start="16165" end="16170" title="McLaren MP4/3" label="MP4/3"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="16312" end="16324" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172621" start="16494" end="16499" title="McLaren MP4/4" label="MP4/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q171657" start="16599" end="16604" title="1988 Italian Grand Prix" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q171479" start="16672" end="16692" title="Jean-Louis Schlesser" label="Jean-Louis Schlesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q514488" start="16702" end="16723" title="1988 Portuguese Grand Prix" label="Portuguese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q305647" start="17053" end="17058" title="1988 Japanese Grand Prix" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q761768" start="17143" end="17153" title="V10 engine" label="V10 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q172532" start="17197" end="17202" title="McLaren MP4/5" label="MP4/5"/>
<link wikidata="Q515936" start="17295" end="17316" title="1989 San Marino Grand Prix" label="San Marino Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q305652" start="17638" end="17657" title="1989 Japanese Grand Prix" label="Japanese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171329" start="17864" end="17872" title="Benetton Formula" label="Benetton"/>
<link wikidata="Q78502" start="17974" end="17988" title="Gerhard Berger" label="Gerhard Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q305665" start="18096" end="18125" title="1990 Japanese Grand Prix" label="the penultimate race in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q53718" start="18472" end="18477" title="Williams FW14B" label="FW14B"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="18831" end="18835" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q419393" start="19020" end="19026" title="1993 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q171576" start="19044" end="19063" title="1993 European Grand Prix" label="European Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677492" start="19133" end="19137" title="1991 CART PPG Indy Car World Series" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q840399" start="19138" end="19142" title="Championship Auto Racing Teams" label="CART"/>
<link wikidata="Q171519" start="19152" end="19168" title="Michael Andretti" label="Michael Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q172842" start="19249" end="19262" title="Mika Häkkinen" label="Mika Häkkinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="19484" end="19498" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659370" start="19524" end="19545" title="A Season With McLaren" label="A Season With McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q35886" start="19571" end="19582" title="Lamborghini" label="Lamborghini"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="19675" end="19683" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="19719" end="19726" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306957" start="19760" end="19765" title="McLaren MP4/9" label="MP4/9"/>
<link wikidata="Q172854" start="19793" end="19807" title="Martin Brundle" label="Martin Brundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="20033" end="20046" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q173259" start="20056" end="20061" title="Ilmor" label="Ilmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055791" start="20227" end="20240" title="Peugeot Sport" label="Peugeot Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q173358" start="20291" end="20329" title="Mercedes-AMG High Performance Powertrains" label="Mercedes-Benz High Performance Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q64506339" start="20419" end="20425" title="Sauber" label="Sauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q173259" start="20517" end="20534" title="Ilmor Engineering" label="Ilmor Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="20631" end="20641" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="20646" end="20659" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q172689" start="20798" end="20804" title="McLaren MP4/10" label="MP4/10"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501" start="20877" end="20890" title="Nigel Mansell" label="Nigel Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171553" start="20972" end="20985" title="Mark Blundell" label="Mark Blundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172832" start="21053" end="21068" title="David Coulthard" label="David Coulthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055" start="21204" end="21225" title="1997 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173380" start="21327" end="21339" title="Adrian Newey" label="Adrian Newey"/>
<link wikidata="Q307034" start="21504" end="21511" title="1997 British Grand Prix" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q363568" start="21516" end="21526" title="1997 Luxembourg Grand Prix" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553595" start="22336" end="22359" title="McLaren MP4/12" label="&amp;quot;brake steer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q55664453" start="22436" end="22446" title="understeer" label="understeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54420" start="22497" end="22503" title="1998 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q363610" start="22658" end="22668" title="1998 Luxembourg Grand Prix" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q305754" start="22673" end="22681" title="1998 Japanese Grand Prix" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q69791" start="22843" end="22859" title="1999 Formula One World Championship" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="23215" end="23224" title="beryllium" label="beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="23251" end="23262" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q11192" start="23469" end="23483" title="Kimi Räikkönen" label="Kimi Räikkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419556" start="23532" end="23538" title="2002 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451900" start="23755" end="23761" title="McLaren MP4-18" label="MP4-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q173524" start="23910" end="23916" title="McLaren MP4-17" label="MP4-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316487" start="24127" end="24133" title="McLaren MP4-19" label="MP4-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982" start="24388" end="24406" title="2004 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173663" start="24526" end="24541" title="Red Bull Racing" label="Red Bull Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172744" start="24584" end="24602" title="Juan Pablo Montoya" label="Juan Pablo Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316531" start="24873" end="24879" title="McLaren MP4-20" label="MP4-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="25068" end="25083" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="25329" end="25335" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q596935" start="25346" end="25370" title="2006 United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q82924" start="25430" end="25446" title="Pedro de la Rosa" label="Pedro de la Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613294" start="25555" end="25569" title="Steve Matchett" label="Steve Matchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802081" start="25787" end="25812" title="McLaren Technology Centre" label="McLaren Technology Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q173055" start="25850" end="25856" title="Jaguar Racing" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="26151" end="26165" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q611403" start="26389" end="26409" title="2007 Hungarian Grand Prix" label="Hungarian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="26815" end="26818" title="FIA" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q173220" start="26891" end="26932" title="2007 Formula One espionage controversy" label="so-called &amp;quot;Spygate&amp;quot; controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54430" start="27341" end="27347" title="2007 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82891" start="27555" end="27572" title="Heikki Kovalainen" label="Heikki Kovalainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82652" start="27681" end="27693" title="Felipe Massa" label="Felipe Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20997" start="27788" end="27806" title="2008 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q54431" start="27955" end="27975" title="2008 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="final race in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q179379" start="28244" end="28251" title="2008 Hungarian Grand Prix" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q173376" start="28471" end="28487" title="Martin Whitmarsh" label="Martin Whitmarsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q173505" start="28521" end="28527" title="McLaren MP4-24" label="MP4-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070" start="28630" end="28640" title="2009 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171361" start="28645" end="28654" title="2009 Malaysian Grand Prix" label="Malaysian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172010" start="28737" end="28746" title="2009 Hungarian Grand Prix" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172927" start="28751" end="28760" title="2009 Singapore Grand Prix" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q69934" start="28829" end="28840" title="2010 Formula One World Championship" label="2010 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q17596" start="28937" end="28942" title="Brawn GP" label="Brawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10510" start="29337" end="29350" title="Jenson Button" label="Jenson Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071" start="29419" end="29428" title="2010 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172950" start="29433" end="29438" title="2010 Chinese Grand Prix" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q172910" start="29469" end="29475" title="2010 Turkish Grand Prix" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q66081" start="29477" end="29483" title="2010 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003" start="29489" end="29496" title="2010 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q173530" start="29583" end="29589" title="McLaren MP4-25" label="MP4-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q171875" start="29626" end="29629" title="Red Bull RB6" label="RB6"/>
<link wikidata="Q220865" start="29718" end="29723" title="2011 Chinese Grand Prix" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q297429" start="29725" end="29732" title="2011 German Grand Prix" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q11915" start="29738" end="29747" title="2011 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66103" start="29786" end="29792" title="2011 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q665909" start="29794" end="29801" title="2011 Hungarian Grand Prix" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q305879" start="29807" end="29812" title="2011 Japanese Grand Prix" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42311" start="29928" end="29944" title="Sebastian Vettel" label="Sebastian Vettel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15073" start="30289" end="30298" title="2012 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66118" start="30406" end="30412" title="2012 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q173166" start="31012" end="31021" title="2012 Singapore Grand Prix" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11916" start="31026" end="31035" title="2012 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82805" start="31205" end="31217" title="Sergio Pérez" label="Sergio Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954812" start="31278" end="31286" title="Mercedes-Benz in Formula One" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754523" start="31328" end="31334" title="McLaren MP4-28" label="MP4-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740212" start="31510" end="31525" title="Kevin Magnussen" label="Kevin Magnussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637285" start="31753" end="31759" title="McLaren MP4-29" label="MP4-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298266" start="31863" end="31872" title="2014 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82816" start="31887" end="31903" title="Daniel Ricciardo" label="Daniel Ricciardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185864" start="32031" end="32037" title="2014 Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16787435" start="32039" end="32046" title="2014 British Grand Prix" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15665357" start="32052" end="32058" title="2014 Russian Grand Prix" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171404" start="32751" end="32781" title="Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya" label="Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740212" start="32842" end="32857" title="Kevin Magnussen" label="Kevin Magnussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787992" start="33307" end="33313" title="2015 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787928" start="33383" end="33401" title="2015 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787927" start="33407" end="33427" title="2015 Hungarian Grand Prix" label="Hungarian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19711077" start="33639" end="33657" title="2015 Russian Grand Prix" label="Russian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19760259" start="33676" end="33700" title="2015 United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q21674869" start="34154" end="34175" title="2016 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="34185" end="34200" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="34231" end="34245" title="collapsed lung" label="collapsed lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q18915" start="34267" end="34284" title="Esteban Gutiérrez" label="Esteban Gutiérrez"/>
<link wikidata="Q22681246" start="34426" end="34444" title="2016 Bahrain Grand Prix" label="Bahrain Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344577" start="34481" end="34498" title="Stoffel Vandoorne" label="Stoffel Vandoorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045058" start="34671" end="34689" title="2016 Russian Grand Prix" label="Russian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045176" start="34770" end="34787" title="2016 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q75820" start="34873" end="34885" title="Nico Rosberg" label="Nico Rosberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045194" start="34976" end="34995" title="2016 Austrian Grand Prix" label="Austrian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045154" start="35161" end="35179" title="2016 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045137" start="35374" end="35392" title="2016 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045142" start="35401" end="35425" title="2016 United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q10510" start="35844" end="35857" title="Jenson Button" label="Jenson Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007193" start="36098" end="36110" title="Lando Norris" label="Lando Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="36145" end="36151" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q28747719" start="36177" end="36199" title="2017 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2017 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128279" start="36231" end="36247" title="2017 Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q29063392" start="36433" end="36458" title="2017 Singapore Grand Prix" label="2017 Singapore Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172978" start="36611" end="36621" title="Mecachrome" label="Mecachrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="36632" end="36639" title="Renault F1" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051084" start="36986" end="36997" title="2018 Formula One World Championship" label="2018 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q45047629" start="37129" end="37150" title="2018 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045176" start="37213" end="37235" title="2016 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2016 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q544856" start="37655" end="37671" title="Carlos Sainz Jr." label="Carlos Sainz Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1344577" start="37767" end="37784" title="Stoffel Vandoorne" label="Stoffel Vandoorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007193" start="37842" end="37854" title="Lando Norris" label="Lando Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="38147" end="38155" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q138933" start="38241" end="38252" title="Force India" label="Force India"/>
<link wikidata="Q41173535" start="38398" end="38409" title="2019 Formula One World Championship" label="2019 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q61366499" start="38564" end="38584" title="2019 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="Brazilian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298266" start="38640" end="38666" title="2014 Australian Grand Prix" label="2014 Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171566" start="39177" end="39184" title="Red Bull Ring" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q67123914" start="39193" end="39212" title="2020 Austrian Grand Prix" label="Austrian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q67123918" start="39333" end="39351" title="2020 Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173358" start="39643" end="39651" title="Mercedes AMG High Performance Powertrains" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="39685" end="39692" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q82816" start="39915" end="39931" title="Daniel Ricciardo" label="Daniel Ricciardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007193" start="39962" end="39974" title="Lando Norris" label="Lando Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q72635834" start="39983" end="40018" title="2021 Formula One World Championship" label="2021 Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q544856" start="40060" end="40072" title="Carlos Sainz Jr." label="Carlos Sainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="40087" end="40094" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q105758284" start="40189" end="40194" title="2021 Emilia Romagna Grand Prix" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q99391310" start="40196" end="40202" title="2021 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q106317378" start="40207" end="40214" title="2021 Austrian Grand Prix" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q106317431" start="40248" end="40271" title="2021 Italian Grand Prix" label="2021 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q48311119" start="40314" end="40336" title="2018 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2018 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q54437" start="40377" end="40402" title="2012 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="2012 Brazilian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q66081" start="40507" end="40531" title="2010 Canadian Grand Prix" label="2010 Canadian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q106317432" start="40657" end="40680" title="2021 Russian Grand Prix" label="2021 Russian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="41088" end="41096" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q110070564" start="41329" end="41336" title="2022 Bahrain Grand Prix" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q98642744" start="41397" end="41420" title="2020 Turkish Grand Prix" label="2020 Turkish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q111318277" start="41493" end="41518" title="2022 Emilia Romagna Grand Prix" label="Emilia Romagna Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q111333196" start="41578" end="41598" title="2022 São Paulo Grand Prix" label="São Paulo Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16300222" start="41754" end="41758" title="Haas F1 Team" label="Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28741262" start="42112" end="42125" title="Oscar Piastri" label="Oscar Piastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q98930155" start="42195" end="42209" title="Alpine F1 Team" label="Alpine F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q173233" start="42255" end="42285" title="FIA Contract Recognition Board" label="FIA Contract Recognition Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q109323149" start="42389" end="42400" title="2023 Formula One World Championship" label="2023 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q116145639" start="42499" end="42504" title="McLaren MCL60" label="MCL60"/>
<link wikidata="Q101206065" start="42633" end="42657" title="Saudi Arabian Grand Prix" label="Saudi Arabian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479187" start="43327" end="43348" title="2023 Australian Grand Prix" label="Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479603" start="43466" end="43484" title="2023 Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spanish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479825" start="43876" end="43895" title="2023 Austrian Grand Prix" label="Austrian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479862" start="43930" end="43948" title="2023 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272755" start="44087" end="44097" title="Anti-stall (engine)" label="anti-stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479862" start="44496" end="44514" title="2023 British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473650" start="45748" end="45768" title="2023 Hungarian Grand Prix" label="Hungarian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115480016" start="45927" end="45945" title="2023 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115480340" start="46385" end="46405" title="2023 Singapore Grand Prix" label="Singapore Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115480409" start="46798" end="46817" title="2023 Japanese Grand Prix" label="Japanese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479531" start="47074" end="47090" title="2023 Qatar Grand Prix" label="Qatar Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q61366499" start="47460" end="47485" title="2019 Brazilian Grand Prix" label="2019 Brazilian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9209" start="47494" end="47518" title="United States Grand Prix" label="United States Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8109" start="47841" end="47859" title="Mexican Grand Prix" label="Mexican Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961" start="48230" end="48250" title="Brazilian Grand Prix" label="Brazilian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q111443584" start="48907" end="48927" title="Las Vegas Grand Prix" label="Las Vegas Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479148" start="50096" end="50116" title="2023 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix" label="Abu Dhabi Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q110317087" start="50845" end="50858" title="David Sanchez (engineer)" label="David Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="50864" end="50880" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280576" start="50911" end="50926" title="Peter Prodromou" label="Peter Prodromou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50931" end="50943" title="Neil Houldey" label="Neil Houldey"/>
<link wikidata="Q97452547" start="50968" end="50980" title="Rob Marshall (motorsport)" label="Rob Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q124314388" start="51034" end="51039" title="McLaren MCL38" label="MCL38"/>
<link wikidata="Q173663" start="51487" end="51502" title="Red Bull Racing" label="Red Bull Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q124539955" start="51582" end="51586" title="Red Bull Racing RB20" label="RB20"/>
<link wikidata="Q115495949" start="51627" end="51650" title="2024 Bahrain Grand Prix" label="2024 Bahrain Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115912471" start="51696" end="51722" title="2024 Australian Grand Prix" label="2024 Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q124518862" start="51814" end="51819" title="Ferrari SF-24" label="SF-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q106317431" start="52598" end="52621" title="2021 Italian Grand Prix" label="2021 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q177410" start="52830" end="52867" title="List of Formula One World Constructors&amp;#x27; Champions" label="World Constructors&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171469" start="53779" end="53789" title="Chris Amon" label="Chris Amon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572264" start="53850" end="53861" title="1966 Can-Am season" label="1966 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="54032" end="54041" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853385" start="54053" end="54056" title="McLaren M6A" label="M6A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573084" start="54371" end="54382" title="1968 Can-Am season" label="1968 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573515" start="54522" end="54533" title="1969 Can-Am season" label="1969 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573956" start="55113" end="55124" title="1970 Can-Am season" label="1970 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="55165" end="55175" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q171511" start="55191" end="55203" title="Peter Gethin" label="Peter Gethin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574461" start="55442" end="55453" title="1971 Can-Am season" label="1971 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188" start="55510" end="55524" title="Jackie Stewart" label="Jackie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q172857" start="55532" end="55536" title="Lola Cars" label="Lola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574976" start="55641" end="55652" title="1972 Can-Am season" label="1972 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802064" start="55662" end="55673" title="McLaren M20" label="McLaren M20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514835" start="55694" end="55705" title="Porsche 917" label="Porsche 917"/>
<link wikidata="Q171732" start="55713" end="55725" title="Mark Donohue" label="Mark Donohue"/>
<link wikidata="Q172096" start="55730" end="55744" title="George Follmer" label="George Follmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399907" start="55862" end="55879" title="open wheel car" label="open-wheel racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576040" start="55938" end="55949" title="1974 Can-Am season" label="1974 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336046" start="56106" end="56129" title="United States Auto Club" label="United States Auto Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q898824" start="56169" end="56173" title="1970 Indianapolis 500" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="56209" end="56217" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q420837" start="56252" end="56261" title="Firestone Tire and Rubber Company" label="Firestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040969" start="56470" end="56483" title="Carl Williams (driver)" label="Carl Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q898755" start="56908" end="56912" title="1972 Indianapolis 500" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301433" start="56929" end="56938" title="Privateer (motorsport)" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174144" start="56939" end="56950" title="Team Penske" label="Team Penske"/>
<link wikidata="Q898751" start="56968" end="56972" title="1973 Indianapolis 500" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q980888" start="56983" end="57000" title="Johnny Rutherford" label="Johnny Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q898507" start="57122" end="57126" title="1974 Indianapolis 500" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q898760" start="57197" end="57201" title="1975 Indianapolis 500" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q280441" start="57219" end="57223" title="1976 Indianapolis 500" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q739667" start="57399" end="57403" title="1977 Indianapolis 500" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q572793" start="57405" end="57409" title="1978 Indianapolis 500" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q934996" start="57414" end="57418" title="1979 Indianapolis 500" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128279" start="57722" end="57743" title="2017 Indianapolis 500" label="2017 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q503406" start="57844" end="57862" title="Andretti Autosport" label="Andretti Autosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933327" start="58291" end="58312" title="2019 Indianapolis 500" label="2019 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="58344" end="58353" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073348" start="58594" end="58598" title="2020 IndyCar Series" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646582" start="58619" end="58653" title="Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports" label="Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207168" start="58719" end="58731" title="Leigh Diffey" label="Leigh Diffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q72635834" start="59055" end="59059" title="2021 Formula One World Championship" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q172155" start="59663" end="59683" title="Roger Penske" label="Penske Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q715991" start="59809" end="59820" title="Tony George" label="Tony George"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548504" start="60083" end="60102" title="2022 IndyCar Series" label="2022 IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534956" start="60292" end="60306" title="GMR Grand Prix" label="GMR Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q108770495" start="60315" end="60336" title="2022 Indianapolis 500" label="2022 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q559962" start="60551" end="60566" title="Alexander Rossi" label="Alexander Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113645062" start="60625" end="60629" title="2023 IndyCar Series" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q559962" start="60666" end="60681" title="Alexander Rossi" label="Alexander Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963058" start="60819" end="60833" title="Brian Barnhart" label="Brian Barnhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528302" start="60913" end="60923" title="Gavin Ward (engineer)" label="Gavin Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q117149890" start="61030" end="61051" title="2023 Indianapolis 500" label="2023 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533221" start="61080" end="61092" title="Triple Crown of Motorsport" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q107395008" start="61162" end="61176" title="McLaren M16" label="McLaren M16C/D"/>
<link wikidata="Q898507" start="61190" end="61211" title="1974 Indianapolis 500" label="1974 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q152693" start="61217" end="61230" title="McLaren MP4/2" label="McLaren MP4/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q418271" start="61244" end="61266" title="1984 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1984 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826156" start="61276" end="61290" title="McLaren F1 GTR" label="McLaren F1 GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q216520" start="61304" end="61328" title="1995 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1995 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384389" start="61443" end="61461" title="Meyer Shank Racing" label="Meyer Shank Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q56690547" start="61482" end="61495" title="David Malukas" label="David Malukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446100" start="61511" end="61528" title="Dale Coyne Racing" label="Dale Coyne Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61766530" start="61688" end="61703" title="Théo Pourchaire" label="Théo Pourchaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42310572" start="61734" end="61738" title="Neom" label="Neom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963316" start="61795" end="61814" title="electric motorsport" label="electric motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q61999636" start="61916" end="61925" title="Extreme E" label="Extreme E"/>
<link wikidata="Q108402684" start="61933" end="61944" title="2022 Extreme E Championship" label="2022 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393052" start="62012" end="62024" title="Tanner Foust" label="Tanner Foust"/>
<link wikidata="Q110584432" start="62029" end="62041" title="Emma Gilmour" label="Emma Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q115824373" start="62316" end="62329" title="2022 Energy X-Prix" label="Energy X-Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q113685681" start="62525" end="62536" title="2023 Extreme E Championship" label="2023 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q113685681" start="62607" end="62619" title="2023 Hydro X-Prix" label="Hydro X-Prix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62639" end="62655" title="2023 Island X-Prix II" label="Island X-Prix II"/>
<link wikidata="Q111017863" start="62876" end="62891" title="Tamara Molinaro" label="Tamara Molinaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q106230832" start="63051" end="63055" title="JBXE" label="JBXE"/>
<link wikidata="Q112896381" start="63063" end="63074" title="Hedda Hosås" label="Hedda Hosås"/>
<link wikidata="Q124399800" start="63539" end="63550" title="2024 Extreme E Championship" label="2024 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817503" start="63594" end="63612" title="Cristina Gutiérrez" label="Cristina Gutiérrez"/>
<link wikidata="Q506045" start="63617" end="63632" title="Mattias Ekström" label="Mattias Ekström"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805780" start="63649" end="63652" title="Team X44" label="X44"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63657" end="63680" title="Carlos Sainz Sr.#Sainz XE Team" label="Acciona | Sainz XE Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q124399800" start="63777" end="63790" title="2024 Desert X-Prix" label="Desert X-Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q319565" start="64027" end="64036" title="Formula E" label="Formula E"/>
<link wikidata="Q63557729" start="64234" end="64260" title="Mercedes-EQ Formula E Team" label="Mercedes-EQ Formula E Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q106452471" start="64292" end="64306" title="2022–23 Formula E World Championship" label="2022–23 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543585" start="64353" end="64366" title="Nismo" label="Nissan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q64052" start="64382" end="64391" title="René Rast" label="René Rast"/>
<link wikidata="Q96464938" start="64415" end="64429" title="2020–21 Formula E World Championship" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q202468" start="64435" end="64460" title="Abt Sportsline" label="Audi Sport ABT Schaeffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17541830" start="64466" end="64477" title="Jake Hughes" label="Jake Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116194195" start="64551" end="64573" title="2023 Mexico City ePrix" label="2023 Mexico City ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734055" start="64731" end="64739" title="Mahindra Racing" label="Mahindra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494727" start="64747" end="64761" title="Oliver Rowland" label="Oliver Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q116438223" start="64806" end="64819" title="2023 Diriyah ePrix" label="Diriyah ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64828" end="64839" title="2023 Diriyah ePrix#Race one" label="first round"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65057" end="65069" title="2023 Diriyah ePrix#Race two" label="second round"/>
<link wikidata="Q118186037" start="65328" end="65340" title="2023 Monaco ePrix" label="Monaco ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65387" end="65393" title="Nismo#Formula E" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24940344" start="65401" end="65416" title="Sacha Fenestraz" label="Sacha Fenestraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q120870471" start="65625" end="65637" title="2023 London ePrix" label="London ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="65709" end="65711" title="Artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q119814268" start="65891" end="65905" title="2023–24 Formula E World Championship" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q153242" start="65928" end="65936" title="Sam Bird" label="Sam Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q173055" start="65950" end="65963" title="Jaguar Racing" label="Jaguar Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q124840437" start="66025" end="66040" title="2024 São Paulo ePrix (March)" label="São Paulo ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q125558616" start="66049" end="66061" title="2024 Monaco ePrix" label="Monaco ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q114413758" start="66181" end="66195" title="Taylor Barnard" label="Taylor Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q125838681" start="66414" end="66426" title="2024 Berlin ePrix" label="Berlin ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q110693416" start="66553" end="66572" title="Maserati MSG Racing" label="Maserati MSG Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q129916738" start="66647" end="66654" title="2024–25 Formula E World Championship" label="2024–25"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378065" start="66686" end="66701" title="2024 São Paulo ePrix (December)" label="São Paulo ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66955" end="66961" title="2025 Jeddah ePrix#Race 1" label="Race 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q132194449" start="66969" end="66981" title="2025 Jeddah ePrix" label="Jeddah ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66986" end="66992" title="2025 Jeddah ePrix#Race 2" label="Race 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q77739809" start="67215" end="67218" title="Le Mans Hypercar" label="LMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q945048" start="67274" end="67306" title="FIA World Endurance Championship" label="FIA World Endurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q84065" start="67326" end="67330" title="International Motor Sports Association" label="IMSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889178" start="67331" end="67365" title="United SportsCar Championship" label="WeatherTech SportsCar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q820141" start="67744" end="67756" title="hillclimbing" label="hillclimbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q767942" start="67758" end="67770" title="Formula 5000" label="Formula 5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078831" start="67874" end="67880" title="Trojan (racing team)" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144423" start="67885" end="67898" title="subcontractor" label="subcontracted"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768136" start="68110" end="68121" title="Mark Hughes (journalist)" label="Mark Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126670" start="68310" end="68312" title="McLaren C8" label="C8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550954" start="68324" end="68331" title="Group C" label="Group C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351854" start="68429" end="68441" title="McLaren Automotive" label="McLaren Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q849607" start="68499" end="68501" title="McLaren F1" label="F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826156" start="68516" end="68522" title="McLaren F1 GTR" label="F1 GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q216520" start="68537" end="68561" title="1995 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1995 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q667317" start="68584" end="68604" title="BPR Global GT Series" label="BPR Global GT Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q368026" start="68617" end="68620" title="Group GT3" label="GT3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130427" start="68636" end="68643" title="McLaren MP4-12C" label="MP4-12C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506305" start="68735" end="68738" title="2012 VLN Series" label="VLN"/>
<link wikidata="Q289976" start="68743" end="68758" title="2012 ADAC GT Masters" label="ADAC GT Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15770155" start="68801" end="68813" title="McLaren 650S" label="McLaren 650S"/>
<link wikidata="Q28913682" start="68827" end="68839" title="McLaren 720S" label="McLaren 720S"/>
<link wikidata="Q102562479" start="68992" end="69006" title="McLaren Artura" label="McLaren Artura"/>
<link wikidata="Q118948646" start="69211" end="69235" title="2024 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2024 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q368026" start="69250" end="69255" title="Group GT3" label="LMGT3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887496" start="69294" end="69311" title="United Autosports" label="United Autosports"/>
<link wikidata="Q118949850" start="69391" end="69423" title="2024 IMSA SportsCar Championship" label="2024 IMSA SportsCar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q368026" start="69434" end="69448" title="Group GT3" label="GT Daytona Pro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69579" end="69599" title="McLaren 720S#720S GT3 Evo" label="McLaren 720S GT3 Evo"/>
<link wikidata="Q119359794" start="69679" end="69723" title="2024 FIA World Endurance Championship" label="2024 FIA World Endurance Championship season"/>
<link wikidata="Q173146" start="69848" end="69861" title="McLaren Group" label="McLaren Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q173547" start="70136" end="70147" title="Teddy Mayer" label="Teddy Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173646" start="70393" end="70406" title="Mansour Ojjeh" label="Mansour Ojjeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q173224" start="70511" end="70520" title="TAG Group" label="TAG Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q173358" start="70579" end="70587" title="Mercedes-Benz High Performance Engines" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="70612" end="70627" title="DaimlerChrysler" label="DaimlerChrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="70633" end="70643" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817469" start="70787" end="70813" title="Mumtalakat Holding Company" label="Mumtalakat Holding Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="70819" end="70840" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="70848" end="70866" title="Kingdom of Bahrain" label="Kingdom of Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17596" start="70993" end="71001" title="Brawn GP" label="Brawn GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954812" start="71015" end="71026" title="Mercedes GP" label="Mercedes GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q172767" start="71778" end="71791" title="Éric Boullier" label="Éric Boullier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064960" start="71906" end="71915" title="Zak Brown" label="Zak Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q705516" start="72371" end="72384" title="Gil de Ferran" label="Gil de Ferran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616058" start="72410" end="72423" title="Andrea Stella (engineer)" label="Andrea Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q47502617" start="72462" end="72475" title="Andreas Seidl" label="Andreas Seidl"/>
<link wikidata="Q64506339" start="72562" end="72568" title="Sauber Motorsport" label="Sauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q29571208" start="72851" end="72887" title="McLaren Young Driver Programme" label="McLaren Driver Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q173495" start="73199" end="73235" title="Formula One Constructors Association" label="Formula One Constructors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405413" start="73384" end="73397" title="FISA-FOCA war" label="FISA-FOCA war"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73399" end="73417" title="FISA–FOCA war#Proposed World Professional Drivers Championship 1981 Events" label="a breakaway series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561098" start="73459" end="73467" title="1981 South African Grand Prix" label="one race"/>
<link wikidata="Q171550" start="73478" end="73495" title="1982 San Marino Grand Prix" label="boycotted another"/>
<link wikidata="Q173210" start="73561" end="73579" title="Concorde Agreement" label="Concorde Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q172724" start="73773" end="73790" title="Bernie Ecclestone" label="Bernie Ecclestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q174035" start="73798" end="73839" title="Formula One Promotions and Administration" label="Formula One Promotions and Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173220" start="74132" end="74153" title="2007 Formula One espionage controversy" label="espionage controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173550" start="74181" end="74194" title="Mike Coughlan" label="Mike Coughlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534298" start="74793" end="74803" title="Grand Prix (1966 film)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445883" start="75009" end="75030" title="Royal Automobile Club" label="Royal Automobile Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049290" start="75128" end="75145" title="Yardley of London" label="Yardley of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q491627" start="75834" end="75843" title="Hugo Boss" label="Hugo Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q921466" start="75994" end="75998" title="West (cigarette)" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="76151" end="76175" title="Directive (European Union)" label="European Union directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267310" start="76183" end="76202" title="tobacco advertising" label="tobacco advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="76535" end="76543" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489615" start="76667" end="76693" title="2013 Australian Grand Prix" label="2013 Australian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17334" start="76962" end="76985" title="2012 Bahrain Grand Prix" label="2012 Bahrain Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q242864" start="76997" end="77019" title="2011 Bahraini uprising" label="ongoing civil uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624857" start="77024" end="77049" title="2012 Bahrain Grand Prix protests" label="protests against the race"/>
<link wikidata="Q161140" start="77209" end="77215" title="Diageo" label="Diageo"/>
<link wikidata="Q645984" start="77541" end="77550" title="TAG Heuer" label="TAG Heuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431044" start="77595" end="77608" title="Richard Mille" label="Richard Mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303685" start="78478" end="78483" title="McLaren MP4/1" label="MP4/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q173032" start="78485" end="78491" title="McLaren MP4-22" label="MP4-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q856411" start="79157" end="79181" title="British American Tobacco" label="British American Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q21017124" start="79332" end="79336" title="Vuse" label="Vuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852556" start="79438" end="79452" title="Mission Winnow" label="Mission Winnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296860" start="79999" end="80021" title="Gulf Oil International" label="Gulf Oil International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351854" start="80089" end="80107" title="McLaren Automotive" label="McLaren Automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q99391310" start="80142" end="80164" title="2021 Monaco Grand Prix" label="2021 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627184" start="80180" end="80183" title="OKX" label="OKX"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479698" start="80598" end="80604" title="2023 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q115479603" start="80609" end="80616" title="2023 Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533221" start="80648" end="80660" title="Triple Crown of Motorsport" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q107395008" start="80816" end="80822" title="McLaren M16" label="M16C/D"/>
<link wikidata="Q898507" start="80836" end="80857" title="1974 Indianapolis 500" label="1974 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q152693" start="80888" end="80893" title="McLaren MP4/2" label="MP4/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q418271" start="80907" end="80929" title="1984 Monaco Grand Prix" label="1984 Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826156" start="80966" end="80972" title="McLaren F1 GTR" label="F1 GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q216520" start="80986" end="81010" title="1995 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1995 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q116145639" start="81031" end="81036" title="McLaren MCL60" label="MCL60"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646582" start="81038" end="81079" title="Arrow McLaren" label="McLaren&amp;#x27;s IndyCar Series sister team"/>
<link wikidata="Q117149890" start="81140" end="81161" title="2023 Indianapolis 500" label="2023 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="81327" end="81340" title="Google Chrome" label="Google Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q132291693" start="82066" end="82071" title="McLaren MCL39" label="MCL39"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="82451" end="82462" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646582" start="82512" end="82525" title="Arrow McLaren" label="Arrow McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q119822" start="82526" end="82533" title="IndyCar" label="IndyCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157975" start="82548" end="82555" title="Dallara" label="Dallara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13510900" start="82585" end="82590" title="Dallara DW12" label="IR-12"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82622" end="82627" title="Dallara DW12#IR–18 Universal Aero Kit (UAK-18) (2018–2026)" label="IR-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q61999636" start="82645" end="82654" title="Extreme E" label="Extreme E"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847292" start="82673" end="82689" title="Spark Odyssey 21" label="Spark Odyssey 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q319565" start="82701" end="82710" title="Formula E" label="Formula E"/>
<link wikidata="Q115524715" start="82730" end="82744" title="Formula E Gen3" label="Formula E Gen3"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="82750" end="82756" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002954" start="82808" end="82823" title="Formula One car" label="Formula One car"/>
<link wikidata="Q172621" start="82877" end="82890" title="McLaren MP4/4" label="McLaren MP4/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="82989" end="83001" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="83006" end="83017" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q172849" start="83367" end="83385" title="Emerson Fittipaldi" label="Emerson Fittipaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="83391" end="83401" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="83407" end="83417" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494" start="83423" end="83434" title="Alain Prost" label="Alain Prost"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="83444" end="83456" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172842" start="83466" end="83479" title="Mika Häkkinen" label="Mika Häkkinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="83487" end="83501" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q111945268" start="83679" end="83683" title="2022 Formula One Esports Series" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="" start="83733" end="83736" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 3" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="" start="83904" end="83907" title=":Template:American Open Wheel driver results legend" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q503406" start="83932" end="83950" title="Andretti Autosport" label="Andretti Autosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646582" start="83974" end="84008" title="Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports" label="Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q174035" start="84492" end="84518" title="Formula One Administration" label="Formula One Administration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20995" wikidata="Q16205" url="?curid=20995" title="Province of Massa-Carrara">
<text>The province of Massa-Carrara () is a province in the Tuscany region of Italy. It is named after the provincial capital Massa, and Carrara, the other main town in the province.

==History==
The province of &quot;Massa e Carrara&quot; was born in 1859 from the separation of the Lunigiana and the Garfagnana from the Duchy of Modena. Originally it was composed of three &quot;circondari&quot;: I° &quot;Circondario of Massa and Carrara&quot; (a group of seven districts divided in 14 municipalities), II° &quot;Circondario&quot; of Castelnuovo Garfagnana (four districts divided in 17 municipalities), III° &quot;Circondario&quot; of Pontremoli (three districts divided into six municipalities).

Until the census of 1861, the province appears as part of &quot;Compartimento territorial Modena, Reggio and Massa&quot;, but since the census of the population of 1871 it has been counted as part of Tuscany. Later, with the &quot;Regio Decreto n. 1913 of September 2, 1923&quot;, the municipalities of Calice al Cornoviglio and Rocchetta Vara were detached from the province and added to the new province of La Spezia. In the same period (&quot;Regio Decreto n.2490 of November 9, 1923&quot;) the 17 municipalities of the &quot;Circondario&quot; Castelnuovo Garfagnana were removed from Emilia and assigned to the province of Lucca, in order to compensate for the passage to the new province of Pistoia of all the municipalities of the Val di Nievole.

The province of Massa and Carrara was left crippled, waiting for a reorganization. In 1938, the municipalities of Carrara, Massa, and Montignoso joined and became the municipality of Apuania. In the same year, the industrial zone Apuana was instituted, including in relative Consortium C.Z.I.The municipalities of neighboring Versilia and the province assumed the name of a province of Apuania. In 1946, with decree Lieutenant one (Umberto II of Savoia) the new municipality of Apuania was formed, and the province (for error and/or historical ignorance) resumptions the denomination does not date from 1859 when it was &quot;Massa and Carrara&quot; but Massa. This was the name that had been designated to the city of Massa or Massa of Carrara from 1700 until the formation of the Kingdom of Italy (1860), to distinguish it from other homonymous cities.

In 2009, both decrees of 1938 and 1946 were abolished, restoring the old name.

==Geography and administration==
The province covers an area of and a total population of about 200,000. There are 17 &quot;comuni&quot; (singular: &quot;comune&quot;) in the province.

==Government==
===List of presidents of the province of Massa and Carrara===
==Economy==
The province&#x27;s economical relevance, once mainly based on the production of the famous white Carrara marble, has now shifted to the importation and fabrication of blocks of marble and granite from all over the world.

==See also==
* Carrara
* Duchy of Massa and Carrara
* Lunigiana
* Marble
* Massa
* Ducal Palace of Massa – home of the local authority

==References==
==External links==

*Official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16205" start="4" end="29" title="Province of Massa-Carrara" label="province of Massa-Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089" start="38" end="46" title="Provinces of Italy" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="54" end="61" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="72" end="77" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13370" start="120" end="125" title="Massa, Tuscany" label="Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13372" start="131" end="138" title="Carrara" label="Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q657832" start="278" end="287" title="Lunigiana" label="Lunigiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q176925" start="296" end="306" title="Garfagnana" label="Garfagnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="316" end="331" title="Duchy of Modena" label="Duchy of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="896" end="903" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16188" start="1093" end="1114" title="province of La Spezia" label="province of La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202" start="1311" end="1328" title="province of Lucca" label="province of Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245" start="1380" end="1399" title="province of Pistoia" label="province of Pistoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49609" start="1433" end="1447" title="Val di Nievole" label="Val di Nievole"/>
<link wikidata="Q426213" start="1776" end="1784" title="Versilia" label="Versilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="2232" end="2248" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="2510" end="2516" title="comune" label="comuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2767" end="2773" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q13372" start="2899" end="2906" title="Carrara" label="Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q933592" start="2909" end="2935" title="Duchy of Massa and Carrara" label="Duchy of Massa and Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q657832" start="2938" end="2947" title="Lunigiana" label="Lunigiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2950" end="2956" title="Marble" label="Marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q13370" start="2959" end="2964" title="Massa, Tuscany" label="Massa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20996" wikidata="Q253719" url="?curid=20996" title="Monti">
<text>Monti may refer to:

==People==
* Monti (given name)
* Monti (surname)

==Places==
*Monti, Lazio, the first rione (historic district) of Rome, Italy
*Monti, Sardinia, Italy, a &quot;comune&quot; and town
*Monti, Iowa, United States, a town

==See also==
*Monte (disambiguation)
*Montie (disambiguation)
*Monty (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q253719" start="0" end="5" title="Monti" label="Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q96478114" start="34" end="52" title="Monti (given name)" label="Monti (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877367" start="55" end="70" title="Monti (surname)" label="Monti (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419959" start="84" end="96" title="Monti, Lazio" label="Monti, Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q340920" start="150" end="165" title="Monti, Sardinia" label="Monti, Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905905" start="205" end="216" title="Monti, Iowa" label="Monti, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q232762" start="255" end="277" title="Monte (disambiguation)" label="Monte (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065960" start="279" end="302" title="Montie (disambiguation)" label="Montie (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946490" start="304" end="326" title="Monty (disambiguation)" label="Monty (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20997" wikidata="Q91208" url="?curid=20997" title="Montalcino">
<text>Montalcino is a hill town and &quot;comune&quot; in the province of Siena, Tuscany, central Italy. 

The town is located to the west of Pienza, close to the Crete Senesi in Val d&#x27;Orcia. It is from Siena, from Florence and from Pisa. Monte Amiata is located nearby.

==History==
The hill upon which Montalcino sits has probably been settled since Etruscan times. Its first mention in historical documents in 814 AD suggests there was a church here in the 9th century, most likely built by monks associated with the nearby Abbey of Sant&#x27;Antimo. The population grew suddenly in the middle of the tenth century, when people fleeing the nearby town of Roselle took up residence in the town.

The town takes its name from a variety of oak tree that once covered the terrain. The very high site of the town provides views over the Asso, Ombrone and Arbia valleys of Tuscany, dotted with olive orchards, vineyards, fields and villages. The lower slopes of the Montalcino hill itself are dominated by vines and olive orchards.

During medieval times the city was known for its tanneries and for the shoes and other leather goods that were made from the high-quality leathers that were produced there. As time went by, many medieval hill towns, including Montalcino, went into serious economic decline.

Like many of the medieval towns of Tuscany, Montalcino experienced long periods of peace and often enjoyed a measure of prosperity. This peace and prosperity was, however, interrupted by a number of extremely violent episodes.

During the late Middle Ages it was an independent commune with considerable importance owing to its location on the old Via Francigena, the main road between France and Rome, but increasingly Montalcino came under the sway of the larger and more aggressive city of Siena.

As a satellite of Siena since the Battle of Montaperti in 1260, Montalcino was deeply involved and affected by the conflicts in which Siena became embroiled, particularly in those with the city of Florence in the 14th and 15th centuries, and like many other cities in central and northern Italy, the town was also caught up in the internecine wars between the Ghibellines (supporters of the Holy Roman Empire) and the Guelphs (supporters of the Papacy). Factions from each side controlled the town at various times in the late medieval period.

Once Siena had been conquered by Florence under the rule of the Medici family in 1555, Montalcino held out for almost four years, but ultimately fell to the Florentines, under whose control it remained until the Grand Duchy of Tuscany was amalgamated into a united Italy in 1861.
In the case of Montalcino, gradual economic decline has recently been reversed by economic growth due to the increasing popularity of the town&#x27;s famous wine Brunello di Montalcino, made from the sangiovese grosso grapes grown within the comune. The number of producers of the wine has grown from only 11 in the 1960s to more than 200 today, producing some 330,000 cases of the Brunello wine annually. Brunello was the first wine to be awarded &quot;Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita&quot; (DOCG) status. In addition to Brunello di Montalcino, which must be aged five years prior to release, 6 years for the Riserva, Rosso di Montalcino (DOC), made from sangiovese grosso grapes and aged one year, and a variety of Super Tuscan wines are also produced within the comune, as well as the Moscadello sweet white wines for which it was most famous until the development of the Brunello series.

== Main sights ==
===Medieval structures===
The first walls of the town were built in the 13th century. The fortress, built in 1361 atop the highest point of the town, was designed with a pentagonal layout by the Sienese architects Mino Foresi and Domenico di Feo. The fortress incorporates some of the pre-existing southern walls, the pre-existing structures including the keep of Santo Martini, the San Giovanni tower and an ancient basilica which now serves as the fortress chapel. Though the town itself was eventually conquered, the fortress itself never submitted, an admirable feat, considering the size of the Sienese and Florentine forces that besieged Montalcino at varying intervals.

The narrow, short street leads down from the main gate of the fortress to the &quot;Chiesa di Sant&#x27;Agostino&quot; with its simple 13th-century, Romanesque façade. Adjacent to the church is the former convent, now the Musei Riuniti, both a civic and diocesan museum, housing among its collections: a wooden crucifix by an unknown artist of the Sienese school, two 15th century wooden sculptures, including a &quot;Madonna&quot; by an anonymous artist, and several terracotta sculptures attributed to the Della Robbia school. The collection also includes a &quot;St Peter and St Paul&quot; by Ambrogio Lorenzetti and a &quot;Virgin and Child&quot; by Simone Martini. There are also modern works from the early 20th century in the museum.

The &quot;Duomo&quot; (cathedral), dedicated to San Salvatore, was built originally in the 14th Century, but now has a 19th-century Neoclassical façade designed by the Sienese architect Agostino Fantasici.

The &quot;Piazza della Principessa Margherita&quot; is down the hill from the fortress and Duomo on the via Matteotti. The principal building on the piazza is the former &quot;Palazzo dei Priori&quot; or &quot;Palazzo Comunale&quot; (built late 13th, early 14th century), now town hall. The palace is adorned with the coats of arms of the Podesta, once rulers of the city. A tall medieval tower is incorporated into the palazzo. Close by is a Renaissance-style building with six round arches, called &quot;La Loggia&quot;, for which construction began at the very end of the 14th century and finished in the early 15th, but which has undergone much restoration work over the subsequent centuries.

Montalcino is divided, like most medieval Tuscan cities, into quarters called &quot;contrade&quot;, Borghetto, Travaglio, Pianello and Ruga, each with their own colors, songs and separate drum rhythms to distinguish them. Twice a year they meet together in a breath taking archery contest under the walls of the Fortezza, conducted in Medieval dress, with lords and ladies of each contrada who accompany the proceedings.

The 13th-century church of &quot;San Francesco&quot; in the Castlevecchio &quot;contrada&quot; has undergone several renovations. It contains 16th-century frescoes by Vincenzo Tamagni.

===Other sights===
*Churches with frescoes of the Sienese School
*&quot;Rocca&quot;, a ruined castle
*&quot;Sant&#x27;Antimo&quot;, a nearby Benedictine abbey
*Paleontological research into fossilised skeletons, notably a whale, at the Castello Banfi (former name: Poggio alle Mura) in 2007.

==Culture==

In 2010, the Festa Europea Della Musica had its first edition in Montalcino, to promote tourism and the produce, especially wine, of the region. Associated with the Fête de la Musique, created in 1981 in Paris to celebrate music and musicians, the Festa was incorporated into the Italian Minister of Culture&#x27;s agenda in 1994, and has since spread across Italy.

==&quot;Frazioni&quot;==
The municipality is formed by the municipal seat of Montalcino and the towns and villages (&quot;frazioni&quot;) of Camigliano, Castelnuovo dell&#x27;Abate, Montisi, San Giovanni d&#x27;Asso, Sant&#x27;Angelo in Colle, Sant&#x27;Angelo Scalo and Torrenieri. Other notable villages include Argiano, La Croce, Lucignano d&#x27;Asso, Monte Amiata Scalo, Montelifré, Monterongriffoli, Pieve a Pava, Pieve a Salti, Poggio alle Mura, Tavernelle, Vergelle and Villa a Tolli.

==Honorary citizens==
People awarded the honorary citizenship of Montalcino are:

==See also==
* Brunello di Montalcino
* Val d&#x27;Orcia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q91208" start="0" end="10" title="Montalcino" label="Montalcino"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="36" end="42" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q16275" start="56" end="73" title="province of Siena" label="province of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="75" end="82" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="92" end="97" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q91341" start="136" end="142" title="Pienza" label="Pienza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139769" start="157" end="169" title="Crete Senesi" label="Crete Senesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q217449" start="173" end="189" title="Val d&amp;#x27;Orcia" label="Val d&amp;#x27;Orcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="202" end="207" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="214" end="222" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="232" end="236" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q470777" start="238" end="250" title="Monte Amiata" label="Monte Amiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="351" end="359" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="493" end="497" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q334276" start="526" end="551" title="Abbey of Sant&amp;#x27;Antimo" label="Abbey of Sant&amp;#x27;Antimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860778" start="657" end="664" title="Rusellae" label="Roselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="869" end="876" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="1012" end="1017" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1224" end="1232" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q542830" start="1652" end="1666" title="Via Francigena" label="Via Francigena"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1690" end="1696" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q736727" start="1797" end="1802" title="Republic of Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q587095" start="1839" end="1859" title="Battle of Montaperti" label="Battle of Montaperti"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2094" end="2099" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="2165" end="2176" title="Ghibellines" label="Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2196" end="2213" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="2223" end="2230" title="Guelphs" label="Guelphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="2414" end="2420" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="2562" end="2584" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Grand Duchy of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q26667" start="2792" end="2814" title="Brunello di Montalcino" label="Brunello di Montalcino"/>
<link wikidata="Q509162" start="2830" end="2847" title="sangiovese grosso" label="sangiovese grosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q654824" start="3084" end="3132" title="Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita" label="Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita"/>
<link wikidata="Q26667" start="3266" end="3285" title="Rosso di Montalcino" label="Rosso di Montalcino"/>
<link wikidata="Q532538" start="3364" end="3376" title="Super Tuscan" label="Super Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3772" end="3783" title="Mino Foresi" label="Mino Foresi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3788" end="3803" title="Domenico di Feo" label="Domenico di Feo"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="3975" end="3983" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3672304" start="4320" end="4348" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Agostino, Montalcino" label="Chiesa di Sant&amp;#x27;Agostino"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="4385" end="4395" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q21509069" start="4744" end="4756" title="Della Robbia" label="Della Robbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211562" start="4832" end="4851" title="Ambrogio Lorenzetti" label="Ambrogio Lorenzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q221043" start="4890" end="4904" title="Simone Martini" label="Simone Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942724" start="4988" end="4993" title="Montalcino Cathedral" label="Duomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634521" start="5026" end="5039" title="Holy Saviour" label="San Salvatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="5110" end="5122" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5164" end="5182" title="Agostino Fantasici" label="Agostino Fantasici"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="5628" end="5639" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6338" end="6351" title="San Francesco, Montalcino" label="San Francesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q524497" start="6472" end="6488" title="Vincenzo Tamagni" label="Vincenzo Tamagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332178" start="6541" end="6555" title="Sienese School" label="Sienese School"/>
<link wikidata="Q334276" start="6599" end="6615" title="Abbey of Sant&amp;#x27;Antimo" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="6632" end="6643" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="6644" end="6649" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="6651" end="6666" title="Paleontology" label="Paleontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="6681" end="6687" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="6692" end="6700" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="6713" end="6718" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6756" end="6772" title="Poggio alle Mura" label="Poggio alle Mura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134686" start="7286" end="7294" title="Frazione" label="frazioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q18491480" start="7305" end="7315" title="Camigliano, Montalcino" label="Camigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663016" start="7317" end="7344" title="Castelnuovo dell&amp;#x27;Abate" label="Castelnuovo dell&amp;#x27;Abate"/>
<link wikidata="Q748150" start="7346" end="7353" title="Montisi" label="Montisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q91422" start="7355" end="7379" title="San Giovanni d&amp;#x27;Asso" label="San Giovanni d&amp;#x27;Asso"/>
<link wikidata="Q16600225" start="7381" end="7406" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Colle" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Colle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18491998" start="7408" end="7430" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Scalo" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Scalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q742209" start="7435" end="7445" title="Torrenieri" label="Torrenieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q28309400" start="7497" end="7518" title="Lucignano d&amp;#x27;Asso" label="Lucignano d&amp;#x27;Asso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862261" start="7540" end="7550" title="Montelifré" label="Montelifré"/>
<link wikidata="Q18491796" start="7552" end="7568" title="Monterongriffoli" label="Monterongriffoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q28308965" start="7629" end="7637" title="Vergelle" label="Vergelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q987080" start="7699" end="7719" title="honorary citizenship" label="honorary citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q26667" start="7755" end="7777" title="Brunello di Montalcino" label="Brunello di Montalcino"/>
<link wikidata="Q217449" start="7780" end="7796" title="Val d&amp;#x27;Orcia" label="Val d&amp;#x27;Orcia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20999" wikidata="Q3785398" url="?curid=20999" title="List of marine aquarium fish species">
<text>The following list of marine aquarium fish species commonly available in the aquarium trade is not a completely comprehensive list; certain rare specimens may be available commercially but not yet listed here. A brief section on each, with a link to the page about the particular species is provided along with references for further information.

Reef-safe fish do not consume corals or invertebrates, while fish categorized as not safe do. Fish labelled as &quot;with caution&quot; may have individuals within the species that could potentially eat invertebrates or cause damage to corals.

==Angelfish (large)==

These large fish are considered to be quite hardy, but because of their size may present a significant challenge to the keeper. They need huge aquariums, up to 180 gallons to house one for its entire lifespan. Two angels might be kept in the same aquarium provided it is a large aquarium, they are properly acclimated as juveniles, and they have very different colouring and body shape. However, because all Angelfish have essentially the same diet, mixing them is a feat that should be left to only advanced keepers. Most are not reef safe, and a potential owner should be aware that they need to have plenty of vegetable matter in their diet. They undergo major changes in colouration while maturing, and unless specified given descriptions are for adult specimens.
==Angelfish (dwarf)==

Although Dwarf Angelfish are smaller and generally more manageable than their larger counterparts, they still have some specific care requirements. They are omnivores, but plenty of vegetable matter, preferably in the form of macroalgae, should be provided for their grazing pleasure. Their suitability for reef tanks is hotly debated, so add at your own risk. Specimens that have been successfully maintained in reef aquaria include the Flame and Coral Beauty angels. However, for obvious reasons they should not be put into tanks with expensive decorative macroalgae.


==Anthias==

Although Anthias resemble damsels in shape and size, the two should never be confused. Anthias (also known as &quot;fairy basslets&quot;) are finicky and many starve to death in captivity. In the wild, they eat zooplankton, and will not accept anything else in the aquarium. They also need to be fed nearly constantly, three times a day at least. The best way to ensure the health and longevity of an Anthias is to attach a refugium where copepods can be grown to &quot;drip&quot; into the display tank. Unlike many other saltwater aquarium inhabitants, they can be kept in groups.


==Bass and groupers==

In this exceedingly large group of fish, few are considered proper aquarium inhabitants, for various reasons including diet and size. Basses vary greatly from species to species. Appropriate research should be done before purchasing a specimen. Many unsuspecting hobbyists bring home cute little specimens of popular aquarium fish such as the lyretail grouper, only to realize several months later that they do not have the resources to care for a meter-long that may cost hundreds of dollars a month to feed.


==Basslets and assessors==

Basslets and Assessors are small, long bodied fish strongly resembling Anthias. Their care requirements, however, are closer to those of damsels. They should be kept individually, and generally not with other fish of similar shape and colour. Feeding is easy: they will generally eat any meaty foods offered. Good water quality should be maintained at all times.


==Batfish==

Batfish are gorgeous and striking fish that are not common in aquaria for one major reason: they get huge. A two or three hundred gallon tank is needed for one, minimum, and larger is better. They start out as tiny, manageable-looking cuties, which often fools aquarists into purchasing them for their small aquariums. However they quickly grow to gargantuan proportions, and require large amounts of food as well as space, so beware. They are not reef safe and should be fed plenty of large meaty foods.
Batfish change greatly as they grow, however the potential aquarist is most likely to see them in their juvenile form, so that is the description of the colouration here. They all have generally the same body shape: disk-like with tall dorsal and anal fins, similar to a Freshwater Angelfish.


==Blennies and the Engineer Goby==
Blennies are popular aquarium fish, and for good reason. Most of them are peaceful to other fish, while very aggressive to other blennies which has a similar shape. Some blennies are colorful, and many are downright helpful. For example, the aptly named Lawnmower Blenny will keep your green algae well trimmed and presentable. With the exception of Fang Blennies, Blennies are totally reef safe- in fact a reef environment is really best for them because they can be shy and the intricate rockwork of a reef provides ample hiding spaces. They are omnivores and should be fed a varied diet of frozen or live foods and plant matter. Blennies do not have teeth or functional jaw, so food must be small enough for them to swallow whole.&lt;br&gt;
Blennies are often confused with Gobies, but there is an easy way to tell the difference. Gobies have two distinct dorsal fins, Blennies have a single dorsal fin that runs the length of their body. Also, Gobies&#x27; pelvic fins are fused to form a sucker, similar to Remoras.

The engineer goby is a close relative of cichlids and leaf fishes, the juvenile can often be found in aquarium trade, while the adult is rare.


==Boxfish and blowfish==

Members of the family Tetraodontidae, Boxfish, Blowfish or Pufferfish and their cousins Cowfishes and Porcupinefishes can be very personable and quirky pets, for the prepared. &lt;br&gt;
They are not thought of as an ordinary aquarium tank mate, but are quickly gaining popularity. They do pose a hazard in the community tank however. They are capable of releasing a very powerful toxin which can kill other fish and in some cases, the boxfish itself. They generally only use it when threatened or dying, but can become disturbed easily with aggressive tank mates or overcrowded aquarium. Generally they are reef safe, though they will pick at invertebrates if not fed well enough. &lt;br&gt;
Many people think puffed up Pufferfish, like in the picture, are cute, but an owner should never subject their pet to this as they are often unable to expel the air should they be out of the water. To prevent this, never remove a puffer from the water.


==Butterflyfish==

When properly cared for, Butterflyfish can make beautiful and distinctive additions to fish only marine aquariums. Specimens often grow to large sizes and are not well suited to smaller aquariums. Butterflyfish can be fussy and overparticular, but when fed a varied diet and kept in pristine conditions they will usually thrive. Some species in this family do not do well in captivity, and potential keepers must take care to purchase only those species that have a fighting chance. When selecting Butterflyfish especially, specimens presenting any sign or signs of mishandling are to be avoided.

The following species are relatively hardy and experienced aquarists should have no trouble with them, so long as they are diligent.


==Cardinalfish==

One of the few groups of shoaling fish commonly available to marine aquarists, Cardinalfish are nocturnal and tend to be quite shy. They require meaty foods and will often not take prepared foods such as flakes and tablets. For the best chance of success, keep a wide variety of frozen foods on hand. In the event of a hunger strike, they will almost always take adult brine shrimp. As far as other care requirements they are similar to damsels: not picky. So long as they are properly acclimated, they tolerate a wide range of parameters. A marine aquarist should watch the ammonia/nitrite levels of the environment, as cardinalfish are particularly sensitive to these chemicals.


==Chromis==

Chromis are perhaps the ultimate reef fish. Generally peaceful, most species are easy to take care of and quite colorful. Like anthias, they will school, but in many cases this tendency disappears as they age. They are, nevertheless, at least ambivalent with their own species, as well as completely reef safe. Like Damsels and Anemonefish, their close cousins, Chromis are omnivores and will accept most foods offered. A flake staple is usually sufficient, but for best color and health supplement with frozen and live foods when possible.


==Clownfish==

Clownfish, more technically known as Anemonefish, are the classic aquarium fish. Both hardy and attractive, they are perhaps best known for their symbiotic relationship with Sea Anemones, a relative of coral. In the wild, Anemonefish are always found with a host, leading many potential keepers to believe that an anemone is necessary to keep them. Anemonefish are easy to keep, but their cnidarian counterparts are inordinately finicky and need high light levels, and luckily Anemonefish will thrive without them. Aquarists often find that Anemonefish will host in other things, from corals and Feather Duster Worms to powerheads and other equipment.
Anemonefish care is identical to that of Damselfish, as they are actually very closely related.


==Damselfish==

All Damselfish can be considered reef-safe, sometimes excluding larger, more aggressive Dascyllus varieties. Some Damselfish will host in anemones like clownfish. Most Damselfish are aggressive and difficult to catch once you put them in an aquarium.

Damselfish change gender as they grow larger and older. Small damselfish are ungendered. Eventually, they become males if no males prevent them from doing so. One or sometimes two males live with a female and guard over the eggs. Females are the largest fish and dominant over the males and juveniles. They will not allow other females into an area they have claimed as their territory without a fight. They may not allow new males or juveniles, either. Aggression increases with each change.


== Dartfish ==

Most should be kept as pairs or small groups where all individuals are added at once.


==Dragonets==
Dragonets are often mis-categorized as gobies or blennies by fish sellers. They are bottom-dwelling fish that constantly hunt tiny invertebrates for food. Most starve to death in a marine aquarium unless you provide a refugium or place for the invertebrates to reproduce safely without any fish being able to reach them.


==Eels==

Most eels are easily kept in a large aquarium, although several species such as the blue ribbon eel should usually be avoided. With any moray eel care must be taken to secure the lid as one of the most common causes of death is escaping from the tank, and onto the floor.


==Filefish==

Less often kept than their relatives the triggerfish and puffers, there are many filefish that make good aquarium residents, and a few that require specialized diets, making it hard to sustain them in an aquarium.


== Flatfish ==

==Frogfish==

A type of Anglerfish, Frogfish are ambush predators with huge mouths. They are capable of eating fish up to twice their length so care should be taken in choosing tank mates.


== Goatfish ==

While not as common a choice for aquariums as many other species, they are typically hardy and brightly colored


==Gobies and clingfishes==
Are typically hardy and do not harm invertebrates which makes them a good choice of fish for a reef tank.


== Grunts ==


== Hamlet ==


==Hawkfish==

Attractive and relatively small, Hawkfish make excellent additions to fish only or FOWLR aquariums. With extreme caution taken, they could be kept in reef aquariums, but because of their propensity to eat small ornamental shrimps and other mobile invertebrates (usually leaving sessile invertebrates alone) they are not considered reef safe. Lacking a swim bladder, Hawkfish can often be found resting in crevices of rocks or among the branches of corals or gorgonians. Hawkfish are easy to care for and not picky at all about water quality. A varied diet, including spirulina and small meaty foods like Mysis is recommended.


==Hogfish==


==Idols==


== Jacks ==


==Jawfish==

Jawfish are burrowers and require a sandy substrate of sufficient depth.


==Lionfish==

&quot;Lionfish&quot; specifically refer to the genus &quot;Pterois&quot; within the family Scorpaenidae. They have venomous spines and should be treated with caution. Other species within Scorpaenidae but outside &quot;Pterois&quot; may also have &quot;lionfish&quot; in their common names. Feeder goldfish are not the proper nutrition for a lion fish.


== Parrotfish ==


==Pipefish==

Pipefish are relatives of seahorses and require a similar level of care. They should only be bought by experienced aquarium owners. Captive bred specimens are sometimes available, and are significantly more likely to survive.


==Pseudochromidae==

Usually only a single specimen can be kept in an aquarium. Sometimes multiple specimens can be kept in larger aquariums, but usually this requires them to be added at the same time or they will be too territorial.


==Rabbitfish and Foxfaces==

Less commonly kept than some other species, many still make hardy and colorful aquarium residents.


==Rays==

Most rays have a venomous spine near the base of the tail. Care must be taken to avoid this animal when performing tank maintenance and during capture.


== Scorpionfish ==

Because they are relatively inactive fishes, most species can be kept in smaller aquariums than other equally large fish, and 30 gallon tanks are not unusual. Because they are capable of eating fish that are surprisingly large, but will often be picked at by fish that eat invertebrates a species tank is often set up for them. Some fish will never accept anything but live food, typically these specimens are fed on gut packed guppies, mollies, or ghost shrimp. Similarly to the lionfish, care should be taken when handling these fish as they are also venomous.


==Seahorses==

It takes a special aquarist to maintain these delicate beauties. A potential keeper must be dedicated and willing to throw artistic creativity to the winds- as what seahorses need is not always beautiful. They require taller tanks, live/frozen food, and many hitching posts, as well as very peaceful tankmates. In fact, beginners would be well-advised not to mix seahorses with any other species until they have more experience. Good tank mates would include other peaceful, microfauna consuming species such as pipefish and dragonets.&lt;br&gt;
Seahorses found in stores are generally Captive Bred, but occasionally one might find a wild caught (WC) specimen. WC Seahorses should only be purchased by seahorse experts who are going to breed them, as they tend to be finicky and most are endangered in the wild. &lt;br&gt;
One of the advantages of Seahorses is that many species stay small and can (in fact, some &quot;should&quot;) be kept in smaller tanks, making them ideal for aquarists who are pressed for space or money.

Seahorses are among the few popular marine aquarium species that can be temperate. Species vary in their temperature requirement, so here an extra category has been added.&lt;br&gt;
TR=Tropical ST=Sub-Tropical TM=Temperate


==Squirrelfish==

Typically are hardy fish that can be kept with a wide variety of tankmates.


==Sharks==

Many sharks will outgrow most home aquariums and/or adapt poorly to captivity. However, numerous coastal and coral reef sharks do well in good aquarium surroundings although you should have experience in keeping other saltwater fish before trying to keep sharks as they are more difficult to care for. In a shark aquarium setup (preferably an oval-shaped tank for more active species), there should be much surface area (wide and long tanks with good gas exchange/more room for biological filtration and room for sharks to swim, glide, and turn with little constraint opposed to tall, thin tanks), fine substrate (coarse substrate can irritate the shark&#x27;s underside), little décor and rockwork (which should be secure) for swimming space (sharks in the orders Orectolobiformes and Heterodontiformes however, feel more secure in tanks with caves and ledges), excellent filtration (sharks are messy eaters and need good water conditions), protected heaters, filter intakes, etc. by surrounding them in polyurethane foam barriers (unprotected equipment can be dangerous to active sharks), and a secure canopy (sharks can jump out of the water) as well as, strong, steady, linear water flow (10+ x the volume of the aquarium per hour) moving in a gyre circling the aquarium, dissolved oxygen levels of 7–8ppm (slightly more if you are using ozone), low light levels, and no stray electrical currents/amounts of metal in the aquarium water. Many sharks feed on invertebrates to a great degree along with fish (even ones that are larger than themselves), and although they don&#x27;t eat coral, they can knock them over and rest on them. There are also many fish and invertebrates that can harm/irritate sharks such as Scorpionfish, Butterflyfish, Angelfish (large), Filefish, Triggerfish, Pufferfish, Suckerfish (over time), Porcupinefish, certain other sharks, large crabs, Hermit crabs, sea anemones, and stinging corals. Also, sharks need iodine which can be provided through regular water changes or supplements for sharks (iodine deficiencies and possibly the buildup of nitrates can result in goiter), and feeding frequency is species-specific. Copper treatments should not be administered to most shark species.


== Snappers ==


==Tangs==

Tangs generally feed on algae, though there are a few carnivorous species. Most tangs will not tolerate other fish the same color and/or shape as them. They have a spine on their tails that can cut open other fish and unprotected hands. All tangs should be given plenty of swimming room; try to have at least a 4&#x27; tank. Contrary to popular belief they will tolerate smaller (4&#x27; to 5&#x27;) tanks just fine but tend to live better in larger tanks, over 5&#x27;.


==Tilefish==

Though often categorized as gobies, tilefish are a separate species.


==Triggerfish==

While they are generally considered monsters that will chomp invertebrates, a few species can make great reef fish. Other more aggressive species such as the undulated trigger, and clown trigger will sometimes be so aggressive that it is necessary to keep as the sole inhabitant of the aquarium. All will require large tanks, with good filtration.


==Wrasse==

A diverse group of fish with an equally wide range of characteristics. Some wrasse species are aggressive towards small fish and invertebrates, others are reef safe. Some are quite hardy, some typically die within weeks.


== See also ==

* List of fish common names
* List of marine aquarium invertebrate species
* List of marine aquarium plant species
* List of aquarium fish by scientific name
* List of freshwater aquarium fish species
* List of brackish aquarium fish species

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1916943" start="22" end="37" title="marine aquarium" label="marine aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="38" end="42" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="43" end="50" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="77" end="85" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="759" end="767" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q178413" start="780" end="786" title="gallon" label="gallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q320913" start="830" end="836" title="Pomacanthidae" label="angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516282" start="937" end="945" title="juvenile (organism)" label="juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q320913" start="1024" end="1033" title="Pomacanthidae" label="Angelfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q474191" start="1060" end="1064" title="diet (nutrition)" label="diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="1147" end="1151" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="1229" end="1238" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q609370" start="1309" end="1317" title="Sexual maturity" label="maturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="1564" end="1572" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="1633" end="1643" title="macroalgae" label="macroalgae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060639" start="1714" end="1724" title="reef aquarium" label="reef tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060639" start="1820" end="1832" title="reef aquarium" label="reef aquaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426988" start="1845" end="1850" title="Centropyge loricula" label="Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191959" start="1855" end="1873" title="Centropyge bispinosa" label="Coral Beauty angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="1965" end="1975" title="macroalgae" label="macroalgae"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="2203" end="2214" title="zooplankton" label="zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307688" start="2416" end="2424" title="refugium (fishkeeping)" label="refugium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189973" start="2431" end="2439" title="copepods" label="copepods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224135" start="2733" end="2739" title="bass (fish)" label="Basses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882388" start="2942" end="2958" title="Lyretail Grouper" label="lyretail grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="3965" end="3969" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516282" start="4126" end="4134" title="juvenile (organism)" label="juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q214145" start="4293" end="4313" title="Pterophyllum" label="Freshwater Angelfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60613116" start="4352" end="4360" title="Blenny" label="Blennies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="4738" end="4742" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468" start="5129" end="5135" title="Gobies" label="Gobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468" start="5300" end="5306" title="Gobies" label="Gobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q239771" start="5364" end="5370" title="Remora" label="Remora"/>
<link wikidata="Q150444" start="5378" end="5391" title="engineer goby" label="engineer goby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406" start="5415" end="5422" title="cichlid" label="cichlid"/>
<link wikidata="Q621986" start="5428" end="5439" title="Polycentridae" label="leaf fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="5567" end="5581" title="Tetraodontidae" label="Tetraodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060639" start="6153" end="6157" title="reef aquarium" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060639" start="7992" end="7996" title="reef aquarium" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q147256" start="8691" end="8702" title="Sea Anemone" label="Sea Anemone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="8719" end="8724" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="8906" end="8915" title="cnidarian" label="cnidarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400752" start="9113" end="9132" title="Sabellidae" label="Feather Duster Worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022204" start="9210" end="9220" title="Damselfish" label="Damselfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022204" start="9287" end="9297" title="Damselfish" label="Damselfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060639" start="9316" end="9320" title="reef aquarium" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q158286" start="9421" end="9429" title="anemones" label="anemones"/>
<link wikidata="Q472616" start="9435" end="9444" title="clownfish" label="clownfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209454" start="9546" end="9559" title="Dichogamy" label="change gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="9648" end="9652" title="male" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q43445" start="9733" end="9739" title="female" label="female"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516282" start="9826" end="9834" title="juvenile (organism)" label="juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="9911" end="9920" title="territory (biology)" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516282" start="9970" end="9978" title="juvenile (organism)" label="juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307688" start="10366" end="10374" title="refugium (fishkeeping)" label="refugium"/>
<link wikidata="Q917209" start="10565" end="10580" title="blue ribbon eel" label="blue ribbon eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q504796" start="10810" end="10821" title="triggerfish" label="triggerfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="10826" end="10833" title="Pufferfish" label="puffers"/>
<link wikidata="Q206948" start="11025" end="11035" title="Anglerfish" label="Anglerfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q540454" start="11037" end="11045" title="Frogfish" label="Frogfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="11241" end="11249" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="11265" end="11272" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="11385" end="11397" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060639" start="11444" end="11453" title="reef aquarium" label="reef tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060639" start="11651" end="11664" title="reef aquarium" label="reef aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759860" start="11779" end="11786" title="Sessility (zoology)" label="sessile"/>
<link wikidata="Q137552" start="11959" end="11968" title="gorgonian" label="gorgonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565729" start="12068" end="12077" title="spirulina (genus)" label="spirulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q601140" start="12105" end="12110" title="Mysis" label="Mysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q475711" start="12330" end="12337" title="Pterois" label="Pterois"/>
<link wikidata="Q386535" start="12362" end="12374" title="Scorpaenidae" label="Scorpaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386847" start="12386" end="12394" title="venomous" label="venomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q675781" start="12659" end="12667" title="Pipefish" label="Pipefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q74363" start="12685" end="12694" title="seahorses" label="seahorses"/>
<link wikidata="Q178202" start="13866" end="13873" title="guppy" label="guppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q310951" start="13875" end="13882" title="Poecilia" label="mollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269791" start="13887" end="13899" title="Palaemonetes" label="ghost shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13918" end="13926" title="#Lionfish" label="lionfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386847" start="13991" end="13999" title="venomous" label="venomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q74363" start="14183" end="14191" title="seahorse" label="seahorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q74363" start="14381" end="14389" title="seahorse" label="seahorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q74363" start="14564" end="14572" title="Seahorse" label="Seahorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="14604" end="14616" title="Aquaculture" label="Captive Bred"/>
<link wikidata="Q465563" start="17628" end="17632" title="Tang (fish)" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="17652" end="17657" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="17682" end="17693" title="carnivorous" label="carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="17694" end="17701" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q56282003" start="18143" end="18149" title="Goby" label="gobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782772" start="18151" end="18159" title="tilefish" label="tilefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="18175" end="18182" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="18264" end="18276" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060639" start="18308" end="18312" title="reef aquarium" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139189" start="18361" end="18378" title="undulated trigger" label="undulated trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q973548" start="18384" end="18397" title="clown trigger" label="clown trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q623170" start="18539" end="18549" title="filter (aquarium)" label="filtration"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="18694" end="18706" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474140" start="18806" end="18831" title="List of fish common names" label="List of fish common names"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627177" start="18834" end="18878" title="List of marine aquarium invertebrate species" label="List of marine aquarium invertebrate species"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627180" start="18881" end="18918" title="List of marine aquarium plant species" label="List of marine aquarium plant species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079160" start="18921" end="18961" title="List of aquarium fish by scientific name" label="List of aquarium fish by scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467362" start="18964" end="19004" title="List of freshwater aquarium fish species" label="List of freshwater aquarium fish species"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560396" start="19007" end="19045" title="List of brackish aquarium fish species" label="List of brackish aquarium fish species"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21001" wikidata="Q41298" url="?curid=21001" title="Magazine">
<text>A magazine is a periodical publication, print or digital, generally produced on a regular schedule, that contains any of a variety of subject-oriented textual and visual content forms. Magazines are generally financed by advertising, purchase price, prepaid subscriptions, or by a combination of the three. They are categorised by their frequency of publication (i.e., as weeklies, monthlies, quarterlies, etc.), their target audiences (e.g., women&#x27;s and trade magazines), their subjects of focus (e.g., popular science and religious), and their tones or approach (e.g., works of satire or humor). Appearance on the cover of print magazines has historically been understood to convey a place of honor or distinction to an individual or event. 

==Term origin and definition==
===Origin===
The etymology of the word &quot;magazine&quot; suggests derivation from the Arabic (), the broken plural of () meaning &quot;depot, storehouse&quot; (originally military storehouse); that comes to English via Middle French and Italian . In its original sense, the word &quot;magazine&quot; referred to a storage space or device.

===Definitions===

In the case of written publication, it refers to a collection of written articles; hence, magazine publications share the moniker with storage units for military equipment such as gunpowder, artillery and firearm magazines, and in French and Russian (adopted from the French, as ), retailers such as department stores.

A distinction can be made between magazines and journals. In the technical sense, a &quot;journal&quot; has continuous pagination throughout a volume; thus, &quot;Bloomberg Businessweek&quot;, which starts each issue anew with page one, is a magazine, but the &quot;Journal of Business Communication&quot;, which continues the same sequence of pagination throughout the coterminous year, is a journal.

Another distinction regard peer-review, although some professional or trade publications are also peer-reviewed, for example the &quot;Journal of Accountancy&quot;. Non-peer-reviewed academic or professional publications are generally &quot;professional magazines&quot;. That a publication calls itself a &quot;journal&quot; does not make it a journal in the technical sense; &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; is actually a newspaper.

==Distribution==

Print magazines can be distributed through the mail, through sales by newsstands, bookstores, or other vendors, or through free distribution at selected pick-up locations. Electronic distribution methods can include social media, email, news aggregators, and visibility of a publication&#x27;s website and search engine results. The traditional subscription business models for distribution fall into three main categories.

===Paid circulation===
In this model, the magazine is sold to readers for a price, either on a per-issue basis or by subscription, where an annual fee or monthly price is paid and issues are sent by post to readers. Paid circulation allows for defined readership statistics.

===Non-paid circulation===
This means that there is no cover price and issues are given away, for example in street dispensers, on airlines, or included with other products or publications. Because this model involves giving issues away to unspecific populations, the statistics only entail the number of issues distributed, and not who reads them.

===Controlled circulation===
This is the model used by many trade magazines (industry-based periodicals) distributed only to qualifying readers, often for free and determined by some form of survey. Because of costs (e.g., printing and postage) associated with the medium of print, publishers may not distribute free copies to everyone who requests one (unqualified leads); instead, they operate under controlled circulation, deciding who may receive free subscriptions based on each person&#x27;s qualification as a member of the trade (and likelihood of buying, for example, likelihood of having corporate purchasing authority, as determined by job title). This allows a high level of certainty that advertisements will be received by the advertiser&#x27;s target audience, and it avoids wasted printing and distribution expenses. This latter model was widely used before the rise of the World Wide Web and is still employed by some titles. For example, in the United Kingdom, a number of computer-industry magazines use this model, including &quot;Computer Weekly&quot; and &quot;Computing&quot;, and in finance, &quot;Waters Magazine&quot;. For the global media industry, an example would be &quot;VideoAge International&quot;.

==History==
The earliest example of magazines was &quot;Erbauliche Monaths Unterredungen&quot;, a literary and philosophy magazine, which was launched in 1663 in Germany. &quot;The Gentleman&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, first published in 1741 in London was the first general-interest magazine. Edward Cave, who edited &quot;The Gentleman&#x27;s Magazine&quot; under the pen name &quot;Sylvanus Urban&quot;, was the first to use the term &quot;magazine&quot;, on the analogy of a military storehouse, the quote being: &quot;a monthly collection, to treasure up as in a magazine&quot;. Founded by Herbert Ingram in 1842, &quot;The Illustrated London News&quot; was the first illustrated weekly news magazine.

===Britain===
The oldest consumer magazine still in print is &quot;The Scots Magazine&quot;, which was first published in 1739, though multiple changes in ownership and gaps in publication totalling over 90 years weaken that claim. &quot;Lloyd&#x27;s List&quot; was founded in Edward Lloyd&#x27;s England coffee shop in 1734; although its online platform is still updated daily, it has not been published as a printed magazine since 2013, when it ended print publication after 274 years.

===France===


Under the Ancien Régime, the most prominent magazines were , , founded in 1665 for scientists, and , founded in 1631. Jean Loret was one of France&#x27;s first journalists. He disseminated the weekly news of music, dance and Parisian society from 1650 until 1665 in verse, in what he called a &quot;gazette burlesque&quot;, assembled in three volumes of &quot;La Muse historique&quot; (1650, 1660, 1665). The French press lagged a generation behind the British, for they catered to the needs of the aristocracy, while the newer British counterparts were oriented toward the middle and working classes.

Periodicals were censored by the central government in Paris. They were not totally quiescent politically—often they criticized Church abuses and bureaucratic ineptitude. They supported the monarchy and they played at most a small role in stimulating the revolution. During the Revolution, new periodicals played central roles as propaganda organs for various factions. Jean-Paul Marat (1743–1793) was the most prominent editor. His &quot;L&#x27;Ami du peuple&quot; advocated vigorously for the rights of the lower classes against the enemies of the people Marat hated; it closed when he was assassinated. After 1800 Napoleon reimposed strict censorship.

Magazines flourished after Napoleon left in 1815. Most were based in Paris and most emphasized literature, poetry and stories. They served religious, cultural and political communities. In times of political crisis they expressed and helped shape the views of their readership and thereby were major elements in the changing political culture. For example, there were eight Catholic periodicals in 1830 in Paris. None were officially owned or sponsored by the Church and they reflected a range of opinion among educated Catholics about current issues, such as the 1830 July Revolution that overthrew the Bourbon monarchy. Several were strong supporters of the Bourbon kings, but all eight ultimately urged support for the new government, putting their appeals in terms of preserving civil order. They often discussed the relationship between church and state. Generally, they urged priests to focus on spiritual matters and not engage in politics. Historian M. Patricia Dougherty says this process created a distance between the Church and the new monarch and enabled Catholics to develop a new understanding of church-state relationships and the source of political authority.

=== Turkey ===

==== General ====
The &quot;Moniteur Ottoman&quot; was a gazette written in French and first published in 1831 on the order of Mahmud II. It was the first official gazette of the Ottoman Empire, edited by Alexandre Blacque at the expense of the Sublime Porte. Its name perhaps referred to the French newspaper &quot;Le Moniteur Universel&quot;. It was issued weekly. &quot;Takvim-i vekayi&quot; was published a few months later, intended as a translation of the &quot;Moniteur&quot; into Ottoman Turkish. After having been edited by former Consul for Denmark &quot;&quot;M. Franceschi&quot;, and later on by &quot;Hassuna de Ghiez&quot;&quot;, it was lastly edited by Lucien Rouet. However, facing the hostility of embassies, it was closed in the 1840s.

==== Satire ====

Satirical magazines of Turkey have a long tradition. One of the earliest satirical magazines was &quot;Diyojen&quot; which was launched in 1869. There are around 20 satirical magazines; the leading ones are &quot;Penguen&quot; (70,000 weekly circulation), &quot;LeMan&quot; (50,000) and &quot;Uykusuz&quot;. Historical examples include Oğuz Aral&#x27;s magazine &quot;Gırgır&quot; (which reached a circulation of 500,000 in the 1970s) and &quot;Marko Paşa&quot; (launched in 1946). Others include &quot;L-Manyak&quot; and &quot;Lombak&quot;.

===United States===
==== Colonial America ====

Publishing was a very expensive industry in colonial times. Paper and printer&#x27;s ink were taxed imported goods and their quality was inconsistent. Interstate tariffs and a poor road system hindered distribution, even on a regional scale. Many magazines were launched, most failing within a few editions, but publishers kept trying. Benjamin Franklin is said to have envisioned one of the first magazines of the American colonies in 1741, the &quot;General Magazine and Historical Chronicle&quot;. The &quot;Pennsylvania Magazine&quot;, edited by Thomas Paine, ran only for a short time but was a very influential publication during the Revolutionary War. The final issue containing the text of the Declaration of Independence was published in 1776.

==== Late 19th century ====
In the mid-19th century, monthly magazines gained popularity. They were general interest to begin, containing some news, vignettes, poems, history, political events, and social discussion. Unlike newspapers, they were more of a monthly record of current events along with entertaining stories, poems, and pictures. The first periodicals to branch out from news were &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot; and &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, which focused on fostering the arts. Both &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot; and &quot;The Atlantic&quot; persist to this day, with &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot; being a cultural magazine and The Atlantic focusing mainly on world events. Early publications of &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot; even held famous works such as early publications of &quot;Moby Dick&quot; or famous events such as the laying of the world&#x27;s first transatlantic telegraph cable; however, the majority of early content was trickle down from British events.

The development of the magazines stimulated an increase in literary criticism and political debate, moving towards more opinionated pieces from the objective newspapers. The increased time between prints and the greater amount of space to write provided a forum for public arguments by scholars and critical observers.

The early periodical predecessors to magazines started to evolve to modern definition in the late 1800s. Works slowly became more specialized and the general discussion or cultural periodicals were forced to adapt to a consumer market which yearned for more localization of issues and events.

====Progressive era: 1890s–1920s====
Mass-circulation magazines became much more common after 1900, some with circulations in the hundreds of thousands of subscribers. Some passed the million-mark in the 1920s. It was an age of mass media. Because of the rapid expansion of national advertising, the cover price fell sharply to about 10 cents. One cause was the heavy coverage of corruption in politics, local government and big business, especially by &quot;Muckrakers.&quot; They were journalists who wrote for popular magazines to expose social and political sins and shortcomings. They relied on their own investigative journalism reporting; muckrakers often worked to expose social ills and corporate and political corruption. Muckraking magazines–notably &quot;McClure&#x27;s&quot;–took on corporate monopolies and crooked political machines while raising public awareness of chronic urban poverty, unsafe working conditions, and social issues such as child labor.

The journalists who specialized in exposing waste, corruption, and scandal operated at the state and local level, like Ray Stannard Baker, George Creel, and Brand Whitlock. Others, including Lincoln Steffens, exposed political corruption in many large cities; Ida Tarbell went after John D. Rockefeller&#x27;s Standard Oil Company. Samuel Hopkins Adams in 1905 showed the fraud involved in many patent medicines, Upton Sinclair&#x27;s 1906 novel &quot;The Jungle&quot; gave a horrid portrayal of how meat was packed, and, also in 1906, David Graham Phillips unleashed a blistering indictment of the U.S. Senate. Roosevelt gave these journalists their nickname when he complained that they were not being helpful by raking up all the muck.

==== 1930s–1990s ====
====21st century====

According to the Research Department of Statista, closures of magazines outnumbered launches in North America during 2009. Although both figures declined during 2010–2015, launches outnumbered closures in each of those years, sometimes by a 3:1 ratio. Focusing more narrowly, MediaFinder.com found that 93 new magazines were launched during the first six months of 2014, while only 30 closed in that time frame. The category which produced the most new publications was &quot;Regional interest&quot;, of which six new magazines were launched, including &quot;12th &amp; Broad&quot; and &quot;Craft Beer &amp; Brewing&quot;. However, two magazines had to change their print schedules. Johnson Publishing&#x27;s &quot;Jet&quot; stopped printing regular issues, making the transition to digital format, though still printing an annual print edition. &quot;Ladies&#x27; Home Journal&quot; stopped their monthly schedule and home delivery for subscribers to become a quarterly newsstand-only special interest publication.

According to statistics from the end of 2013, subscription levels for 22 of the top 25 magazines declined from 2012 to 2013, with just &quot;Time&quot;, &quot;Glamour&quot; and &quot;ESPN The Magazine&quot; gaining numbers. However, by 2024, some titles, notably outdoors magazines, appeared to be growing in popularity.

====Women&#x27;s magazines====
The &quot;seven sisters&quot; of American women&#x27;s magazines are &quot;Ladies&#x27; Home Journal&quot;, &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot;, &quot;McCall&#x27;s&quot;, &quot;Woman&#x27;s Day&quot;, &quot;Redbook&quot;, &quot;Family Circle&quot;, and &quot;Better Homes and Gardens&quot;. Some magazines, among them &quot;Godey&#x27;s Lady&#x27;s Book&quot; and &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, were intended exclusively for a female audience, emphasizing the traditional gender roles of the 19th century. &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot; was the first to focus exclusively on couture fashion, fashion accessories and textiles. The inclusion of didactic content about housekeeping may have increased the appeal of the magazine for a broader audience of women and men concerned about the frivolity of a fashion magazine. 

==Categories==
===Based on periodicity===
Magazines are often categorised by their frequencies of publication (i.e., as weeklies, monthlies, quarterlies, etc.). 

=== Based on target audience and subject ===
====Women&#x27;s fashion====
The first women&#x27;s magazine targeted toward wives and mothers was published in 1852. In the 1920s, new magazines appealed to young German women with a sensuous image and advertisements for the appropriate clothes and accessories they would want to purchase. The glossy pages of &quot;Die Dame&quot; and &quot;Das Blatt der Hausfrau&quot; displayed the &quot;Neue Frauen&quot;, &quot;New Girl&quot; – what Americans called the flapper. This ideal young woman was chic, financially independent, and an eager consumer of the latest fashions. Magazines kept her up to date on fashion, arts, sports, and modern technology such as automobiles and telephones.

==== Parenting ====
Other women&#x27;s magazines have influenced views of motherhood and child-rearing through the use of advice columns, advertisements, and articles related to parenting. Mass-marketed women&#x27;s magazines have shaped and transformed cultural values related to parenting practices. As such, magazines targeting women and parenthood have exerted power and influence over ideas about motherhood and child-rearing.

==== Religion ====
Religious groups have used magazines for spreading and communicating religious doctrine for over 100 years. For instance, &quot;The Watchtower&quot; magazine of the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses was founded by Charles Taze Russell under the title &quot;Zion&#x27;s Watch Tower and Herald of Christ&#x27;s Presence&quot; in July 1879.

====Celebrity gossip, human interest====
Magazines publishing stories and photos of high-profile individuals and celebrities have long been a popular format in the United States. In 2019, &quot;People Magazine&quot; ranked second behind ESPN Magazine in total reach with a reported reach of 98.51 million.

==== Professional ====

Professional magazines, also called trade magazines, or business-to-business magazines are targeted to readers employed in particular industries. These magazines typically cover industry trends and news of interest to professionals in the industry. Subscriptions often come with membership in a professional association. Professional magazines may derive revenue from advertisement placements or advertorials by companies selling products and services to a specific professional audience. Examples include &quot;Advertising Age,&quot; &quot;Automotive News, Broadcast, The Bookseller,&quot; and &quot;The Stage&quot;.

===Based on tone or approach===

Magazines can be categorised by their tone or approach, e.g., as with periodical works of satire or humor. 

==Cover==
Being on the cover of a magazine is sometimes considered an honor or distinction; examples are one-time common statements to the effect that an individual had &quot;appeared on the cover of &quot;Time&quot;&quot; or of the &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, etc. 

The English &quot;Wikipedia&quot; presents a number of List-type articles that survey subjects and individuals appearing in the covers of specific magazines; see for example:
* List of stories on the cover of National Geographic;
* List of individuals on the cover of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;;
* List of people/stories on the cover of &quot;Time&quot; magazine;
* List of individuals on the cover of U.S. &quot;Vogue&quot;.

==See also==

* History of journalism
* Automobile magazines
* Boating magazines
* British boys&#x27; magazines
* Business magazines
* Computer magazines
* Customer magazines
* Fantasy fiction magazines
* Fashion journalism
* Horror fiction magazines
* Humor magazines
* Inflight magazines
* Lifestyle magazine
* Literary magazines
* Luxury magazines
* Music magazines
* News magazines
* Online magazines
* Pornographic magazines
* Pulp magazines
* Science fiction magazines
* Scientific journals
* Shelter magazines (home design and decorating)
* Sports magazines
* Sunday magazines
* Teen magazines
* Trade journals
* Video game magazine
* Video magazines
* Zines
===Lists===

* List of 18th-century British periodicals
* List of 19th-century British periodicals
* List of amateur radio magazines
* List of architecture magazines
* List of art magazines
* List of avant-garde magazines
* List of computer magazines
* List of environmental periodicals
* List of fashion magazines
* List of food and drink magazines
* List of gadget magazines
* List of health and fitness magazines
* List of horticultural magazines
* List of lesbian periodicals
* List of LGBT periodicals
* List of literary magazines
* List of magazines by circulation
* Lists of magazines by country
* List of manga magazines
* List of manga magazines published outside of Japan
* List of men&#x27;s magazines
* List of music magazines
* List of online magazine archives
* List of political magazines
* List of pornographic magazines
* List of railroad-related periodicals
* List of satirical magazines
* List of science magazines
* List of travel magazines
* List of teen magazines
* List of video game magazines
* List of wildlife magazines
* List of women&#x27;s magazines
===Categories===
* 
* 

==References==

==Further reading==

===General===





===U.S. magazines===

* Baughman, James L. &quot;Henry R. Luce and the Rise of the American News Media&quot; (2001) excerpt and text search 
* Brinkley, Alan. &quot;The Publisher: Henry Luce and His American Century&quot;, Alfred A. Knopf (2010) 531 pp.
** &quot;A Magazine Master Builder&quot; Book review by Janet Maslin, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 19 April 2010
* Damon-Moore, Helen. &quot;Magazines for the Millions: Gender and Commerce in the Ladies&#x27; Home Journal and the Saturday Evening Post, 1880–1910&quot; (1994) online 
* Elson, Robert T. &quot;Time Inc: The Intimate History of a Publishing Enterprise, 1923–1941&quot; (1968); vol. 2: &quot;The World of Time Inc.: The Intimate History, 1941–1960&quot; (1973), official corporate history
* Endres, Kathleen L. and Therese L. Lueck, eds. &quot;Women&#x27;s Periodicals in the United States: Consumer Magazines&quot; (1995) online 
* Haveman, Heather A. &quot;Magazines and the Making of America: Modernization, Community, and Print Culture, 1741–1860&quot; (Princeton UP, 2015)
* Johnson, Ronald Maberry and Abby Arthur Johnson. &quot;Propaganda and Aesthetics: The Literary Politics of Afro-American Magazines in the Twentieth Century&quot; (1979) online 
* Mott, Frank Luther. &quot;A History of American Magazines&quot; (five volumes, 1930–1968), detailed coverage of all major magazines, 1741 to 1930 by a leading scholar.
* Nourie, Alan and Barbara Nourie. &quot;American Mass-Market Magazines&quot; (Greenwood Press, 1990) online 
* Rooks, Noliwe M. &quot;Ladies&#x27; Pages: African American Women&#x27;s Magazines and the Culture That Made Them&quot; (Rutgers UP, 2004) online 
* Summer, David E. &quot;The Magazine Century: American Magazines Since 1900&quot; (Peter Lang Publishing; 2010) 242 pages. Examines the rapid growth of magazines throughout the 20th century and analyzes the form&#x27;s current decline.
* Tebbel, John, and Mary Ellen Zuckerman. &quot;The Magazine in America, 1741–1990&quot; (1991), popular history
* Wood, James P. &quot;Magazines in the United States: Their Social and Economic Influence&quot; (1949) online 
* Zuckerman, Mary Ellen. &quot;A History of Popular Women&#x27;s Magazines in the United States, 1792–1995&quot; (Greenwood Press, 1998) online 

===Magazine cover-art related===
* 


==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="2" end="10" title="Magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002697" start="16" end="38" title="periodical literature" label="periodical publication"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="170" end="177" title="content (media)" label="content"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="221" end="232" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528905" start="234" end="248" title="newsagent&amp;#x27;s shop" label="purchase price"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="258" end="271" title="subscription business model" label="subscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="870" end="876" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098772" start="885" end="898" title="broken plural" label="broken plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473289" start="1003" end="1016" title="Middle French" label="Middle French"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="1208" end="1215" title="written work" label="written"/>
<link wikidata="Q191067" start="1216" end="1223" title="article (publishing)" label="article"/>
<link wikidata="Q17504814" start="1323" end="1332" title="gunpowder magazine" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051611" start="1334" end="1343" title="artillery magazine" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q148958" start="1348" end="1364" title="firearm magazine" label="firearm magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="1425" end="1433" title="retailer" label="retailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="1443" end="1459" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="1553" end="1560" title="Academic journal" label="journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="1626" end="1648" title="Bloomberg Businessweek" label="Bloomberg Businessweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294882" start="1729" end="1762" title="Journal of Business Communication" label="Journal of Business Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q685935" start="1936" end="1954" title="Trade magazine" label="trade publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="1964" end="1977" title="Peer review" label="peer-reviewed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2001" end="2023" title="American Institute of Certified Public Accountants#External links" label="Journal of Accountancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="2248" end="2271" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="2292" end="2301" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="2369" end="2373" title="mail" label="mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528905" start="2392" end="2401" title="newsstand" label="newsstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q998426" start="2404" end="2413" title="bookstore" label="bookstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q269415" start="2494" end="2517" title="Electronic distribution" label="Electronic distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="2538" end="2550" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="2552" end="2557" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q498267" start="2559" end="2574" title="news aggregator" label="news aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="2616" end="2623" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="2628" end="2641" title="search engine" label="search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="4263" end="4277" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157518" start="4424" end="4439" title="Computer Weekly" label="Computer Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157629" start="4456" end="4465" title="Computing (magazine)" label="Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974398" start="4495" end="4510" title="Waters Magazine" label="Waters Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927776" start="4575" end="4597" title="VideoAge International" label="VideoAge International"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974935" start="4662" end="4694" title="Erbauliche Monaths Unterredungen" label="Erbauliche Monaths Unterredungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153297" start="4783" end="4812" title="The Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="The Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151799" start="4895" end="4906" title="Edward Cave" label="Edward Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734579" start="5196" end="5210" title="Herbert Ingram" label="Herbert Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q856192" start="5226" end="5253" title="The Illustrated London News" label="The Illustrated London News"/>
<link wikidata="Q178659" start="5274" end="5285" title="illustrated" label="illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522619" start="5376" end="5394" title="The Scots Magazine" label="The Scots Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866963" start="5547" end="5564" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s List" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s List"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="5823" end="5836" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173247" start="5931" end="5941" title="Jean Loret" label="Jean Loret"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="6471" end="6476" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q122290" start="6786" end="6801" title="Jean-Paul Marat" label="Jean-Paul Marat"/>
<link wikidata="Q719806" start="6855" end="6875" title="L&amp;#x27;Ami du peuple" label="L&amp;#x27;Ami du peuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8343" end="8349" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="8394" end="8403" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065227" start="8422" end="8438" title="Government gazette" label="official gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8446" end="8460" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="8512" end="8525" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410997" start="8583" end="8604" title="Le Moniteur Universel" label="Le Moniteur Universel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450146" start="8640" end="8655" title="Takvim-i Vekayi" label="Takvim-i vekayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="8755" end="8770" title="Ottoman Turkish language" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961333" start="9040" end="9059" title="Satirical magazines of Turkey" label="Satirical magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050173" start="9143" end="9150" title="Diyojen" label="Diyojen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090284" start="9253" end="9260" title="Penguen" label="Penguen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116771" start="9376" end="9385" title="Oğuz Aral" label="Oğuz Aral"/>
<link wikidata="Q118727" start="9408" end="9414" title="Gırgır" label="Gırgır"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080864" start="9485" end="9495" title="Marko Paşa" label="Marko Paşa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588963" start="9782" end="9800" title="Import-Export Clause" label="Interstate tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="9967" end="9984" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="10181" end="10193" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="10271" end="10288" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="10333" end="10360" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="10779" end="10804" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="&amp;quot;Harper&amp;#x27;s&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="10815" end="10827" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="11161" end="11182" title="Moby-Dick" label="&amp;quot;Moby Dick&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395922" start="11245" end="11274" title="transatlantic telegraph cable" label="transatlantic telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="12196" end="12206" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127717" start="12578" end="12602" title="investigative journalism" label="investigative journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173093" start="12678" end="12698" title="Corruption in the United States" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800390" start="12735" end="12749" title="McClure&amp;#x27;s" label="McClure&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218690" start="12797" end="12814" title="political machine" label="political machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920219" start="12904" end="12917" title="social issues" label="social issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="12926" end="12937" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133979" start="13059" end="13077" title="Ray Stannard Baker" label="Ray Stannard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741378" start="13079" end="13091" title="George Creel" label="George Creel"/>
<link wikidata="Q753365" start="13097" end="13111" title="Brand Whitlock" label="Brand Whitlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825813" start="13131" end="13147" title="Lincoln Steffens" label="Lincoln Steffens"/>
<link wikidata="Q271712" start="13200" end="13211" title="Ida Tarbell" label="Ida Tarbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="13223" end="13242" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="13250" end="13270" title="Standard Oil Company" label="Standard Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q185406" start="13272" end="13292" title="Samuel Hopkins Adams" label="Samuel Hopkins Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q216134" start="13353" end="13367" title="Upton Sinclair" label="Upton Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q260205" start="13392" end="13402" title="The Jungle" label="The Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q548960" start="13476" end="13497" title="David Graham Phillips" label="David Graham Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333891" start="13764" end="13772" title="Statista" label="Statista"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="13820" end="13833" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268401" start="14408" end="14426" title="Johnson Publishing Company" label="Johnson Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177768" start="14440" end="14443" title="Jet (magazine)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394235" start="14577" end="14602" title="Ladies&amp;#x27; Home Journal" label="Ladies&amp;#x27; Home Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="14883" end="14887" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="14901" end="14908" title="Glamour (magazine)" label="Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046164" start="14925" end="14942" title="ESPN The Magazine" label="ESPN The Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394235" start="15170" end="15195" title="Ladies&amp;#x27; Home Journal" label="Ladies&amp;#x27; Home Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="15209" end="15226" title="Good Housekeeping" label="Good Housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q838254" start="15240" end="15253" title="McCall&amp;#x27;s" label="McCall&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020711" start="15267" end="15283" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430019" start="15297" end="15304" title="Redbook" label="Redbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738999" start="15318" end="15331" title="Family Circle" label="Family Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639151" start="15349" end="15373" title="Better Homes and Gardens (magazine)" label="Better Homes and Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576341" start="15414" end="15443" title="Godey&amp;#x27;s Lady&amp;#x27;s Book" label="Godey&amp;#x27;s Lady&amp;#x27;s Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="15460" end="15480" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="15670" end="15685" title="Haute couture" label="couture fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502127" start="15738" end="15746" title="didactic" label="didactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211924" start="16440" end="16448" title="Die Dame" label="Die Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560" start="16884" end="16890" title="mother" label="mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="16948" end="16962" title="advertisements" label="advertisements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217379" start="16988" end="16997" title="parenting" label="parenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q164706" start="17390" end="17404" title="The Watchtower" label="The Watchtower"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="17427" end="17451" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q313456" start="17467" end="17487" title="Charles Taze Russell" label="Charles Taze Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="17786" end="17801" title="People Magazine" label="People Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q685935" start="17959" end="17974" title="trade magazines" label="trade magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q325421" start="17979" end="17999" title="business-to-business" label="business-to-business"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="18218" end="18242" title="professional association" label="professional association"/>
<link wikidata="Q380060" start="18319" end="18331" title="advertorials" label="advertorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q380047" start="18435" end="18450" title="Advertising Age" label="Advertising Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q787918" start="18464" end="18479" title="Automotive News" label="Automotive News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972059" start="18481" end="18490" title="Broadcast (magazine)" label="Broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719356" start="18492" end="18506" title="The Bookseller" label="The Bookseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235126" start="18524" end="18533" title="The Stage" label="The Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="18890" end="18894" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="18923" end="18936" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706035" start="19128" end="19179" title="List of National Geographic cover stories" label="List of stories on the cover of National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633180" start="19183" end="19244" title="Lists of people on the United States cover of Rolling Stone" label="List of individuals on the cover of &amp;quot;Rolling Stone&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647155" start="19248" end="19312" title="Lists of covers of Time magazine" label="List of people/stories on the cover of &amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q63122661" start="19316" end="19374" title="List of Vogue (US) cover models" label="List of individuals on the cover of U.S. &amp;quot;Vogue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517385" start="19393" end="19414" title="History of journalism" label="History of journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267592" start="19417" end="19436" title="Automobile magazine" label="Automobile magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931528" start="19440" end="19456" title="Boating magazine" label="Boating magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971301" start="19460" end="19488" title="British boys&amp;#x27; magazines" label="British boys&amp;#x27; magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142888" start="19491" end="19509" title="Business journalism" label="Business magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402519" start="19512" end="19529" title="Computer magazine" label="Computer magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303200" start="19533" end="19550" title="Customer magazine" label="Customer magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433771" start="19554" end="19578" title="Fantasy fiction magazine" label="Fantasy fiction magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610346" start="19582" end="19600" title="Fashion journalism" label="Fashion journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000113" start="19603" end="19626" title="Horror fiction magazine" label="Horror fiction magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12298619" start="19630" end="19644" title="Humor magazine" label="Humor magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784039" start="19648" end="19665" title="Inflight magazine" label="Inflight magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545508" start="19669" end="19687" title="Lifestyle magazine" label="Lifestyle magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="19690" end="19707" title="Literary magazine" label="Literary magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706470" start="19711" end="19726" title="Luxury magazine" label="Luxury magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824338" start="19730" end="19744" title="Music magazine" label="Music magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684600" start="19748" end="19762" title="News magazines" label="News magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q847906" start="19765" end="19780" title="Online magazine" label="Online magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244962" start="19784" end="19805" title="Pornographic magazine" label="Pornographic magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="19809" end="19822" title="Pulp magazine" label="Pulp magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399338" start="19826" end="19850" title="Science fiction magazine" label="Science fiction magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="19854" end="19872" title="Scientific journal" label="Scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493984" start="19876" end="19892" title="Shelter magazine" label="Shelter magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q568765" start="19925" end="19940" title="Sports magazine" label="Sports magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639615" start="19944" end="19959" title="Sunday magazine" label="Sunday magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711354" start="19963" end="19976" title="Teen magazine" label="Teen magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q685935" start="19980" end="19993" title="Trade journal" label="Trade journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122591" start="19997" end="20016" title="Video game magazine" label="Video game magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927945" start="20019" end="20033" title="Video magazine" label="Video magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="20037" end="20041" title="Zine" label="Zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559396" start="20058" end="20098" title="List of 18th-century British periodicals" label="List of 18th-century British periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559734" start="20101" end="20141" title="List of 19th-century British periodicals" label="List of 19th-century British periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605645" start="20144" end="20175" title="List of amateur radio magazines" label="List of amateur radio magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470839" start="20178" end="20208" title="List of architecture magazines" label="List of architecture magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606157" start="20211" end="20232" title="List of art magazines" label="List of art magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q114088665" start="20235" end="20264" title="List of avant-garde magazines" label="List of avant-garde magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296003" start="20267" end="20293" title="List of computer magazines" label="List of computer magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618953" start="20296" end="20329" title="List of environmental periodicals" label="List of environmental periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389750" start="20332" end="20357" title="List of fashion magazines" label="List of fashion magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348724" start="20360" end="20392" title="List of food and drink magazines" label="List of food and drink magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100445" start="20395" end="20419" title="List of gadget magazines" label="List of gadget magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622105" start="20422" end="20458" title="List of health and fitness magazines" label="List of health and fitness magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623524" start="20461" end="20492" title="List of horticultural magazines" label="List of horticultural magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q43497718" start="20495" end="20522" title="List of lesbian periodicals" label="List of lesbian periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q428230" start="20525" end="20549" title="List of LGBT periodicals" label="List of LGBT periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q259163" start="20552" end="20578" title="List of literary magazines" label="List of literary magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306228" start="20581" end="20613" title="List of magazines by circulation" label="List of magazines by circulation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20616" end="20645" title=":Category:Lists of magazines by country" label="Lists of magazines by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q457524" start="20648" end="20671" title="List of manga magazines" label="List of manga magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116405" start="20674" end="20724" title="List of manga magazines published outside of Japan" label="List of manga magazines published outside of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957360" start="20727" end="20755" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s magazines" label="List of men&amp;#x27;s magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630003" start="20758" end="20781" title="List of music magazines" label="List of music magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631676" start="20784" end="20816" title="List of online magazine archives" label="List of online magazine archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634154" start="20819" end="20846" title="List of political magazines" label="List of political magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634464" start="20849" end="20879" title="List of pornographic magazines" label="List of pornographic magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q906202" start="20882" end="20918" title="List of railroad-related periodicals" label="List of railroad-related periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864278" start="20921" end="20948" title="List of satirical magazines" label="List of satirical magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115904" start="20951" end="20976" title="List of science magazines" label="List of science magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643949" start="20979" end="21003" title="List of travel magazines" label="List of travel magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642543" start="21006" end="21028" title="List of teen magazines" label="List of teen magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644649" start="21031" end="21059" title="List of video game magazines" label="List of video game magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645239" start="21062" end="21088" title="List of wildlife magazines" label="List of wildlife magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q21114779" start="21091" end="21121" title="List of women&amp;#x27;s magazines" label="List of women&amp;#x27;s magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q24259821" start="21226" end="21244" title="Baughman, James L." label="Baughman, James L."/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="21512" end="21524" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50051" start="23098" end="23110" title="John William Tebbel" label="Tebbel, John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21008" wikidata="Q259838" url="?curid=21008" title="Multivibrator">
<text>A multivibrator is an electronic circuit used to implement a variety of simple two-state devices such as relaxation oscillators, timers, latches and flip-flops. The first multivibrator circuit, the astable multivibrator oscillator, was invented by Henri Abraham and Eugene Bloch during World War I. It consisted of two vacuum tube amplifiers cross-coupled by a resistor-capacitor network. They called their circuit a &quot;multivibrator&quot; because its output waveform was rich in harmonics. A variety of active devices can be used to implement multivibrators that produce similar harmonic-rich wave forms; these include transistors, neon lamps, tunnel diodes and others. Although cross-coupled devices are a common form, single-element multivibrator oscillators are also common.

The three types of multivibrator circuits are:
# Astable multivibrator, in which the circuit is not stable in either state —it continually switches from one state to the other. It functions as a relaxation oscillator.
# Monostable multivibrator, in which one of the states is stable, but the other state is unstable (transient). A trigger pulse causes the circuit to enter the unstable state. After entering the unstable state, the circuit will return to the stable state after a set time. Such a circuit is useful for creating a timing period of fixed duration in response to some external event. This circuit is also known as a one shot.
# Bistable multivibrator, in which the circuit is stable in either state. It can be flipped from one state to the other by an external trigger pulse. This circuit is also known as a flip-flop or latch. It can store one bit of information, and is widely used in digital logic and computer memory.

Multivibrators find applications in a variety of systems where square waves or timed intervals are required. For example, before the advent of low-cost integrated circuits, chains of multivibrators found use as frequency dividers. A free-running multivibrator with a frequency of one-half to one-tenth of the reference frequency would accurately lock to the reference frequency. This technique was used in early electronic organs, to keep notes of different octaves accurately in tune. Other applications included early television systems, where the various line and frame frequencies were kept synchronized by pulses included in the video signal.

== History ==
The first multivibrator circuit, the classic astable multivibrator oscillator (also called a &quot;plate-coupled multivibrator&quot;) was first described by Henri Abraham and Eugene Bloch in &quot;Publication 27&quot; of the French &quot;Ministère de la Guerre&quot;, and in &quot;Annales de Physique 12, 252 (1919)&quot;. Since it produced a square wave, in contrast to the sine wave generated by most other oscillator circuits of the time, its output contained many harmonics above the fundamental frequency, which could be used for calibrating high frequency radio circuits. For this reason Abraham and Bloch called it a &quot;multivibrateur&quot;. It is a predecessor of the Eccles-Jordan trigger which was derived from the circuit a year later.

Historically, the terminology of multivibrators has been somewhat variable:
* 1942 – multivibrator implies astable: &quot;The multivibrator circuit (Fig. 7-6) is somewhat similar to the flip-flop circuit, but the coupling from the anode of one valve to the grid of the other is by a condenser only, so that the coupling is not maintained in the steady state.&quot;
* 1942 – multivibrator as a particular flip-flop circuit: &quot;Such circuits were known as &#x27;trigger&#x27; or &#x27;flip-flop&#x27; circuits and were of very great importance. The earliest and best known of these circuits was the multivibrator.&quot;
* 1943 – flip-flop as one-shot pulse generator: &quot;...an essential difference between the two-valve flip-flop and the multivibrator is that the flip-flop has one of the valves biased to cutoff.&quot;
* 1949 – monostable as flip-flop: &quot;Monostable multivibrators have also been called &#x27;flip-flops&#x27;.&quot;
* 1949 – monostable as flip-flop: &quot;... a flip-flop is a monostable multivibrator and the ordinary multivibrator is an astable multivibrator.&quot;

== Astable ==
An astable multivibrator consists of two amplifying stages connected in a positive feedback loop by two capacitive-resistive coupling networks. The amplifying elements may be junction or field-effect transistors, vacuum tubes, operational amplifiers, or other types of amplifier. Figure 1, below right, shows bipolar junction transistors.

The circuit is usually drawn in a symmetric form as a cross-coupled pair. The two output terminals can be defined at the active devices and have complementary states. One has high voltage while the other has low voltage, except during the brief transitions from one state to the other.

===Operation===
The circuit has two astable (unstable) states that change alternatively with maximum transition rate because of the &quot;accelerating&quot; positive feedback. It is implemented by the coupling capacitors that instantly transfer voltage changes because the voltage across a capacitor cannot suddenly change. In each state, one transistor is switched on and the other is switched off. Accordingly, one fully charged capacitor discharges (reverse charges) slowly thus converting the time into an exponentially changing voltage. At the same time, the other empty capacitor quickly charges thus restoring its charge (the first capacitor acts as a time-setting capacitor and the second prepares to play this role in the next state). The circuit operation is based on the fact that the forward-biased base-emitter junction of the switched-on bipolar transistor can provide a path for the capacitor restoration.

State 1 (Q1 is switched on, Q2 is switched off)

In the beginning, the capacitor C1 is fully charged (in the previous State 2) to the power supply voltage &quot;V&quot; with the polarity shown in Figure 1. Q1 is &quot;on&quot; and connects the left-hand positive plate of C1 to ground. As its right-hand negative plate is connected to Q2 base, a maximum negative voltage (-&quot;V&quot;) is applied to Q2 base that keeps Q2 firmly &quot;off&quot;. C1 begins discharging (reverse charging) via the high-value base resistor R2, so that the voltage of its right-hand plate (and at the base of Q2) is rising from below ground (-&quot;V&quot;) toward +&quot;V&quot;. As Q2 base-emitter junction is reverse-biased, it does not conduct, so all the current from R2 goes into C1. Simultaneously, C2 that is fully discharged and even slightly charged to 0.6 V (in the previous State 2) quickly charges via the low-value collector resistor R4 and Q1 forward-biased base-emitter junction (because R4 is less than R2, C2 charges faster than C1). Thus C2 restores its charge and prepares for the next State C2 when it will act as a time-setting capacitor. Q1 is firmly saturated in the beginning by the &quot;forcing&quot; C2 charging current added to R3 current. In the end, only R3 provides the needed input base current. The resistance R3 is chosen small enough to keep Q1 (not deeply) saturated after C2 is fully charged.

When the voltage of C1 right-hand plate (Q2 base voltage) becomes positive and reaches 0.6 V, Q2 base-emitter junction begins diverting a part of R2 charging current. Q2 begins conducting and this starts the avalanche-like positive feedback process as follows. Q2 collector voltage begins falling; this change transfers through the fully charged C2 to Q1 base and Q1 begins cutting off. Its collector voltage begins rising; this change transfers back through the almost empty C1 to Q2 base and makes Q2 conduct more thus sustaining the initial input impact on Q2 base. Thus the initial input change circulates along the feedback loop and grows in an avalanche-like manner until finally Q1 switches off and Q2 switches on. The forward-biased Q2 base-emitter junction fixes the voltage of C1 right-hand plate at 0.6 V and does not allow it to continue rising toward +&quot;V&quot;.

State 2 (Q1 is switched off, Q2 is switched on)

Now, the capacitor C2 is fully charged (in the previous State 1) to the power supply voltage &quot;V&quot; with the polarity shown in Figure 1. Q2 is &quot;on&quot; and connects the right-hand positive plate of C2 to ground. As its left-hand negative plate is connected to Q1 base, a maximum negative voltage (-&quot;V&quot;) is applied to Q1 base that keeps Q1 firmly &quot;off&quot;. C2 begins discharging (reverse charging) via the high-value base resistor R3, so that the voltage of its left-hand plate (and at the base of Q1) is rising from below ground (-&quot;V&quot;) toward +&quot;V&quot;. Simultaneously, C1 that is fully discharged and even slightly charged to 0.6 V (in the previous State 1) quickly charges via the low-value collector resistor R1 and Q2 forward-biased base-emitter junction (because R1 is less than R3, C1 charges faster than C2). Thus C1 restores its charge and prepares for the next State 1 when it will act again as a time-setting capacitor...and so on... (the next explanations are a mirror copy of the second part of State 1).

===Multivibrator frequency===
==== Derivation ====

The duration of state 1 (low output) will be related to the time constant &quot;R&quot;2&quot;C&quot;1 as it depends on the charging of C1, and the duration of state 2 (high output) will be related to the time constant &quot;R&quot;3&quot;C&quot;2 as it depends on the charging of C2. Because they do not need to be the same, an asymmetric duty cycle is easily achieved.

The voltage on a capacitor with non-zero initial charge is:

:formula_1

Looking at C2, just before Q2 turns on, the left terminal of C2 is at the base-emitter voltage of Q1 (VBE_Q1) and the right terminal is at &quot;V&quot;CC (&quot;&quot;V&quot;CC&quot; is used here instead of &quot;+&quot;V&quot;&quot; to ease notation). The voltage across C2 is &quot;V&quot;CC minus &quot;V&quot;BE_Q1 . The moment after Q2 turns on, the right terminal of C2 is now at 0 V which drives the left terminal of C2 to 0 V minus (&quot;V&quot;CC - &quot;V&quot;BE_Q1) or &quot;V&quot;BE_Q1 - &quot;V&quot;CC. From this instant in time, the left terminal of C2 must be charged back up to VBE_Q1. How long this takes is half our multivibrator switching time (the other half comes from C1). In the charging capacitor equation above, substituting:

:&quot;V&quot;BE_Q1 for formula_2
:(&quot;V&quot;BE_Q1 - &quot;V&quot;CC) for formula_3
:&quot;V&quot;CC for formula_4
results in:

:formula_5

Solving for t results in:

:formula_6

For this circuit to work, VCC»VBE_Q1 (for example: VCC=5 V, VBE_Q1=0.6 V), therefore the equation can be simplified to:

:formula_7

:or

:formula_8

:or

:formula_9

The period of each &quot;half&quot; of the multivibrator is therefore given by
&quot;t&quot; = ln(2)&quot;RC&quot;.

The total period of oscillation is given by:

&quot;T&quot; = &quot;t&quot;1 + &quot;t&quot;2 = ln(2)&quot;R&quot;2 &quot;C&quot;1 + ln(2)&quot;R&quot;3 &quot;C&quot;2

formula_10

where...
* &quot;f&quot; is frequency in hertz.
* &quot;R&quot;2 and &quot;R&quot;3 are resistor values in ohms.
* &quot;C&quot;1 and &quot;C&quot;2 are capacitor values in farads.
* &quot;T&quot; is the period (In this case, the sum of two period durations).

For the special case where
* &quot;t&quot;1 = &quot;t&quot;2 (50% duty cycle)
* &quot;R&quot;2 = &quot;R&quot;3
* &quot;C&quot;1 = &quot;C&quot;2

formula_11

==== Output pulse shape ====

The output voltage has a shape that approximates a square waveform. It is considered below for the transistor Q1.

During State 1, Q2 base-emitter junction is reverse-biased and capacitor C1 is &quot;unhooked&quot; from ground. The output voltage of the switched-on transistor Q1 changes rapidly from high to low since this low-resistive output is loaded by a high impedance load (the series connected capacitor C1 and the high-resistive base resistor R2).

During State 2, Q2 base-emitter junction is forward-biased and capacitor C1 is &quot;hooked&quot; to ground. The output voltage of the switched-off transistor Q1 changes exponentially from low to high since this relatively high resistive output is loaded by a low impedance load (capacitor C1). This is the output voltage of R1C1 integrating circuit.

To approach the needed square waveform, the collector resistors have to be low in resistance. The base resistors have to be low enough to make the transistors saturate in the end of the restoration (RB &lt; β.RC).

===Initial power-up===
When the circuit is first powered up, neither transistor will be switched on. However, this means that at this stage they will both have high base voltages and therefore a tendency to switch on, and inevitable slight asymmetries will mean that one of the transistors is first to switch on. This will quickly put the circuit into one of the above states, and oscillation will ensue. In practice, oscillation always occurs for practical values of &quot;R&quot; and &quot;C&quot;.

However, if the circuit is temporarily held with both bases high, for longer than it takes for both capacitors to charge fully, then the circuit will remain in this stable state, with both bases at 0.60 V, both collectors at 0 V, and both capacitors charged backwards to −0.60 V. This can occur at startup without external intervention, if &quot;R&quot; and &quot;C&quot; are both very small.

===Frequency divider===
An astable multivibrator can be synchronized to an external chain of pulses. A single pair of active devices can be used to divide a reference by a large ratio, however, the stability of the technique is poor owing to the variability of the power supply and the circuit elements. A division ratio of 10, for example, is easy to obtain but not dependable. Chains of bistable flip-flops provide more predictable division, at the cost of more active elements.

===Protective components===
While not fundamental to circuit operation, diodes connected in series with the base or emitter of the transistors are required to prevent the base-emitter junction being driven into reverse breakdown when the supply voltage is in excess of the &quot;V&quot;eb breakdown voltage, typically around 5-10 volts for general purpose silicon transistors. In the monostable configuration, only one of the transistors requires protection.
=== Astable multivibrator using an op-amp ===
Assume all the capacitors to be discharged at first. The output of the op-amp Vo at node c is +Vsat initially. At node a, a voltage of +β Vsat is formed due to voltage division where formula_12. The current that flows from nodes c and b to ground charges the capacitor C towards +Vsat. During this charging period, the voltage at b becomes greater than +β Vsat at some point. The voltage at inverting terminal will be greater than the voltage at the non-inverting terminal of the op-amp. This is a comparator circuit and hence, the output becomes -Vsat. The voltage at node a becomes -βVsat due to voltage division. Now the capacitor discharges towards -Vsat. At some point, the voltage at b becomes less than -β Vsat. The voltage at the non-inverting terminal will be greater than the voltage at the inverting terminal of the op-amp. So, the output of the op-amp is +Vsat. This repeats and forms a free-running oscillator or an astable multivibrator.

If VC is the voltage across the capacitor and from the graph, the time period of the wave formed at capacitor and the output would match, then the time period could be calculated in this way:formula_13

formula_14

At &quot;t&quot; =&quot;T1&quot;,

formula_15

Upon solving, we get:

formula_16

We are taking values of R, C and β such that we get a symmetrical square wave. Thus, we get &quot;T1&quot; = &quot;T2&quot; and total time period &quot;T&quot; = &quot;T1&quot; + &quot;T2&quot;. So, the time period of the square wave generated at the output is:

formula_17

==Monostable==
In the monostable multivibrator, one resistive-capacitive network (C2-R3 in Figure 1) is replaced by a resistive network (just a resistor). The circuit can be thought as a 1/2 astable multivibrator. Q2 collector voltage is the output of the circuit (in contrast to the astable circuit, it has a perfect square waveform since the output is not loaded by the capacitor).

When triggered by an input pulse, a monostable multivibrator will switch to its unstable position for a period of time, and then return to its stable state. The time period monostable multivibrator remains in unstable state is given by &quot;t&quot; = ln(2)&quot;R&quot;2&quot;C&quot;1. If repeated application of the input pulse maintains the circuit in the unstable state, it is called a &quot;retriggerable&quot; monostable. If further trigger pulses do not affect the period, the circuit is a &quot;non-retriggerable&quot; multivibrator.

For the circuit in Figure 2, in the stable state Q1 is turned off and Q2 is turned on. It is triggered by zero or negative input signal applied to Q2 base (with the same success it can be triggered by applying a positive input signal through a resistor to Q1 base). As a result, the circuit goes in State 1 described above. After elapsing the time, it returns to its stable initial state.

=== Monostable using op-amp ===

The circuit is useful for generating single output pulse of adjustable time duration in response to a triggering signal. The width of the output pulse
depends only on external components connected to the op-amp. A diode D1 clamps the capacitor voltage to 0.7 V when the output is at +Vsat. Let us assume that in the stable
state the output Vo = +Vsat. The diode D1 clamps the capacitor to 0.7 V. The voltage at the non-inverting terminal through the potential divider will be + βVsat. Now a negative trigger of magnitude V1 is applied to the non-inverting terminal so that the effective signal at this terminal is less than 0.7 V. Then the output voltage switches from +Vsat to -Vsat. The diode will now get reverse biased and the capacitor starts charging exponentially to -Vsat through R. The voltage at the non-inverting terminal through the potential divider will be - βVsat. After some time the capacitor charges to a voltage more than - βVsat. The voltage on the non-inverting input is now greater than on the inverting input and the output of the op-amp switches again to +Vsat. The capacitor discharges through resistor R and charges again to 0.7 V.

The pulse width T of a monostable multivibrator is calculated as follows:
The general solution for a low pass RC circuit is
:formula_18
where formula_19 and formula_20, the diode forward voltage. Therefore,
:formula_21
at formula_22,
:formula_23
:formula_24
after simplification,
:formula_25
where formula_26
If formula_27 and formula_28 so that formula_29, then
formula_30

==Bistable==


In the bistable multivibrator, both resistive-capacitive networks (C1-R2 and C2-R3 in Figure 1) are replaced by resistive networks (just resistors or direct coupling).

This latch circuit is similar to an astable multivibrator, except that there is no charge or discharge time, due to the absence of capacitors. Hence, when the circuit is switched on, if Q1 is on, its collector is at 0 V. As a result, Q2 gets switched off. This results in more than half +&quot;V&quot; volts being applied to R4 causing current into the base of Q1, thus keeping it on. Thus, the circuit remains stable in a single state continuously. Similarly, Q2 remains on continuously, if it happens to get switched on first.

Switching of state can be done via Set and Reset terminals connected to the bases. For example, if Q2 is on and Set is grounded momentarily, this switches Q2 off, and makes Q1 on. Thus, Set is used to &quot;set&quot; Q1 on, and Reset is used to &quot;reset&quot; it to off state.

== See also ==
* Blocking oscillator
* RC circuit
* Schmitt trigger

== References ==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q259838" start="2" end="15" title="Multivibrator" label="multivibrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="22" end="40" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421688" start="105" end="126" title="relaxation oscillator" label="relaxation oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q186612" start="129" end="134" title="timer" label="timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="137" end="159" title="flip-flop (electronics)" label="latches and flip-flops"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="220" end="230" title="electronic oscillator" label="oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q324919" start="248" end="261" title="Henri Abraham" label="Henri Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373428" start="266" end="278" title="Eugene Bloch" label="Eugene Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="286" end="297" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="483" end="491" title="harmonic" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q259838" start="832" end="853" title="Multivibrator" label="Astable multivibrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="900" end="905" title="State (computer science)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421688" start="978" end="999" title="relaxation oscillator" label="relaxation oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q259838" start="1003" end="1027" title="Multivibrator" label="Monostable multivibrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q259838" start="1413" end="1421" title="Multivibrator" label="one shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q259838" start="1425" end="1447" title="Multivibrator" label="Bistable multivibrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="1605" end="1614" title="flip-flop (electronics)" label="flip-flop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="1642" end="1645" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="1702" end="1717" title="computer memory" label="computer memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455624" start="1931" end="1948" title="frequency divider" label="frequency divider"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="2178" end="2184" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="2240" end="2250" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="2450" end="2460" title="electronic oscillator" label="oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q324919" start="2540" end="2553" title="Henri Abraham" label="Henri Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136640" start="2726" end="2737" title="square wave" label="square wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="2758" end="2767" title="sine wave" label="sine wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="2851" end="2859" title="harmonic" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178947" start="4470" end="4491" title="operational amplifier" label="operational amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q557120" start="9590" end="9600" title="duty cycle" label="duty cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="11128" end="11137" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="11141" end="11146" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11672" end="11679" title="#State 1" label="State 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12015" end="12022" title="#State 2" label="State 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="14025" end="14030" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q178947" start="14529" end="14535" title="Operational amplifier" label="op-amp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16174" end="16195" title="Multivibrator#Astable" label="astable multivibrator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17210" end="17217" title="#State 1" label="State 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="19057" end="19062" title="latch (electronics)" label="latch"/>
<link wikidata="Q623704" start="19880" end="19899" title="Blocking oscillator" label="Blocking oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19902" end="19912" title="RC circuit#Time-domain considerations" label="RC circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q202957" start="19915" end="19930" title="Schmitt trigger" label="Schmitt trigger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21009" wikidata="Q338712" url="?curid=21009" title="Marsh gas">
<text>Marsh gas, also known as swamp gas or bog gas, is a mixture primarily of methane and smaller amounts of hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide, and trace phosphine that is produced naturally within some geographical marshes, swamps, and bogs.

The surface of marshes, swamps, and bogs is initially porous vegetation that rots to form a crust that prevents oxygen from reaching the organic material trapped below. That is the condition that allows anaerobic digestion and fermentation of any plant or animal matter, which then produces methane.

The trapped methane can escape through any of three main pathways: by the diffusion of methane molecules across an air–water interface, by bubbling out of water in a process known as ebullition, or through plant-mediated transport.

== Methane formation ==
Methane is the primary gas that makes up the product colloquially known as &quot;marsh gas&quot;. Much of the biogenic methane produced in nature is derived from either acetate cleavage or by the hydrogen reduction of carbon dioxide. Methane can also be produced by methanogens, archaea that produce methane under anoxic conditions, in a process known as methanogenesis. Methanogenic genera &quot;Methanosarcina&quot; are common in marsh environments. They are both known to stimulate methane production in aquatic muds and use acetate, methanol, and trimethylamine as substrates for methane production.

== Escape routes ==
Global wetlands are one of the largest sources of atmospheric methane. This methane, which is produced by the decomposition of organic matter in an anoxic environment, escapes through either diffusion, a process that occurs mostly at night, ebullition, or plant-mediated transportation.The diffusive process is controlled by the passage of gas across the air–water interface. The diffusion can be accelerated and intensified by upwelling, such as the motion from turbulent eddies, and cooling processes. At night, heat is emitted from the water surface by radiation. The colder surface water sinks, pushing the warmer surface water out and forming eddies. These eddies circulate the dissolved methane throughout the water column and increase the methane flux to the atmosphere. This process is called hydrodynamic transport, and it accounts for more than half of nighttime methane fluxes as well as 32% of annual methane emissions from wetland environments.

Ebullition, also known as bubbling, is a type of one-way transport of gases from nutrient rich sediments, to the water column, and then to the atmosphere. It is a major mechanism for gas exchange in freshwater and coastal marine ecosystems and is known to peak during the daytime and at warm temperatures. It has been reported that ebullition is responsible for 45% of the annual methane flux for fresh water marshes and that it is more important in the summer months during the daytime and can also be triggered by increased wind.

One of the most common species of grass in marsh environments is &quot;Spartina&quot;. These spartina and other common marsh grasses use a gas transport system found in the stems and roots of the plants. The gas transport system works by gaseous diffusion that occurs through the leaf blades and then moves down into the furthest tips of the plant roots. This transport system is sufficient to supply all of the aerobic respiratory needs of the grass roots and also helps to aerate the surrounding mud.

==See also==
* Anoxic waters 
* Firedamp, produced naturally in coal mines
* Hydric soil
* Landfill gas, produced incidentally where municipal solid waste is abandoned.
* Michigan &quot;swamp gas&quot; UFO reports
* Natural gas
* Sewer gas
* Wetland methane emissions
* Will-o&#x27;-the-wisp, mysterious lights caused by ignition of methane and other gases

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q338712" start="0" end="9" title="Marsh gas" label="Marsh gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q338712" start="25" end="34" title="Marsh gas" label="swamp gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q338712" start="38" end="45" title="Marsh gas" label="bog gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="73" end="80" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="104" end="120" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="122" end="136" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207877" start="148" end="157" title="phosphine" label="phosphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="210" end="215" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="219" end="224" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="231" end="234" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271208" start="292" end="298" title="Porous medium" label="porous"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="315" end="319" title="Decomposition" label="rots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554909" start="330" end="335" title="Soil crust" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="350" end="356" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="441" end="460" title="anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="465" end="477" title="fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="485" end="490" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="494" end="500" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41716" start="722" end="732" title="Ebullitions" label="ebullition"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="965" end="972" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="1062" end="1072" title="methanogen" label="methanogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="1075" end="1082" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="1110" end="1116" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22275999" start="1151" end="1165" title="methanogenesis" label="methanogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942715" start="1193" end="1207" title="Methanosarcina" label="Methanosarcina"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="1324" end="1331" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="1333" end="1341" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q423953" start="1347" end="1361" title="trimethylamine" label="trimethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817113" start="1471" end="1490" title="atmospheric methane" label="atmospheric methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="1569" end="1575" title="Hypoxia (environmental)" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="1612" end="1621" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="1849" end="1858" title="upwelling" label="upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q159038" start="2984" end="2992" title="Spartina" label="Spartina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138138" start="3151" end="3168" title="gaseous diffusion" label="gaseous diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="3432" end="3445" title="Anoxic waters" label="Anoxic waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q394497" start="3449" end="3457" title="Firedamp" label="Firedamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="3481" end="3491" title="coal mining" label="coal mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410263" start="3494" end="3505" title="Hydric soil" label="Hydric soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191614" start="3508" end="3520" title="Landfill gas" label="Landfill gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538" start="3550" end="3571" title="municipal solid waste" label="municipal solid waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q130633559" start="3588" end="3630" title="Michigan &amp;quot;swamp gas&amp;quot; UFO reports" label="Michigan &amp;quot;swamp gas&amp;quot; UFO reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="3633" end="3644" title="Natural gas" label="Natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863977" start="3647" end="3656" title="Sewer gas" label="Sewer gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990121" start="3659" end="3684" title="Wetland methane emissions" label="Wetland methane emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q160569" start="3687" end="3708" title="Will-o&amp;#x27;-the-wisp" label="Will-o&amp;#x27;-the-wisp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21012" wikidata="Q14945" url="?curid=21012" title="Merseburg">
<text>Merseburg () is a town in central Germany in southern Saxony-Anhalt, situated on the river Saale, and approximately 14 km south of Halle (Saale) and 30 km west of Leipzig. It is the capital of the Saalekreis district. It had a diocese founded by Archbishop Adalbert of Magdeburg.
The University of Merseburg is located within the town. Merseburg has around 35,000 inhabitants. 

==Names==
* 
* 
* 

==Geography==

The town Merseburg consists of Merseburg proper and the following four &quot;Ortschaften&quot; or municipal divisions:
*Beuna (Geiseltal)
*Geusa
*Meuschau
*Trebnitz

=== Administrative reforms ===
Venenien was incorporated into Merseburg on 1 January 1949. The parish Kötzschen followed on 1 July 1950. Since 30 May 1994, Meuschau is part of Merseburg. Trebnitz, previously part of Kreypau, followed in 2003. Beuna was annexed on 1 January 2009. Geusa is a part of Merseburg since 1 January 2010.

==History==
===Pre-history and Middle Ages===
Merseburg was first mentioned in 850. King Henry the Fowler built a royal palace at Merseburg; in the 933 Battle of Riade, he gained his great victory over the Hungarians in the vicinity.

Thietmar, appointed in 973, became the first bishop of the newly created bishopric of Prague in Bohemia. Prague had been part of the archbishopric of Mainz for a hundred years before that. From 968 until the Protestant Reformation, Merseburg was the seat of the Bishop of Merseburg, and in addition to being for a time the residence of the margraves of Meissen, it was a favorite residence of the German kings during the 10th, 11th and 12th centuries. Fifteen diets were held here during the Middle Ages, during which time its fairs enjoyed the importance which was afterwards transferred to those of Leipzig. After Ekkehard&#x27;s treacherous death on 3 April 1002, Bolesław I Chrobry took Merseburg and Meissen, and then Milsko with Bautzen and Strehla, with the help of the local Slavic population. The German princes accepted the sovereignty of the Polish prince in these areas. Some historians believe that since the convention in Gniezno, the Brave might have had certain rights to the German throne after Otto III, guaranteed by some succession document. Merseburg was later the site of a failed assassination attempt on Polish ruler Bolesław I Chrobry in 1002. The town suffered severely during the German Peasants&#x27; War and also during the Thirty Years&#x27; War.
===17th century to 20th century===
From 1657 to 1738 Merseburg was the residence of the Dukes of Saxe-Merseburg, after which it fell to the Electorate of Saxony. In 1815 following the Napoleonic Wars, the town became part of the Prussian Province of Saxony.

Merseburg is where the Merseburg Incantations were rediscovered in 1841. Written down in Old High German, they are hitherto the only preserved German documents with a heathen theme. One of them is a charm to release warriors caught during battle, and the other is a charm to heal a horse&#x27;s sprained foot.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Merseburg was transformed into an industrial town, largely due to the pioneering work done by Carl Bosch and Friedrich Bergius, who laid down the scientific fundamentals of the catalytic high-pressure ammonia synthesis from 1909 to 1913. The nearby Leuna works continue this tradition of chemical industry. The &quot;Merseburger Tageblatt&quot; was published as a local newspaper in Merseburg.

Merseburg was badly damaged in World War II. In 23 air raids, 6,200 dwellings were completely or partly destroyed. The historic town centre was almost completely destroyed.

Briefly part of Saxony-Anhalt after the war, it was then administered within the &quot;Bezirk&quot; Halle in East Germany. It became part of Saxony-Anhalt again after the reunification of Germany.

==Demographics==
Like many towns in the former East Germany, Merseburg has had a general decline in population since German Reunification despite annexing and merging with a number of smaller nearby villages.

Population of Merseburg &quot;(from 1960, population on 31 December, unless otherwise indicated)&quot;:

==Sights==
Among the notable buildings of Merseburg are the Merseburg Cathedral of St John the Baptist (founded 1015, rebuilt in the 13th and 16th centuries) and the episcopal palace (15th century). The cathedral-and-palace ensemble also features a palace garden.

Other sights include the Merseburg House of Trades with a cultural stage and the German Museum of Chemistry, Merseburg.

==Arts and culture==
The Merseburg Palace Festival with the Historical Pageant, the International Palace-Moat Concerts, Merseburg Organ Days and the Puppet Show Festival Week are events celebrated every year.

==Transport==
Merseburg station is located on the Halle–Bebra railway. Leipzig/Halle Airport is 25 kilometers away.
Merseburg is connected with the Halle (Saale) tramway network. A tram ride from Halle&#x27;s city centre to Merseburg takes about 50 minutes.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Merseburg is twinned with:
* Châtillon, France
* Genzano di Roma, Italy
* Bottrop, Germany

==Notable people==

*Thietmar of Merseburg (975–1018), bishop and chronist
*Menahem of Merseburg (first half of 15th century), rabbi and author
*Johannes Knolleisen (1450–1513), theological professor
*Szymon Bogumił Zug (1733–1807), Polish-German architect and designer of gardens
*Karl Adolph von Basedow (1799–1854), physician
*Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919), biologist, philosopher, physician
*Lucian Müller (1836–1898), classical scholar
*Oskar Herrfurth (1862-1934), painter and illustrator
*Elisabeth Schumann (1888–1952), operatic soprano
*Klaus Tennstedt (1926–1998), conductor
*Uwe Nolte (born 1969), poet, musician and graphic artist
*Jawed Karim (born 1979), American software engineer, YouTube co-founder, creator of the first video uploaded to YouTube &quot;Me at the zoo&quot;
*Dave Grunewald (born 1986), metalcore singer for Annisokay (2011-2019), fitness expert, and podcaster

==References==


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14945" start="0" end="9" title="Merseburg" label="Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="18" end="22" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="34" end="41" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="54" end="67" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678" start="91" end="96" title="Saale" label="Saale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="131" end="144" title="Halle (Saale)" label="Halle (Saale)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="163" end="170" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098" start="197" end="207" title="Saalekreis" label="Saalekreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="227" end="234" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q77394" start="257" end="278" title="Adalbert of Magdeburg" label="Adalbert of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622126" start="284" end="307" title="University of Merseburg" label="University of Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q702094" start="534" end="551" title="Beuna (Geiseltal)" label="Beuna (Geiseltal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q690003" start="553" end="558" title="Geusa" label="Geusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q473384" start="796" end="803" title="Kreypau" label="Kreypau"/>
<link wikidata="Q702094" start="823" end="828" title="Beuna" label="Beuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q690003" start="860" end="865" title="Geusa" label="Geusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150620" start="1001" end="1017" title="Henry the Fowler" label="Henry the Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q164697" start="1064" end="1079" title="Battle of Riade" label="Battle of Riade"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="1118" end="1128" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q325292" start="1147" end="1155" title="Dětmar" label="Thietmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46082" start="1220" end="1239" title="bishopric of Prague" label="bishopric of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="1243" end="1250" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q284667" start="1280" end="1302" title="archbishopric of Mainz" label="archbishopric of Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1355" end="1377" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q566770" start="1409" end="1428" title="Bishop of Merseburg" label="Bishop of Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170180" start="1487" end="1507" title="Margraviate of Meissen" label="margraves of Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="1607" end="1612" title="Reichstag (Holy Roman Empire)" label="diets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="1748" end="1755" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="1814" end="1832" title="Bolesław I Chrobry" label="Bolesław I Chrobry"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="2288" end="2306" title="Bolesław I Chrobry" label="Bolesław I Chrobry"/>
<link wikidata="Q154031" start="2354" end="2379" title="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War" label="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="2400" end="2422" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q568737" start="2521" end="2535" title="Duchy of Saxe-Merseburg" label="Saxe-Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="2564" end="2584" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Electorate of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="2608" end="2623" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="2653" end="2660" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340210" start="2662" end="2680" title="Province of Saxony" label="Province of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q549342" start="2706" end="2728" title="Merseburg Incantations" label="Merseburg Incantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="2772" end="2787" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q76606" start="3126" end="3136" title="Carl Bosch" label="Carl Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76614" start="3141" end="3158" title="Friedrich Bergius" label="Friedrich Bergius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="3233" end="3240" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821579" start="3281" end="3292" title="Leuna works" label="Leuna works"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3458" end="3470" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="3617" end="3630" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48066" start="3682" end="3706" title="Bezirk Halle" label="&amp;quot;Bezirk&amp;quot; Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="3710" end="3722" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="3772" end="3796" title="reunification of Germany" label="reunification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q878372" start="4174" end="4193" title="Merseburg Cathedral" label="Merseburg Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="4200" end="4216" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486272" start="4724" end="4741" title="Merseburg station" label="Merseburg station"/>
<link wikidata="Q875806" start="4760" end="4779" title="Halle–Bebra railway" label="Halle–Bebra railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q668382" start="4781" end="4802" title="Leipzig/Halle Airport" label="Leipzig/Halle Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q820381" start="4858" end="4887" title="Trams in Halle (Saale)" label="Halle (Saale) tramway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="5014" end="5021" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q212947" start="5030" end="5039" title="Châtillon, Hauts-de-Seine" label="Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q242683" start="5050" end="5065" title="Genzano di Roma" label="Genzano di Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069" start="5075" end="5082" title="Bottrop" label="Bottrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q275425" start="5114" end="5135" title="Thietmar of Merseburg" label="Thietmar of Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502112" start="5169" end="5189" title="Menahem of Merseburg" label="Menahem of Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q108976" start="5238" end="5257" title="Johannes Knolleisen" label="Johannes Knolleisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q86122" start="5294" end="5312" title="Szymon Bogumił Zug" label="Szymon Bogumił Zug"/>
<link wikidata="Q77241" start="5375" end="5398" title="Karl Adolph von Basedow" label="Karl Adolph von Basedow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48246" start="5423" end="5436" title="Ernst Haeckel" label="Ernst Haeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q71344" start="5485" end="5498" title="Lucian Müller" label="Lucian Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349032" start="5531" end="5546" title="Oskar Herrfurth" label="Oskar Herrfurth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62745" start="5585" end="5603" title="Elisabeth Schumann" label="Elisabeth Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q61180" start="5635" end="5650" title="Klaus Tennstedt" label="Klaus Tennstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260239" start="5675" end="5684" title="Uwe Nolte" label="Uwe Nolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q76694" start="5733" end="5744" title="Jawed Karim" label="Jawed Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="5786" end="5793" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803111" start="5859" end="5872" title="Me at the zoo" label="Me at the zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q113169365" start="5880" end="5894" title="Dave Grunewald" label="Dave Grunewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q14550979" start="5929" end="5938" title="Annisokay" label="Annisokay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21017" wikidata="Q165678" url="?curid=21017" title="Microcontroller">
<text>A microcontroller (MC, UC, or μC) or microcontroller unit (MCU) is a small computer on a single integrated circuit. A microcontroller contains one or more CPUs (processor cores) along with memory and programmable input/output peripherals. Program memory in the form of NOR flash, OTP ROM, or ferroelectric RAM is also often included on the chip, as well as a small amount of RAM. Microcontrollers are designed for embedded applications, in contrast to the microprocessors used in personal computers or other general-purpose applications consisting of various discrete chips.

In modern terminology, a microcontroller is similar to, but less sophisticated than, a system on a chip (SoC). A SoC may include a microcontroller as one of its components but usually integrates it with advanced peripherals like a graphics processing unit (GPU), a Wi-Fi module, or one or more coprocessors.

Microcontrollers are used in automatically controlled products and devices, such as automobile engine control systems, implantable medical devices, remote controls, office machines, appliances, power tools, toys, and other embedded systems. By reducing the size and cost compared to a design that uses a separate microprocessor, memory, and input/output devices, microcontrollers make digital control of more devices and processes practical. Mixed-signal microcontrollers are common, integrating analog components needed to control non-digital electronic systems. In the context of the Internet of Things, microcontrollers are an economical and popular means of data collection, sensing and actuating the physical world as edge devices.

Some microcontrollers may use four-bit words and operate at frequencies as low as for low power consumption (single-digit milliwatts or microwatts). They generally have the ability to retain functionality while waiting for an event such as a button press or other interrupt; power consumption while sleeping (CPU clock and most peripherals off) may be just nanowatts, making many of them well suited for long lasting battery applications. Other microcontrollers may serve performance-critical roles, where they may need to act more like a digital signal processor (DSP), with higher clock speeds and power consumption.

== History ==
=== Background ===
The first multi-chip microprocessors, the Four-Phase Systems AL1 in 1969 and the Garrett AiResearch MP944 in 1970, were developed with multiple MOS LSI chips. The first single-chip microprocessor was the Intel 4004, released on a single MOS LSI chip in 1971. It was developed by Federico Faggin, using his silicon-gate MOS technology, along with Intel engineers Marcian Hoff and Stan Mazor, and Busicom engineer Masatoshi Shima. It was followed by the 4-bit Intel 4040, the 8-bit Intel 8008, and the 8-bit Intel 8080. All of these processors required several external chips to implement a working system, including memory and peripheral interface chips. As a result, the total system cost was several hundred (1970s US) dollars, making it impossible to economically computerize small appliances.

MOS Technology introduced its sub-$100 microprocessors in 1975, the 6501 and 6502. Their chief aim was to reduce this cost barrier but these microprocessors still required external support, memory, and peripheral chips which kept the total system cost in the hundreds of dollars.

=== Development ===
One book credits TI engineers Gary Boone and Michael Cochran with the successful creation of the first microcontroller in 1971. The result of their work was the TMS 1000, which became commercially available in 1974. It combined read-only memory, read/write memory, processor and clock on one chip and was targeted at embedded systems.

During the early-to-mid-1970s, Japanese electronics manufacturers began producing microcontrollers for automobiles, including 4-bit MCUs for in-car entertainment, automatic wipers, electronic locks, and dashboard, and 8-bit MCUs for engine control.

Partly in response to the existence of the single-chip TMS 1000, Intel developed a computer system on a chip optimized for control applications, the Intel 8048, with commercial parts first shipping in 1977. It combined RAM and ROM on the same chip with a microprocessor. Among numerous applications, this chip would eventually find its way into over one billion PC keyboards. At that time Intel&#x27;s President, Luke J. Valenter, stated that the microcontroller was one of the most successful products in the company&#x27;s history, and he expanded the microcontroller division&#x27;s budget by over 25%.


Most microcontrollers at this time had concurrent variants. One had EPROM program memory, with a transparent quartz window in the lid of the package to allow it to be erased by exposure to ultraviolet light. These erasable chips were often used for prototyping. The other variant was either a mask-programmed ROM or a PROM variant which was only programmable once. For the latter, sometimes the designation &quot;OTP&quot; was used, standing for &quot;one-time programmable&quot;. In an OTP microcontroller, the PROM was usually of identical type as the EPROM, but the chip package had no quartz window; because there was no way to expose the EPROM to ultraviolet light, it could not be erased. Because the erasable versions required ceramic packages with quartz windows, they were significantly more expensive than the OTP versions, which could be made in lower-cost opaque plastic packages. For the erasable variants, quartz was required, instead of less expensive glass, for its transparency to ultraviolet light—to which glass is largely opaque—but the main cost differentiator was the ceramic package itself. Piggyback microcontrollers were also used.

In 1993, the introduction of EEPROM memory allowed microcontrollers (beginning with the Microchip PIC16C84) to be electrically erased quickly without an expensive package as required for EPROM, allowing both rapid prototyping, and in-system programming. (EEPROM technology had been available prior to this time, but the earlier EEPROM was more expensive and less durable, making it unsuitable for low-cost mass-produced microcontrollers.) The same year, Atmel introduced the first microcontroller using Flash memory, a special type of EEPROM. Other companies rapidly followed suit, with both memory types.

Nowadays microcontrollers are cheap and readily available for hobbyists, with large online communities around certain processors.

=== Volume and cost ===
In 2002, about 55% of all CPUs sold in the world were 8-bit microcontrollers and microprocessors.

Over two billion 8-bit microcontrollers were sold in 1997, and according to Semico, over four billion 8-bit microcontrollers were sold in 2006. More recently, Semico has claimed the MCU market grew 36.5% in 2010 and 12% in 2011.

A typical home in a developed country is likely to have only four general-purpose microprocessors but around three dozen microcontrollers. A typical mid-range automobile has about 30 microcontrollers. They can also be found in many electrical devices such as washing machines, microwave ovens, and telephones.

Cost to manufacture can be under per unit.

Cost has plummeted over time, with the cheapest 8-bit microcontrollers being available for under in 2018, and some 32-bit microcontrollers around for similar quantities.

In 2012, following a global crisis—a worst ever annual sales decline and recovery and average sales price year-over-year plunging 17%—the biggest reduction since the 1980s—the average price for a microcontroller was ( for 4-/8-bit, for 16-bit, for 32-bit).

In 2012, worldwide sales of 8-bit microcontrollers were around , while 4-bit microcontrollers also saw significant sales.

In 2015, 8-bit microcontrollers could be bought for (1,000 units), 16-bit for (1,000 units), and 32-bit for (1,000 units, but at for 5,000).

In 2018, 8-bit microcontrollers could be bought for , 16-bit for (1,000 units, but at for 100 or for full reel of 2,000), and 32-bit for (1,000 units, but at for 5,000).

In 2018, the low-priced microcontrollers above from 2015 were all more expensive (with inflation calculated between 2018 and 2015 prices for those specific units) at: the 8-bit microcontroller could be bought for (1,000 units) or 2.6% higher, the 16-bit one for (1,000 units) or 21% higher, and the 32-bit one for (1,000 units, but at for 5,000) or 33% higher.

=== Smallest computer ===
On 21 June 2018, the &quot;world&#x27;s smallest computer&quot; was announced by the University of Michigan. The device is a &quot; wireless and batteryless sensor system with integrated Cortex-M0+ processor and optical communication for cellular temperature measurement.&quot; It &quot;measures just to a side—dwarfed by a grain of rice. [...] In addition to the RAM and photovoltaics, the new computing devices have processors and wireless transmitters and receivers. Because they are too small to have conventional radio antennae, they receive and transmit data with visible light. A base station provides light for power and programming, and it receives the data.&quot; The device is th the size of IBM&#x27;s previously claimed world-record-sized computer from months back in March 2018, which is &quot;smaller than a grain of salt&quot;, has a million transistors, costs less than to manufacture, and, combined with blockchain technology, is intended for logistics and &quot;crypto-anchors&quot;—digital fingerprint applications.

== Embedded design ==
A microcontroller can be considered a self-contained system with a processor, memory and peripherals and can be used as an embedded system. The majority of microcontrollers in use today are embedded in other machinery, such as automobiles, telephones, appliances, and peripherals for computer systems.

While some embedded systems are very sophisticated, many have minimal requirements for memory and program length, with no operating system, and low software complexity. Typical input and output devices include switches, relays, solenoids, LED&#x27;s, small or custom liquid-crystal displays, radio frequency devices, and sensors for data such as temperature, humidity, light level etc. Embedded systems usually have no keyboard, screen, disks, printers, or other recognizable I/O devices of a personal computer, and may lack human interaction devices of any kind.

=== Interrupts ===
Microcontrollers must provide real-time (predictable, though not necessarily fast) response to events in the embedded system they are controlling. When certain events occur, an interrupt system can signal the processor to suspend processing the current instruction sequence and to begin an interrupt service routine (ISR, or &quot;interrupt handler&quot;) which will perform any processing required based on the source of the interrupt, before returning to the original instruction sequence. Possible interrupt sources are device-dependent and often include events such as an internal timer overflow, completing an analog-to-digital conversion, a logic-level change on an input such as from a button being pressed, and data received on a communication link. Where power consumption is important as in battery devices, interrupts may also wake a microcontroller from a low-power sleep state where the processor is halted until required to do something by a peripheral event.

=== Programs ===
Typically microcontroller programs must fit in the available on-chip memory, since it would be costly to provide a system with external, expandable memory. Compilers and assemblers are used to convert both high-level and assembly language code into a compact machine code for storage in the microcontroller&#x27;s memory. Depending on the device, the program memory may be permanent, read-only memory that can only be programmed at the factory, or it may be field-alterable flash or erasable read-only memory.

Manufacturers have often produced special versions of their microcontrollers in order to help the hardware and software development of the target system. Originally these included EPROM versions that have a &quot;window&quot; on the top of the device through which program memory can be erased by ultraviolet light, ready for reprogramming after a programming (&quot;burn&quot;) and test cycle. Since 1998, EPROM versions are rare and have been replaced by EEPROM and flash, which are easier to use (can be erased electronically) and cheaper to manufacture.

Other versions may be available where the ROM is accessed as an external device rather than as internal memory, however these are becoming rare due to the widespread availability of cheap microcontroller programmers.

The use of field-programmable devices on a microcontroller may allow field update of the firmware or permit late factory revisions to products that have been assembled but not yet shipped. Programmable memory also reduces the lead time required for deployment of a new product.

Where hundreds of thousands of identical devices are required, using parts programmed at the time of manufacture can be economical. These &quot;mask-programmed&quot; parts have the program laid down in the same way as the logic of the chip, at the same time.

A customized microcontroller incorporates a block of digital logic that can be personalized for additional processing capability, peripherals and interfaces that are adapted to the requirements of the application. One example is the AT91CAP from Atmel.

=== Other microcontroller features ===
Microcontrollers usually contain from several to dozens of general purpose input/output pins (GPIO). GPIO pins are software configurable to either an input or an output state. When GPIO pins are configured to an input state, they are often used to read sensors or external signals. Configured to the output state, GPIO pins can drive external devices such as LEDs or motors, often indirectly, through external power electronics.

Many embedded systems need to read sensors that produce analog signals. However, because they are built to interpret and process digital data, i.e. 1s and 0s, they are not able to do anything with the analog signals that may be sent to it by a device. So, an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) is used to convert the incoming data into a form that the processor can recognize. A less common feature on some microcontrollers is a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) that allows the processor to output analog signals or voltage levels.

In addition to the converters, many embedded microprocessors include a variety of timers as well. One of the most common types of timers is the programmable interval timer (PIT). A PIT may either count down from some value to zero, or up to the capacity of the count register, overflowing to zero. Once it reaches zero, it sends an interrupt to the processor indicating that it has finished counting. This is useful for devices such as thermostats, which periodically test the temperature around them to see if they need to turn the air conditioner on/off, the heater on/off, etc.

A dedicated pulse-width modulation (PWM) block makes it possible for the CPU to control power converters, resistive loads, motors, etc., without using many CPU resources in tight timer loops.

A universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter (UART) block makes it possible to receive and transmit data over a serial line with very little load on the CPU. Dedicated on-chip hardware also often includes capabilities to communicate with other devices (chips) in digital formats such as Inter-Integrated Circuit (I²C), Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), Universal Serial Bus (USB), and Ethernet.

== Higher integration ==
Microcontrollers may not implement an external address or data bus as they integrate RAM and non-volatile memory on the same chip as the CPU. Using fewer pins, the chip can be placed in a much smaller, cheaper package.

Integrating the memory and other peripherals on a single chip and testing them as a unit increases the cost of that chip, but often results in decreased net cost of the embedded system as a whole. Even if the cost of a CPU that has integrated peripherals is slightly more than the cost of a CPU and external peripherals, having fewer chips typically allows a smaller and cheaper circuit board, and reduces the labor required to assemble and test the circuit board, in addition to tending to decrease the defect rate for the finished assembly.

A microcontroller is a single integrated circuit, commonly with the following features:
* central processing unit ranging from small and simple 4-bit processors to complex 32-bit or 64-bit processors
* volatile memory (RAM) for data storage
* ROM, EPROM, EEPROM or Flash memory for program and operating parameter storage
* discrete input and output bits, allowing control or detection of the logic state of an individual package pin
* serial input/output such as serial ports (UARTs)
* other serial communications interfaces like I²C, Serial Peripheral Interface and Controller Area Network for system interconnect
* peripherals such as timers, event counters, PWM generators, and watchdog
* clock generator often an oscillator for a quartz timing crystal, resonator or RC circuit
* many include analog-to-digital converters, some include digital-to-analog converters
* in-circuit programming and in-circuit debugging support

This integration drastically reduces the number of chips and the amount of wiring and circuit board space that would be needed to produce equivalent systems using separate chips. Furthermore, on low pin count devices in particular, each pin may interface to several internal peripherals, with the pin function selected by software. This allows a part to be used in a wider variety of applications than if pins had dedicated functions.

Microcontrollers have proved to be highly popular in embedded systems since their introduction in the 1970s.

Some microcontrollers use a Harvard architecture: separate memory buses for instructions and data, allowing accesses to take place concurrently. Where a Harvard architecture is used, instruction words for the processor may be a different bit size than the length of internal memory and registers; for example: 12-bit instructions used with 8-bit data registers.

The decision of which peripheral to integrate is often difficult. The microcontroller vendors often trade operating frequencies and system design flexibility against time-to-market requirements from their customers and overall lower system cost. Manufacturers have to balance the need to minimize the chip size against additional functionality.

Microcontroller architectures vary widely. Some designs include general-purpose microprocessor cores, with one or more ROM, RAM, or I/O functions integrated onto the package. Other designs are purpose-built for control applications. A microcontroller instruction set usually has many instructions intended for bit manipulation (bit-wise operations) to make control programs more compact. For example, a general-purpose processor might require several instructions to test a bit in a register and branch if the bit is set, where a microcontroller could have a single instruction to provide that commonly required function.

Microcontrollers historically have not had math coprocessors, so floating-point arithmetic has been performed by software. However, some recent designs do include FPUs and DSP-optimized features. An example would be Microchip&#x27;s PIC32 MIPS-based line.

== Programming environments ==
Microcontrollers were originally programmed only in assembly language, but various high-level programming languages, such as C, Python and JavaScript, are now also in common use to target microcontrollers and embedded systems. Compilers for general-purpose languages will typically have some restrictions as well as enhancements to better support the unique characteristics of microcontrollers. Some microcontrollers have environments to aid developing certain types of applications. Microcontroller vendors often make tools freely available to make it easier to adopt their hardware.

Microcontrollers with specialty hardware may require their own non-standard dialects of C, such as SDCC for the 8051, which prevent using standard tools (such as code libraries or static analysis tools) even for code unrelated to hardware features. Interpreters may also contain nonstandard features, such as MicroPython, although a fork, CircuitPython, has looked to move hardware dependencies to libraries and have the language adhere to a more CPython standard.

Interpreter firmware is also available for some microcontrollers. For example, BASIC on the early microcontroller Intel 8052; BASIC and FORTH on the Zilog Z8 as well as some modern devices. Typically these interpreters support interactive programming.

Simulators are available for some microcontrollers. These allow a developer to analyze what the behavior of the microcontroller and their program should be if they were using the actual part. A simulator will show the internal processor state and also that of the outputs, as well as allowing input signals to be generated. While on the one hand most simulators will be limited from being unable to simulate much other hardware in a system, they can exercise conditions that may otherwise be hard to reproduce at will in the physical implementation, and can be the quickest way to debug and analyze problems.

Recent microcontrollers are often integrated with on-chip debug circuitry that when accessed by an in-circuit emulator (ICE) via JTAG, allow debugging of the firmware with a debugger. A real-time ICE may allow viewing and/or manipulating of internal states while running. A tracing ICE can record executed program and MCU states before/after a trigger point.

== Types ==
, there are several dozen microcontroller architectures and vendors including:
* ARM core processors (many vendors)
** ARM Cortex-M cores are specifically targeted toward microcontroller applications
* Microchip Technology Atmel AVR (8-bit), AVR32 (32-bit), and AT91SAM (32-bit)
* Cypress Semiconductor&#x27;s M8C core used in their Cypress PSoC
* Freescale ColdFire (32-bit) and S08 (8-bit)
* Freescale 68HC11 (8-bit), and others based on the Motorola 6800 family
* Intel 8051, also manufactured by NXP Semiconductors, Infineon and many others
* Infineon: 8-bit XC800, 16-bit XE166, 32-bit XMC4000 (ARM based Cortex M4F), 32-bit TriCore and, 32-bit Aurix Tricore Bit microcontrollers
* Maxim Integrated MAX32600, MAX32620, MAX32625, MAX32630, MAX32650, MAX32640
* MIPS
* Microchip Technology PIC, (8-bit PIC16, PIC18, 16-bit dsPIC33 / PIC24), (32-bit PIC32)
* NXP Semiconductors LPC1000, LPC2000, LPC3000, LPC4000 (32-bit), LPC900, LPC700 (8-bit)
* Parallax Propeller
* PowerPC ISE
* Rabbit 2000 (8-bit)
* Renesas Electronics: RL78 16-bit MCU; RX 32-bit MCU; SuperH; V850 32-bit MCU; H8; R8C 16-bit MCU
* Silicon Laboratories Pipelined 8-bit 8051 microcontrollers and mixed-signal ARM-based 32-bit microcontrollers
* STMicroelectronics STM8 (8-bit), ST10 (16-bit), STM32 (32-bit), SPC5 (automotive 32-bit)
* Texas Instruments TI MSP430 (16-bit), MSP432 (32-bit), C2000 (32-bit)
* Toshiba TLCS-870 (8-bit/16-bit)

Many others exist, some of which are used in very narrow range of applications or are more like applications processors than microcontrollers. The microcontroller market is extremely fragmented, with numerous vendors, technologies, and markets. Note that many vendors sell or have sold multiple architectures.

== Interrupt latency ==
In contrast to general-purpose computers, microcontrollers used in embedded systems often seek to optimize interrupt latency over instruction throughput. Issues include both reducing the latency, and making it be more predictable (to support real-time control).

When an electronic device causes an interrupt, during the context switch the intermediate results (registers) have to be saved before the software responsible for handling the interrupt can run. They must also be restored after that interrupt handler is finished. If there are more processor registers, this saving and restoring process may take more time, increasing the latency. (If an ISR does not require the use of some registers, it may simply leave them alone rather than saving and restoring them, so in that case those registers are not involved with the latency.) Ways to reduce such context/restore latency include having relatively few registers in their central processing units (undesirable because it slows down most non-interrupt processing substantially), or at least having the hardware not save them all (this fails if the software then needs to compensate by saving the rest &quot;manually&quot;). Another technique involves spending silicon gates on &quot;shadow registers&quot;: One or more duplicate registers used only by the interrupt software, perhaps supporting a dedicated stack.

Other factors affecting interrupt latency include:
* Cycles needed to complete current CPU activities. To minimize those costs, microcontrollers tend to have short pipelines (often three instructions or less), small write buffers, and ensure that longer instructions are continuable or restartable. RISC design principles ensure that most instructions take the same number of cycles, helping avoid the need for most such continuation/restart logic.
* The length of any critical section that needs to be interrupted. Entry to a critical section restricts concurrent data structure access. When a data structure must be accessed by an interrupt handler, the critical section must block that interrupt. Accordingly, interrupt latency is increased by however long that interrupt is blocked. When there are hard external constraints on system latency, developers often need tools to measure interrupt latencies and track down which critical sections cause slowdowns.
** One common technique just blocks all interrupts for the duration of the critical section. This is easy to implement, but sometimes critical sections get uncomfortably long.
** A more complex technique just blocks the interrupts that may trigger access to that data structure. This is often based on interrupt priorities, which tend to not correspond well to the relevant system data structures. Accordingly, this technique is used mostly in very constrained environments.
** Processors may have hardware support for some critical sections. Examples include supporting atomic access to bits or bytes within a word, or other atomic access primitives like the LDREX/STREX exclusive access primitives introduced in the ARMv6 architecture.
* Interrupt nesting. Some microcontrollers allow higher priority interrupts to interrupt lower priority ones. This allows software to manage latency by giving time-critical interrupts higher priority (and thus lower and more predictable latency) than less-critical ones.
* Trigger rate. When interrupts occur back-to-back, microcontrollers may avoid an extra context save/restore cycle by a form of tail call optimization.

Lower end microcontrollers tend to support fewer interrupt latency controls than higher end ones.

== Memory technology ==
Two different kinds of memory are commonly used with microcontrollers, a non-volatile memory for storing firmware and a read–write memory for temporary data.

=== Data ===
From the earliest microcontrollers to today, six-transistor SRAM is almost always used as the read/write working memory, with a few more transistors per bit used in the register file.

In addition to the SRAM, some microcontrollers also have internal EEPROM and/or NVRAM for data storage; and ones that do not have any (such as the BASIC Stamp), or where the internal memory is insufficient, are often connected to an external EEPROM or flash memory chip.

A few microcontrollers beginning in 2003 have &quot;self-programmable&quot; flash memory.

=== Firmware ===
The earliest microcontrollers used mask ROM to store firmware. Later microcontrollers (such as the early versions of the Freescale 68HC11 and early PIC microcontrollers) had EPROM memory, which used a translucent window to allow erasure via UV light, while production versions had no such window, being OTP (one-time-programmable). Firmware updates were equivalent to replacing the microcontroller itself, thus many products were not upgradeable.

Motorola MC68HC805 was the first microcontroller to use EEPROM to store the firmware. EEPROM microcontrollers became more popular in 1993 when Microchip introduced PIC16C84 and Atmel introduced an 8051-core microcontroller that was first one to use NOR Flash memory to store the firmware. Today&#x27;s microcontrollers almost all use flash memory, with a few models using FRAM and some ultra-low-cost parts still using OTP or Mask ROM.

== See also ==

* Microprocessor
* System on a chip
* List of common microcontrollers
* List of Wi-Fi microcontrollers
* List of open-source hardware projects
* Microbotics
* Programmable logic controller
* Single-board microcontroller

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="2" end="17" title="Microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="19" end="21" title="Microcontroller" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="23" end="25" title="Microcontroller" label="UC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="30" end="32" title="Microcontroller" label="μC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="37" end="57" title="Microcontroller" label="microcontroller unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="59" end="62" title="Microcontroller" label="MCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="75" end="83" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="96" end="114" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="155" end="159" title="Central processing unit" label="CPUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="161" end="175" title="processor core" label="processor core"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="189" end="195" title="Computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="213" end="225" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="269" end="278" title="Flash memory#NOR flash" label="NOR flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q381364" start="280" end="287" title="Programmable read-only memory" label="OTP ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q703656" start="292" end="309" title="ferroelectric RAM" label="ferroelectric RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="375" end="378" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="414" end="422" title="Embedded system" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="456" end="470" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="480" end="497" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="663" end="679" title="system on a chip" label="system on a chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="807" end="831" title="graphics processing unit" label="graphics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="841" end="846" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="870" end="881" title="coprocessor" label="coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q959968" start="914" end="938" title="Control system" label="automatically controlled"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="1108" end="1123" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="1198" end="1212" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541329" start="1327" end="1339" title="Mixed-signal integrated circuit" label="Mixed-signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="1471" end="1489" title="internet of things" label="Internet of Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929239" start="1547" end="1562" title="data collection" label="data collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q167676" start="1564" end="1571" title="Sensor" label="sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q423488" start="1576" end="1585" title="Actuator" label="actuating"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098575" start="1608" end="1619" title="edge device" label="edge device"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="1662" end="1667" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="words"/>
<link wikidata="Q29954" start="1713" end="1730" title="Electric energy consumption" label="power consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="1745" end="1755" title="Watt" label="milliwatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068739" start="1834" end="1841" title="Wait state" label="waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q991296" start="1849" end="1854" title="Event-driven architecture" label="event"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="1887" end="1896" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="2162" end="2186" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474890" start="2318" end="2340" title="Four-Phase Systems AL1" label="Four-Phase Systems AL1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494445" start="2357" end="2375" title="Garrett AiResearch" label="Garrett AiResearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q902535" start="2376" end="2381" title="MP944" label="MP944"/>
<link wikidata="Q205509" start="2480" end="2490" title="Intel 4004" label="Intel 4004"/>
<link wikidata="Q667095" start="2555" end="2570" title="Federico Faggin" label="Federico Faggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478108" start="2582" end="2594" title="silicon-gate" label="silicon-gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="2622" end="2627" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q462096" start="2638" end="2650" title="Marcian Hoff" label="Marcian Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442751" start="2655" end="2665" title="Stan Mazor" label="Stan Mazor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017523" start="2671" end="2678" title="Busicom" label="Busicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414244" start="2688" end="2703" title="Masatoshi Shima" label="Masatoshi Shima"/>
<link wikidata="Q229932" start="2728" end="2733" title="4-bit computing" label="4-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q330255" start="2734" end="2744" title="Intel 4040" label="Intel 4040"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="2750" end="2755" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q319509" start="2756" end="2766" title="Intel 8008" label="Intel 8008"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="2782" end="2792" title="Intel 8080" label="Intel 8080"/>
<link wikidata="Q852174" start="3073" end="3087" title="MOS Technology" label="MOS Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="3150" end="3154" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="3391" end="3393" title="Texas Instruments" label="TI"/>
<link wikidata="Q694036" start="3535" end="3543" title="TMS 1000" label="TMS 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q21026417" start="3851" end="3871" title="in-car entertainment" label="in-car entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753717" start="4109" end="4119" title="Intel 8048" label="Intel 8048"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="4179" end="4182" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="4187" end="4190" title="read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="4636" end="4641" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="4757" end="4768" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q381364" start="4886" end="4890" title="Programmable read-only memory" label="PROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="5755" end="5761" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991934" start="5824" end="5832" title="PIC16x84" label="PIC16C84"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="5913" end="5918" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q373805" start="5957" end="5978" title="in-system programming" label="in-system programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="6229" end="6241" title="Flash memory" label="Flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="6514" end="6517" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="7220" end="7225" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="7287" end="7293" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q229932" start="7672" end="7677" title="4-bit computing" label="4-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="8510" end="8532" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8612" end="8622" title="ARM Cortex-M#Cortex-M0+" label="Cortex-M0+"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="8797" end="8810" title="photovoltaics" label="photovoltaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11375" start="8858" end="8893" title="wireless networking" label="wireless transmitters and receivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20514253" start="9347" end="9357" title="blockchain" label="blockchain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745713" start="9427" end="9446" title="Fingerprint (computing)" label="digital fingerprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="9607" end="9622" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="9909" end="9925" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="10007" end="10012" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q245739" start="10015" end="10023" title="solenoid" label="solenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="10026" end="10029" title="Light-emitting diode" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="10054" end="10076" title="liquid-crystal display" label="liquid-crystal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="10280" end="10297" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="10401" end="10410" title="Real-time computing" label="real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="10548" end="10557" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541162" start="10661" end="10686" title="interrupt service routine" label="interrupt service routine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="11569" end="11579" title="High-level programming language" label="high-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="11584" end="11601" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="11622" end="11634" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="11747" end="11763" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="11837" end="11842" title="Flash memory" label="flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="11985" end="12005" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="12054" end="12059" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="12171" end="12182" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="12331" end="12337" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="12740" end="12748" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="13074" end="13089" title="mask ROM" label="mask-programmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="13320" end="13331" title="peripherals" label="peripherals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="13336" end="13346" title="Interface (computer science)" label="interfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654573" start="13423" end="13430" title="AT91CAP" label="AT91CAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="13436" end="13441" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q260798" start="13577" end="13581" title="General-purpose input/output" label="GPIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="14172" end="14199" title="analog-to-digital converter" label="analog-to-digital converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="14341" end="14368" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112160" start="14590" end="14617" title="programmable interval timer" label="programmable interval timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q585184" start="15040" end="15062" title="pulse-width modulation" label="pulse-width modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="15116" end="15132" title="Switched-mode power supply" label="power converters"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="15134" end="15143" title="Electrical resistance" label="resistive"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="15151" end="15157" title="Electric motor" label="motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="15213" end="15218" title="Program loops" label="loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q280409" start="15223" end="15266" title="universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter" label="universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q750469" start="15535" end="15538" title="I²C" label="I²C"/>
<link wikidata="Q849492" start="15570" end="15573" title="Serial Peripheral Interface" label="SPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="15598" end="15601" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="15608" end="15616" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="15737" end="15756" title="non-volatile memory" label="non-volatile memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="16438" end="16456" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="16498" end="16521" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q229932" start="16552" end="16557" title="4-bit computing" label="4-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="16580" end="16586" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="16590" end="16596" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="16627" end="16630" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="16651" end="16654" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="16656" end="16661" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="16663" end="16669" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="16673" end="16685" title="Flash memory" label="Flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="16690" end="16697" title="Computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="16851" end="16863" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="16872" end="16883" title="serial port" label="serial port"/>
<link wikidata="Q280409" start="16886" end="16890" title="UART" label="UART"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="16901" end="16922" title="serial communications" label="serial communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="16923" end="16933" title="Network interface controller" label="interfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q750469" start="16939" end="16942" title="I²C" label="I²C"/>
<link wikidata="Q849492" start="16944" end="16971" title="Serial Peripheral Interface" label="Serial Peripheral Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q728183" start="16976" end="16999" title="Controller Area Network" label="Controller Area Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="17026" end="17036" title="peripheral" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q186612" start="17046" end="17051" title="timer" label="timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q585184" start="17070" end="17084" title="Pulse-width modulation" label="PWM generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334191" start="17090" end="17098" title="Watchdog timer" label="watchdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164847" start="17101" end="17116" title="clock generator" label="clock generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q939318" start="17179" end="17189" title="RC circuit" label="RC circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q373805" start="17279" end="17301" title="in-circuit programming" label="in-circuit programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q650553" start="17306" end="17326" title="in-circuit debugging" label="in-circuit debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="17422" end="17435" title="Printed circuit board" label="circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="17825" end="17840" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q641044" start="17910" end="17930" title="Harvard architecture" label="Harvard architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q540627" start="18901" end="18917" title="bit manipulation" label="bit manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="19257" end="19273" title="math coprocessor" label="math coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="19279" end="19304" title="floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="19554" end="19571" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="19585" end="19616" title="high-level programming language" label="high-level programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="19627" end="19628" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="19630" end="19636" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="19641" end="19651" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="19711" end="19727" title="embedded systems" label="embedded systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="19729" end="19737" title="Compiler" label="Compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963996" start="19743" end="19767" title="general-purpose language" label="general-purpose language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542756" start="20187" end="20204" title="Small Device C Compiler" label="SDCC for the 8051"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="20337" end="20349" title="Interpreter (computing)" label="Interpreters"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313489" start="20397" end="20408" title="MicroPython" label="MicroPython"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607667" start="20427" end="20440" title="CircuitPython" label="CircuitPython"/>
<link wikidata="Q599384" start="20535" end="20542" title="CPython" label="CPython"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="20633" end="20638" title="BASIC programming language" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="20668" end="20673" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="20674" end="20678" title="8052" label="8052"/>
<link wikidata="Q275472" start="20690" end="20695" title="Forth (programming language)" label="FORTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q203257" start="20703" end="20711" title="Zilog Z8" label="Zilog Z8"/>
<link wikidata="Q16622442" start="20781" end="20804" title="interactive programming" label="interactive programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q173673" start="20807" end="20817" title="Logic simulation" label="Simulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="21001" end="21010" title="simulator" label="simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="21475" end="21480" title="debug" label="debug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660551" start="21516" end="21535" title="in-circuit emulator" label="in-circuit emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q545306" start="21546" end="21550" title="JTAG" label="JTAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="21591" end="21599" title="debugger" label="debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="21870" end="21873" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="21908" end="21920" title="ARM Cortex-M" label="ARM Cortex-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545076" start="21991" end="22011" title="Microchip Technology" label="Microchip Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q216651" start="22012" end="22021" title="Atmel AVR" label="Atmel AVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q651111" start="22031" end="22036" title="AVR32" label="AVR32"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819531" start="22051" end="22058" title="AT91SAM" label="AT91SAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q478354" start="22070" end="22091" title="Cypress Semiconductor" label="Cypress Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640617" start="22122" end="22134" title="Cypress PSoC" label="Cypress PSoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q284810" start="22137" end="22155" title="Freescale ColdFire" label="Freescale ColdFire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501142" start="22169" end="22172" title="Freescale S08" label="S08"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949893" start="22183" end="22199" title="Freescale 68HC11" label="Freescale 68HC11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839919" start="22220" end="22253" title="List of Freescale products" label="based on the Motorola 6800 family"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="22256" end="22266" title="Intel 8051" label="Intel 8051"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="22289" end="22307" title="NXP Semiconductors" label="NXP Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22336" end="22344" title="List of common microcontrollers#Infineon" label="Infineon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041703" start="22346" end="22357" title="XC800" label="8-bit XC800"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041761" start="22359" end="22371" title="XE166 family" label="16-bit XE166"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597531" start="22373" end="22387" title="Infineon XMC4000" label="32-bit XMC4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662391" start="22412" end="22426" title="TriCore" label="32-bit TriCore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029675" start="22432" end="22444" title="Aurix" label="32-bit Aurix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784671" start="22476" end="22492" title="Maxim Integrated" label="Maxim Integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="22554" end="22558" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545076" start="22561" end="22581" title="Microchip Technology" label="Microchip Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q650553" start="22582" end="22585" title="PIC microcontroller" label="PIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="22650" end="22668" title="NXP Semiconductors" label="NXP Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051580" start="22739" end="22757" title="Parallax Propeller" label="Parallax Propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="22760" end="22767" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195973" start="22774" end="22785" title="Rabbit 2000" label="Rabbit 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196269" start="22796" end="22815" title="Renesas Electronics" label="Renesas Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276935" start="22817" end="22832" title="RL78" label="RL78 16-bit MCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196269" start="22834" end="22847" title="RX Microcontroller Family" label="RX 32-bit MCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205020" start="22849" end="22855" title="SuperH" label="SuperH"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906406" start="22857" end="22872" title="V850" label="V850 32-bit MCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630069" start="22874" end="22876" title="H8 Family" label="H8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415013" start="22878" end="22892" title="R8C" label="R8C 16-bit MCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286044" start="22895" end="22915" title="Silicon Laboratories" label="Silicon Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q661845" start="23007" end="23025" title="STMicroelectronics" label="STMicroelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20745347" start="23026" end="23030" title="STM8" label="STM8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022631" start="23040" end="23044" title="ST10" label="ST10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394773" start="23055" end="23060" title="STM32" label="STM32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23098" end="23115" title="Texas Instruments#Microcontrollers" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028009" start="23116" end="23125" title="MSP430" label="TI MSP430"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745394" start="23153" end="23158" title="TMS320" label="C2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893640" start="23170" end="23186" title="Toshiba TLCS" label="Toshiba TLCS-870"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160861" start="23645" end="23662" title="interrupt latency" label="interrupt latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061424" start="23859" end="23873" title="context switch" label="context switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541162" start="24034" end="24051" title="interrupt handler" label="interrupt handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="24083" end="24101" title="processor register" label="processor register"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="25209" end="25213" title="Reduced instruction set computing" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046373" start="25379" end="25395" title="critical section" label="critical section"/>
<link wikidata="Q250514" start="26532" end="26543" title="Load-link/store-conditional" label="LDREX/STREX"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="26590" end="26595" title="ARM architecture" label="ARMv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340959" start="27009" end="27018" title="tail call" label="tail call"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="27230" end="27249" title="non-volatile memory" label="non-volatile memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q891131" start="27277" end="27294" title="read–write memory" label="read–write memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180944" start="27498" end="27511" title="register file" label="register file"/>
<link wikidata="Q499024" start="27594" end="27599" title="NVRAM" label="NVRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q640596" start="27661" end="27672" title="BASIC Stamp" label="BASIC Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="27947" end="27955" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949893" start="28015" end="28031" title="Freescale 68HC11" label="Freescale 68HC11"/>
<link wikidata="Q650553" start="28042" end="28061" title="PIC microcontroller" label="PIC microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="28068" end="28073" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q750753" start="28351" end="28360" title="Motorola 68HC05" label="MC68HC805"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="28398" end="28404" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991934" start="28506" end="28514" title="PIC16x84" label="PIC16C84"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="28539" end="28548" title="Intel MCS-51" label="8051-core"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="28591" end="28607" title="flash memory" label="NOR Flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="28797" end="28811" title="Microprocessor" label="Microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="28814" end="28830" title="System on a chip" label="System on a chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506558" start="28833" end="28864" title="List of common microcontrollers" label="List of common microcontrollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356139" start="28867" end="28897" title="List of Wi-Fi microcontrollers" label="List of Wi-Fi microcontrollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631684" start="28900" end="28937" title="List of open-source hardware projects" label="List of open-source hardware projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402635" start="28940" end="28951" title="Microbotics" label="Microbotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188674" start="28954" end="28983" title="Programmable logic controller" label="Programmable logic controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157301" start="28986" end="29014" title="Single-board microcontroller" label="Single-board microcontroller"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21018" wikidata="Q7199" url="?curid=21018" title="Marcel Proust">
<text>Valentin Louis Georges Eugène Marcel Proust ( ; ; 10 July 1871 – 18 November 1922) was a French novelist, literary critic, and essayist who wrote the novel (in French – translated in English as &quot;Remembrance of Things Past&quot; and more recently as &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot;) which was published in seven volumes between 1913 and 1927. He is considered by critics and writers to be one of the most influential authors of the 20th century.

==Biography==
Proust was born on 10 July 1871 at the home of his great-uncle in the Paris Borough of Auteuil (the south-western sector of the then-rustic 16th arrondissement), two months after the Treaty of Frankfurt formally ended the Franco-Prussian War. His birth coincided with the beginning of the French Third Republic, during the violence that surrounded the suppression of the Paris Commune, and his childhood corresponded with the consolidation of the Republic. Much of &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot; concerns the vast changes, most particularly the decline of the aristocracy and the rise of the middle classes, that occurred in France during the &quot;fin de siècle.&quot;

Proust&#x27;s father, Adrien Proust, was a prominent French pathologist and epidemiologist, studying cholera in Europe and Asia. He wrote numerous articles and books on medicine and hygiene. Proust&#x27;s mother, Jeanne Clémence (maiden name: Weil), was the daughter of a wealthy German–Jewish family from Alsace. Literate and well-read, she demonstrated a well-developed sense of humour in her letters, and her command of the English language was sufficient to help with her son&#x27;s translations of John Ruskin. Proust was raised in his father&#x27;s Catholic faith. He was baptized on 5 August 1871 at the Church of Saint-Louis-d&#x27;Antin and later confirmed as a Catholic, but he never formally practised that faith. He later became an atheist and was something of a mystic.

By the age of nine, Proust had had his first serious asthma attack, and thereafter was considered a sickly child. Proust spent long holidays in the village of Illiers. This village, combined with recollections of his great-uncle&#x27;s house in Auteuil, became the model for the fictional town of Combray, where some of the most important scenes of &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot; take place. (Illiers was renamed Illiers-Combray in 1971 on the occasion of the Proust centenary celebrations.)

In 1882, at the age of eleven, Proust became a pupil at the Lycée Condorcet; however, his education was disrupted by his illness. Despite this, he excelled in literature, receiving an award in his final year. Thanks to his classmates, he was able to gain access to some of the salons of the upper bourgeoisie, providing him with copious material for &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot;.
In spite of his poor health, Proust served a year (1889–90) in the French army, stationed at Coligny Barracks in Orléans, an experience that provided a lengthy episode in &quot;The Guermantes&#x27; Way&quot;, part three of his novel. As a young man, Proust was a dilettante and a social climber whose aspirations as a writer were hampered by his lack of self-discipline. His reputation from this period, as a snob and an amateur, contributed to his later troubles with getting &quot;Swann&#x27;s Way&quot;, the first part of his large-scale novel, published in 1913. At this time, he attended the &quot;salons&quot; of Mme Straus, widow of Georges Bizet and mother of Proust&#x27;s childhood friend Jacques Bizet, of Madeleine Lemaire and of Mme Arman de Caillavet, one of the models for Madame Verdurin, and mother of his friend Gaston Arman de Caillavet, with whose fiancée (Jeanne Pouquet) he was in love. It is through Mme Arman de Caillavet, he made the acquaintance of Anatole France, her lover.

Proust had a close relationship with his mother. To appease his father, who insisted that he pursue a career, Proust obtained a volunteer position at Bibliothèque Mazarine in the summer of 1896. After exerting considerable effort, he obtained a sick leave that extended for several years until he was considered to have resigned. He never worked at his job, and he did not move from his parents&#x27; apartment until after both were dead.

His life and family circle changed markedly between 1900 and 1905. In February 1903, Proust&#x27;s brother, Robert Proust, married and left the family home. His father died in November of the same year. Finally, and most crushingly, Proust&#x27;s beloved mother died in September 1905. She left him a considerable inheritance. His health throughout this period continued to deteriorate.

Proust spent the last three years of his life mostly confined to his bedroom of his apartment 44 rue Hamelin (in Chaillot), sleeping during the day and working at night to complete his novel. He died of pneumonia and a pulmonary abscess in 1922. He was buried in the Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

===Personal life===
Proust is known to have been homosexual; his sexuality and relationships with men are often discussed by his biographers. Although his housekeeper, Céleste Albaret, denies this aspect of Proust&#x27;s sexuality in her memoirs, her denial runs contrary to the statements of many of Proust&#x27;s friends and contemporaries, including his fellow writer André Gide as well as his valet Ernest A. Forssgren.

Proust never openly disclosed his homosexuality, though his family and close friends either knew or suspected it. In 1897, he fought a duel with writer Jean Lorrain, who publicly questioned the nature of Proust&#x27;s relationship with Proust&#x27;s lover Lucien Daudet; both duellists survived. Despite Proust&#x27;s public denials, his romantic relationship with composer Reynaldo Hahn and his infatuation with his chauffeur and secretary, Alfred Agostinelli, are well documented. On the night of 11 January 1918, Proust was one of the men identified by police in a raid on a male brothel run by Albert Le Cuziat. Proust&#x27;s friend Paul Morand openly teased Proust about his visits to male prostitutes. In his journal, Morand refers to Proust, as well as Gide, as &quot;constantly hunting, never satiated by their adventures ... eternal prowlers, tireless sexual adventurers.&quot;

The exact influence of Proust&#x27;s sexuality on his writing is a topic of debate. However, &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot; discusses homosexuality at length and features several principal characters, both men and women, who are either homosexual or bisexual: the Baron de Charlus, Robert de Saint-Loup, Odette de Crécy, and Albertine Simonet. Homosexuality also appears as a theme in &quot;Les plaisirs et les jours&quot; and his unfinished novel, &quot;Jean Santeuil&quot;.

Proust inherited much of his mother&#x27;s political outlook, which was supportive of the French Third Republic and near the liberal centre of French politics. In an 1892 article published in &quot;Le Banquet&quot; entitled &quot;L&#x27;Irréligion d&#x27;État&quot;, Proust condemned extreme anti-clerical measures such as the expulsion of monks, observing that &quot;one might just be surprised that the negation of religion should bring in its wake the same fanaticism, intolerance, and persecution as religion itself.&quot; He argued that socialism posed a greater threat to society than the Church. He was equally critical of the right, lambasting &quot;the insanity of the conservatives,&quot; whom he deemed &quot;as dumb and ungrateful as under Charles X,&quot; and referring to Pope Pius X&#x27;s obstinacy as foolish. Proust always rejected the bigoted and illiberal views harbored by many priests at the time, but believed that the most enlightened clerics could be just as progressive as the most enlightened secularists, and that both could serve the cause of &quot;the advanced liberal Republic&quot;. He approved of the more moderate stance taken in 1906 by Aristide Briand, whom he described as &quot;admirable&quot;.

Proust was among the earliest Dreyfusards, even attending Émile Zola&#x27;s trial and proudly claiming to have been the one who asked Anatole France to sign the petition in support of Alfred Dreyfus&#x27;s innocence. In 1919, when representatives of the right-wing Action Française published a manifesto upholding French colonialism and the Catholic Church as the embodiment of civilised values, Proust rejected their nationalistic and chauvinistic views in favor of a liberal pluralist vision which acknowledged Christianity&#x27;s cultural legacy in France. Julien Benda commended Proust in &quot;La Trahison des clercs&quot; as a writer who distinguished himself from his generation by avoiding the twin traps of nationalism and class sectarianism.

Because of his allergies and frequent asthma attacks, and the misunderstanding of the disease at the time, Proust was considered a hypochondriac by his doctors. His correspondence provides some clues on his symptoms. According to Yellowlees Douglas, Proust suffered from the vascular subtype of Ehlers–Danlos Syndrome.

==Early writing==
Proust was involved in writing and publishing from an early age. In addition to the literary magazines with which he was associated, and in which he published while at school (&quot;La Revue verte&quot; and &quot;La Revue lilas&quot;), from 1890 to 1891 he published a regular society column in the journal &quot;Le Mensuel&quot;. In 1892, he was involved in founding a literary review called &quot;Le Banquet&quot; (also the French title of Plato&#x27;s &quot;Symposium&quot;), and throughout the next several years Proust published small pieces regularly in this journal and in the prestigious &quot;La Revue Blanche&quot;.

In 1896 &quot;Les plaisirs et les jours&quot;, a compendium of many of these early pieces, was published. The book included a foreword by Anatole France, drawings by Mme Lemaire in whose &quot;salon&quot; Proust was a frequent guest, and who inspired Proust&#x27;s Mme Verdurin. She invited him and Reynaldo Hahn to her château de Réveillon (the model for Mme Verdurin&#x27;s La Raspelière) in summer 1894, and for three weeks in 1895. Despite the contents being well received, the book sold poorly due to its high price, which was widely ridiculed. The price was due to the fact that the book was so sumptuously produced.

That year Proust also began working on a novel, which was eventually published in 1952 and titled &quot;Jean Santeuil&quot; by his posthumous editors. Many of the themes later developed in &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot; find their first articulation in this unfinished work, including the enigma of memory and the necessity of reflection; several sections of &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot; can be read in the first draft in &quot;Jean Santeuil&quot;. The portrait of the parents in &quot;Jean Santeuil&quot; is quite harsh, in marked contrast to the adoration with which the parents are painted in Proust&#x27;s masterpiece. Following the poor reception of &quot;Les Plaisirs et les Jours&quot;, and internal troubles with resolving the plot, Proust gradually abandoned &quot;Jean Santeuil&quot; in 1897 and stopped work on it entirely by 1899.

Beginning in 1895 Proust spent several years reading Thomas Carlyle, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and John Ruskin. Through this reading, he refined his theories of art and the role of the artist in society. Also, in &quot;Time Regained&quot; Proust&#x27;s universal protagonist recalls having translated Ruskin&#x27;s &quot;Sesame and Lilies&quot;. The artist&#x27;s responsibility is to confront the appearance of nature, deduce its essence and retell or explain that essence in the work of art. Ruskin&#x27;s view of artistic production was central to this conception, and Ruskin&#x27;s work was so important to Proust that he claimed to know &quot;by heart&quot; several of Ruskin&#x27;s books, including &quot;The Seven Lamps of Architecture&quot;, &quot;The Bible of Amiens&quot;, and &quot;Praeterita&quot;.

Proust set out to translate two of Ruskin&#x27;s works into French, but was hampered by an imperfect command of English. To compensate for this he made his translations a group affair: sketched out by his mother, the drafts were first revised by Proust, then by Marie Nordlinger, the English cousin of his friend and sometime lover Reynaldo Hahn, then finally polished by Proust. Questioned about his method by an editor, Proust responded, &quot;I don&#x27;t claim to know English; I claim to know Ruskin&quot;. &quot;The Bible of Amiens&quot;, with Proust&#x27;s extended introduction, was published in French in 1904. Both the translation and the introduction were well-reviewed; Henri Bergson called Proust&#x27;s introduction &quot;an important contribution to the psychology of Ruskin&quot;, and had similar praise for the translation. At the time of this publication, Proust was already translating Ruskin&#x27;s &quot;Sesame and Lilies&quot;, which he completed in June 1905, just before his mother&#x27;s death, and published in 1906. Literary historians and critics have ascertained that, apart from Ruskin, Proust&#x27;s chief literary influences included Saint-Simon, Montaigne, Stendhal, Flaubert, George Eliot, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and Leo Tolstoy.

In Proust’s 1904 article &quot;La mort des cathédrales&quot; (The Death of Cathedrals) published in &quot;Le Figaro&quot;, Proust called Gothic cathedrals “probably the highest, and unquestionably the most original expression of French genius”.

1908 was an important year for Proust&#x27;s development as a writer. During the first part of the year he published in various journals pastiches of other writers. These exercises in imitation may have allowed Proust to solidify his own style. In addition, in the spring and summer of the year Proust began work on several different fragments of writing that would later coalesce under the working title of &quot;Contre Sainte-Beuve&quot;. Proust described his efforts in a letter to a friend: &quot;I have in progress: a study on the nobility, a Parisian novel, an essay on Sainte-Beuve and Flaubert, an essay on women, an essay on pederasty (not easy to publish), a study on stained-glass windows, a study on tombstones, a study on the novel&quot;.

From these disparate fragments Proust began to shape a novel on which he worked continually during this period. The rough outline of the work centred on a first-person narrator, unable to sleep, who during the night remembers waiting as a child for his mother to come to him in the morning. The novel was to have ended with a critical examination of Sainte-Beuve and a refutation of his theory that biography was the most important tool for understanding an artist&#x27;s work. Present in the unfinished manuscript notebooks are many elements that correspond to parts of the &quot;Recherche&quot;, in particular, to the &quot;Combray&quot; and &quot;Swann in Love&quot; sections of Volume 1, and to the final section of Volume 7. Trouble with finding a publisher, as well as a gradually changing conception of his novel, led Proust to shift work to a substantially different project that still contained many of the same themes and elements. By 1910 he was at work on &quot;À la recherche du temps perdu&quot;.

==&quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot;==
Begun in 1909, when Proust was 38 years old, &quot;À la recherche du temps perdu&quot; consists of seven volumes totaling around 3,200 pages (about 4,300 in The Modern Library&#x27;s translation) and featuring more than 2,000 characters. Graham Greene called Proust the &quot;greatest novelist of the twentieth century, just as Tolstoy was of the nineteenth&quot; and W. Somerset Maugham called the novel the &quot;greatest fiction to date&quot;. André Gide was initially not so taken with his work. The first volume was refused by the publisher Gallimard on Gide&#x27;s advice. He later wrote to Proust apologizing for his part in the refusal and calling it one of the most serious mistakes of his life. Finally, the book was published at the author&#x27;s expense by Grasset and Proust paid critics to speak favorably about it.

Proust died before he was able to complete his revision of the drafts and proofs of the final volumes, the last three of which were published posthumously and edited by his brother Robert. The book was translated into English by C. K. Scott Moncrieff, appearing under the title &quot;Remembrance of Things Past&quot; between 1922 and 1931. Scott Moncrieff translated volumes one through six of the seven volumes, dying before completing the last. This last volume was rendered by other translators at different times. When Scott Moncrieff&#x27;s translation was later revised (first by Terence Kilmartin, then by D. J. Enright) the title of the novel was changed to the more literal &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot;.

In 1995, Penguin undertook a fresh translation of the book by editor Christopher Prendergast and seven translators in three countries, based on the latest, most complete and authoritative French text. Its six volumes, comprising Proust&#x27;s seven, were published in Britain under the Allen Lane imprint in 2002.

In 2023, Oxford University Press started releasing a new translation of the book by editors Brian Nelson and Adam Watt and five other translators. It will be published in seven volumes under the Oxford World&#x27;s Classics imprint.

==Gallery==
==Bibliography==
===Novels===
* &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot; (&quot;À la recherche du temps perdu&quot; published in seven volumes, previously translated as &quot;Remembrance of Things Past&quot;) (1913–1927)
# &quot;Swann&#x27;s Way&quot; (&quot;Du côté de chez Swann&quot;, sometimes translated as &quot;The Way by Swann&#x27;s&quot;) (1913)
# &quot;In the Shadow of Young Girls in Flower&quot; (&quot;À l&#x27;ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs&quot;, also translated as &quot;Within a Budding Grove&quot;) (1919)
# &quot;The Guermantes Way&quot; (&quot;Le Côté de Guermantes&quot; originally published in two volumes) (1920–1921)
# &quot;Sodom and Gomorrah&quot; (&quot;Sodome et Gomorrhe&quot; originally published in two volumes, sometimes translated as &quot;Cities of the Plain&quot;) (1921–1922)
# &quot;The Prisoner&quot; (&quot;La Prisonnière&quot;, also translated as &quot;The Captive&quot;) (1923)
# &quot;The Fugitive&quot; (&quot;Albertine disparue&quot;, also titled &quot;La Fugitive&quot;, sometimes translated as &quot;The Sweet Cheat Gone&quot; or &quot;Albertine Gone&quot;) (1925)
# &quot;Time Regained&quot; (&quot;Le Temps retrouvé&quot;, also translated as &quot;Finding Time Again&quot; and &quot;The Past Recaptured&quot;) translated by C. K. Scott Moncrieff (1927)
* &quot;Jean Santeuil&quot; (1896–1900, unfinished novel in three volumes published posthumously – 1952)

===Short story collections===
* &quot;Early Stories&quot; (short stories published posthumously)
* &quot;Pleasures and Days&quot; (&quot;Les plaisirs et les jours&quot;; illustrations by Madeleine Lemaire, preface by Anatole France, and four piano works by Reynaldo Hahn) (1896)

===Non-fiction===
* &quot;Pastiches&quot;, or &quot;The Lemoine Affair&quot; (&quot;Pastiches et mélanges&quot; – a collection) (1919)
* &quot;Against Sainte-Beuve&quot; (&quot;Contre Sainte-Beuve: suivi de Nouveaux mélanges&quot;) (published posthumously 1954)

===Translations of John Ruskin===
* &quot;La Bible d&#x27;Amiens&quot; (translation of &quot;The Bible of Amiens&quot;) (1896)
* &quot;Sésame et les lys: des trésors des rois, des jardins des reines&quot; (translation of &quot;Sesame and Lilies&quot;) (1906)

==See also==
* &quot;102 Boulevard Haussmann&quot;, a BBC production set in 1916 about Proust
* &quot;Albertine&quot;, a novel based on a character in &quot;À la recherche du temps perdu&quot; by Jacqueline Rose (London, 2001)
* &quot;Céleste&quot;, a German film dramatising part of Proust&#x27;s life, seen from the viewpoint of his housekeeper Céleste Albaret
* Involuntary memory
* &quot;Le Temps Retrouvé, d&#x27;après l&#x27;œuvre de Marcel Proust&quot; (&quot;Time Regained&quot;), film by director Raúl Ruiz, 1999
* &quot;Mme Proust and the Kosher Kitchen&quot;, a novel by Kate Taylor that includes a fictional diary written by Proust&#x27;s mother
* &quot;Proust&quot;, an essay by Samuel Beckett
* Proust Questionnaire
* &quot;Swann in Love&quot;, film by the director Volker Schlöndorff, 1984
* &quot;La captive&quot;, film by the director Chantal Akerman, 2000
* &quot;Little Miss Sunshine&quot;, an American road-trip tragicomedy where Steve Carell plays an ex-Proust professor.

==References==
==Further reading==

* Aciman, André (2004), &quot;The Proust Project&quot;. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux
* Adams, William Howard; Paul Nadar (photo.), &quot;A Proust Souvenir&quot;. London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson (1984)
* Adorno, Theodor (1967), &quot;Prisms&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press
* Adorno, Theodor, &quot;Short Commentaries on Proust,&quot; Notes to Literature, trans. S. Weber-Nicholsen (New York: Columbia University Press, 1991).
* Albaret, Céleste (Barbara Bray, trans.) (2003), &quot;Monsieur Proust&quot;. New York: New York Review Books
* Beckett, Samuel, &quot;Proust&quot;, London: Calder
* Benjamin, Walter, &quot;The Image of Proust,&quot; Illuminations, trans. Harry Zohn (New York: Schocken Books, 1969); pp. 201–215.
* Bernard, Anne-Marie (2002), &quot;The World of Proust, as seen by Paul Nadar&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press
* Bersani, Leo, &quot;Marcel Proust: The Fictions of Life and of Art&quot; (2013), Oxford: Oxford U. Press
* Bowie, Malcolm, &quot;Proust Among the Stars&quot;, London: Harper Collins
* Capetanakis, Demetrios, &quot;A Lecture on Proust&quot;, in &quot;Demetrios Capetanakis A Greek Poet in England&quot; (1947)
* Carter, William C. (2002), &quot;Marcel Proust: A Life&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press
* Carter, William C. (2006), &quot;Proust in Love&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press
* Chardin, Philippe (2006), &quot;Proust ou le bonheur du petit personnage qui compare&quot;. Paris: Honoré Champion
* Chardin, Philippe &quot;et alii&quot; (2010), &quot;Originalités proustiennes&quot;. Paris: Kimé
* Compagnon, Antoine, &quot;Proust Between Two Centuries,&quot; Columbia U. Press
* Czapski, Józef (2018) &quot;Lost Time. Lectures on Proust in a Soviet Prison Camp.&quot; New York: New York Review Books. 90 pp. 
* Davenport-Hines, Richard (2006), &quot;A Night at the Majestic&quot;. London: Faber and Faber 
* De Botton, Alain (1998), &quot;How Proust Can Change Your Life&quot;. New York: Vintage Books
* Deleuze, Gilles (2004), &quot;Proust and Signs: the complete text&quot;. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press
* De Man, Paul (1979), &quot;Allegories of Reading: Figural Language in Rousseau, Nietzsche, Rilke, and Proust&quot; 
* Descombes, Vincent, &quot;Proust: Philosophy of the Novel&quot;. Stanford, CA: Stanford U. Press
* Forssgren, Ernest A. (William C. Carter, ed.) (2006), &quot;The Memoirs of Ernest A. Forssgren: Proust&#x27;s Swedish Valet&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press
* Foschini, Lorenza, &quot;Proust&#x27;s Overcoat: The True Story of One Man&#x27;s Passion for All Things Proust&quot;. London: Portobello Books (2010)
* Genette, Gérard, &quot;Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell U. Press
* Gracq, Julien, &quot;Proust Considered as An End Point,&quot; in Reading Writing (New York: Turtle Point Press,), 113–130.
* Green, F. C. &quot;The Mind of Proust&quot; (1949)
* Harris, Frederick J. (2002), &quot;Friend and Foe: Marcel Proust and André Gide&quot;. Lanham: University Press of America
* Hayman, Ronald (1990), &quot;Proust. A Biography&quot;. London: William Heinemann
* Hillerin, Laure &quot;La comtesse Greffulhe, L&#x27;ombre des Guermantes&quot; , Paris, Flammarion, 2014. Part V, &quot;La Chambre Noire des Guermantes&quot;. About Marcel Proust and comtesse Greffulhe&#x27;s relationship, and the key role she played in the genesis of &quot;La Recherche&quot;.
* Karlin, Daniel (2005), &quot;Proust&#x27;s English&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press 
* Kristeva, Julia, &quot;Time and Sense. Proust and the Experience of Literature&quot;. New York: Columbia U. Press, 1996
* Ladenson, Elisabeth (1991), &quot;Proust&#x27;s Lesbianism&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell U. Press
* Landy, Joshua, &quot;Philosophy as Fiction: Self, Deception, and Knowledge in Proust&quot;. Oxford: Oxford U. Press
* O&#x27;Brien, Justin. &quot;Albertine the Ambiguous: Notes on Proust&#x27;s Transposition of Sexes&quot;, PMLA 64: 933–52, 1949
* Painter, George D. (1959), &quot;Marcel Proust: A Biography&quot;; Vols. 1 &amp; 2. London: Chatto &amp; Windus
* Poulet, Georges, &quot;Proustian Space&quot;. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins U. Press
* Prendergast, Christopher &quot;Mirages and Mad Beliefs: Proust the Skeptic &quot; 
* Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky (1992), &quot;Epistemology of the Closet&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press
* Shattuck, Roger (1963), &quot;Proust&#x27;s Binoculars: a study of memory, time, and recognition in &quot;À la recherche du temps perdu&quot;&quot;. New York: Random House
* Spitzer, Leo, &quot;Proust&#x27;s Style,&quot; [1928] in &quot;Essays in Stylistics&quot; (Princeton, Princeton U. P., 1948).
* Shattuck, Roger (2000), &quot;Proust&#x27;s Way: a field guide to &quot;In Search of Lost Time&quot;&quot;. New York: W. W. Norton
* Tadié, Jean-Yves (2000), &quot;Marcel Proust: A Life&quot;. New York: Viking
* White, Edmund (1998), &quot;Marcel Proust&quot;. New York: Viking Books
==External links==

* BBC audio file. &quot;In Our Time&quot; discussion, Radio 4.
* The Kolb-Proust Archive for Research. University of Illinois.
* 
* Works by Marcel Proust at Project Gutenberg Australia
* 
* The Album of Marcel Proust, Marcel Proust receives a tribute in this album of &quot;recomposed photographs&quot;.
* – Essay on the lasting relevance of Proust and his work.
* University of Adelaide Library French text of volumes 1–4 and the complete novel in English translation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="0" end="43" title="Marcel Proust" label="Valentin Louis Georges Eugène Marcel Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="96" end="104" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="106" end="121" title="literary critic" label="literary critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="127" end="135" title="essayist" label="essayist"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="160" end="166" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="260" end="282" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="In Search of Lost Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q784536" start="555" end="562" title="Auteuil, Paris" label="Auteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q194420" start="608" end="627" title="16th arrondissement of Paris" label="16th arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q158021" start="651" end="670" title="Treaty of Frankfurt (1871)" label="Treaty of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="690" end="709" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="757" end="778" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="839" end="852" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="939" end="961" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="In Search of Lost Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q265581" start="1121" end="1134" title="fin de siècle" label="fin de siècle"/>
<link wikidata="Q541516" start="1165" end="1178" title="Adrien Proust" label="Adrien Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="1203" end="1214" title="pathologist" label="pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="1219" end="1233" title="Epidemiology" label="epidemiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="1244" end="1251" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="1423" end="1436" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="German–Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="1449" end="1455" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1570" end="1586" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="1646" end="1657" title="John Ruskin" label="John Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1698" end="1712" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3582356" start="1754" end="1788" title="Saint-Louis-d&amp;#x27;Antin" label="Church of Saint-Louis-d&amp;#x27;Antin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="1887" end="1894" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="1918" end="1924" title="Mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1980" end="1986" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q380444" start="2086" end="2093" title="Illiers-Combray" label="Illiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="2282" end="2304" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="In Search of Lost Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q926749" start="2484" end="2499" title="Lycée Condorcet" label="Lycée Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="2721" end="2732" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="2923" end="2930" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="2987" end="3011" title="The Guermantes&amp;#x27; Way" label="The Guermantes&amp;#x27; Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q455595" start="3073" end="3083" title="Amateur" label="dilettante"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623858" start="3090" end="3104" title="social climber" label="social climber"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="3293" end="3309" title="Swann&amp;#x27;s Way" label="Swann&amp;#x27;s Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100658" start="3429" end="3439" title="Geneviève Halévy" label="Mme Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56158" start="3450" end="3463" title="Georges Bizet" label="Georges Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275679" start="3527" end="3544" title="Madeleine Lemaire" label="Madeleine Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271745" start="3552" end="3574" title="Léontine Lippmann" label="Mme Arman de Caillavet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495559" start="3640" end="3665" title="Gaston Arman de Caillavet" label="Gaston Arman de Caillavet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="3785" end="3799" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France"/>
<link wikidata="Q774570" start="3963" end="3984" title="Bibliothèque Mazarine" label="Bibliothèque Mazarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410298" start="4361" end="4374" title="Robert Proust" label="Robert Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413160" start="4754" end="4762" title="Chaillot" label="Chaillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="4844" end="4853" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877550" start="4860" end="4877" title="Lung abscess" label="pulmonary abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q311" start="4908" end="4930" title="Père Lachaise Cemetery" label="Père Lachaise Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="4991" end="5001" title="Homosexuality" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242821" start="5021" end="5043" title="Same-sex relationship" label="relationships with men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010047" start="5110" end="5125" title="Céleste Albaret" label="Céleste Albaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484" start="5313" end="5323" title="André Gide" label="André Gide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13472752" start="5339" end="5344" title="valet" label="valet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5519" end="5531" title="Jean Lorrain#Duel" label="Jean Lorrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265452" start="5623" end="5636" title="Lucien Daudet" label="Lucien Daudet"/>
<link wikidata="Q432938" start="5741" end="5754" title="Reynaldo Hahn" label="Reynaldo Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="5950" end="5957" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q272" start="6004" end="6015" title="Paul Morand" label="Paul Morand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261491" start="6057" end="6073" title="Male prostitution" label="male prostitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="6354" end="6376" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="In Search of Lost Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="6509" end="6517" title="Bisexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234767" start="6650" end="6675" title="Les plaisirs et les jours" label="Les plaisirs et les jours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174551" start="6714" end="6727" title="Jean Santeuil" label="Jean Santeuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="6826" end="6847" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="6861" end="6868" title="Classical liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="6869" end="6875" title="Centrism" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="7028" end="7041" title="Anti-clericalism" label="anti-clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q489750" start="7196" end="7206" title="fanaticism" label="fanaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="7278" end="7287" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="7488" end="7497" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="7522" end="7533" title="Pope Pius X" label="Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="7908" end="7923" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="8000" end="8011" title="Dreyfus Affair" label="Dreyfusards"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="8028" end="8038" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="8104" end="8118" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France"/>
<link wikidata="Q171826" start="8154" end="8168" title="Alfred Dreyfus" label="Alfred Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="8235" end="8251" title="Action Française" label="Action Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="8284" end="8302" title="French colonialism" label="French colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8311" end="8326" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="8439" end="8446" title="Classical liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="8447" end="8456" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965819" start="8483" end="8495" title="Christianity in France" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985804" start="8503" end="8528" title="Culture of France" label="cultural legacy in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q155270" start="8530" end="8542" title="Julien Benda" label="Julien Benda"/>
<link wikidata="Q105434" start="8854" end="8867" title="Hypochondriasis" label="hypochondriac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8998" end="9040" title="Ehlers–Danlos syndromes#Vascular EDS" label="vascular subtype of Ehlers–Danlos Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="9503" end="9508" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q486727" start="9522" end="9531" title="Symposium (Plato)" label="Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799074" start="9663" end="9679" title="La Revue Blanche" label="La Revue Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234767" start="9702" end="9727" title="Les plaisirs et les jours" label="Les plaisirs et les jours"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="9826" end="9840" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275679" start="9858" end="9865" title="Madeleine Lemaire" label="Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q432938" start="9987" end="10000" title="Reynaldo Hahn" label="Reynaldo Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224722" start="10008" end="10028" title="Réveillon, Marne" label="château de Réveillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174551" start="10416" end="10429" title="Jean Santeuil" label="Jean Santeuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="11219" end="11233" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="11235" end="11254" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="11260" end="11271" title="John Ruskin" label="John Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="11322" end="11325" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="11380" end="11393" title="Le Temps retrouvé" label="Time Regained"/>
<link wikidata="Q218578" start="11872" end="11903" title="The Seven Lamps of Architecture" label="The Seven Lamps of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q432938" start="12305" end="12318" title="Reynaldo Hahn" label="Reynaldo Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42156" start="12655" end="12668" title="Henri Bergson" label="Henri Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q463728" start="13139" end="13150" title="Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon" label="Saint-Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="13152" end="13161" title="Michel de Montaigne" label="Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="13163" end="13171" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="13173" end="13181" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="13183" end="13195" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="13197" end="13215" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="13221" end="13232" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="13341" end="13350" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379745" start="13372" end="13389" title="Gothic cathedrals and churches" label="Gothic cathedrals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128018" start="13618" end="13627" title="pastiches" label="pastiches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153244" start="13895" end="13914" title="Contre Sainte-Beuve" label="Contre Sainte-Beuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063392" start="14057" end="14069" title="Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve" label="Sainte-Beuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="14074" end="14082" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q211354" start="14115" end="14124" title="pederasty" label="pederasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q616622" start="14389" end="14410" title="First-person narrative" label="first-person narrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822096" start="15442" end="15467" title="Modern Library" label="The Modern Library&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="15523" end="15536" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="15613" end="15620" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="15653" end="15672" title="W. Somerset Maugham" label="W. Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484" start="15732" end="15742" title="André Gide" label="André Gide"/>
<link wikidata="Q621534" start="16054" end="16061" title="Éditions Grasset" label="Grasset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410298" start="16297" end="16303" title="Robert Proust" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666426" start="16345" end="16366" title="C. K. Scott Moncrieff" label="C. K. Scott Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701935" start="16702" end="16719" title="Terence Kilmartin" label="Terence Kilmartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754030" start="16729" end="16742" title="D. J. Enright" label="D. J. Enright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263483" start="17122" end="17132" title="Allen Lane" label="Allen Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="17435" end="17457" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="In Search of Lost Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666426" start="18667" end="18688" title="C. K. Scott Moncrieff" label="C. K. Scott Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174551" start="18704" end="18717" title="Jean Santeuil" label="Jean Santeuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234767" start="18907" end="18925" title="Les plaisirs et les jours" label="Pleasures and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275679" start="18989" end="19006" title="Madeleine Lemaire" label="Madeleine Lemaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="19019" end="19033" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France"/>
<link wikidata="Q432938" start="19059" end="19072" title="Reynaldo Hahn" label="Reynaldo Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244557" start="19108" end="19152" title="Pastiches et mélanges" label="Pastiches&amp;quot;, or &amp;quot;The Lemoine Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153244" start="19225" end="19245" title="Contre Sainte-Beuve" label="Against Sainte-Beuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q106912386" start="19626" end="19649" title="102 Boulevard Haussmann" label="102 Boulevard Haussmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19659" end="19662" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711882" start="19707" end="19716" title="Albertine (Rose novel)" label="Albertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157793" start="19801" end="19816" title="Jacqueline Rose" label="Jacqueline Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010042" start="19840" end="19847" title="Céleste (1980 film)" label="Céleste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010047" start="19952" end="19967" title="Céleste Albaret" label="Céleste Albaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q28635" start="19970" end="19988" title="Involuntary memory" label="Involuntary memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q509605" start="20072" end="20085" title="Time Regained (film)" label="Time Regained"/>
<link wikidata="Q459299" start="20111" end="20120" title="Raúl Ruiz (director)" label="Raúl Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375820" start="20187" end="20198" title="Kate Taylor (novelist)" label="Kate Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252252" start="20271" end="20277" title="Proust (Beckett essay)" label="Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="20297" end="20311" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668567" start="20314" end="20334" title="Proust Questionnaire" label="Proust Questionnaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q317311" start="20343" end="20356" title="Swann in Love (film)" label="Swann in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q57316" start="20385" end="20403" title="Volker Schlöndorff" label="Volker Schlöndorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138089" start="20418" end="20428" title="La Captive" label="La captive"/>
<link wikidata="Q239823" start="20457" end="20472" title="Chantal Akerman" label="Chantal Akerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q192073" start="20487" end="20507" title="Little Miss Sunshine" label="Little Miss Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="20555" end="20567" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141511" start="20752" end="20762" title="Paul Nadar" label="Paul Nadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="20847" end="20862" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Adorno, Theodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858769" start="21100" end="21112" title="Barbara Bray" label="Barbara Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="21193" end="21208" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Beckett, Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="21247" end="21263" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Benjamin, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020343" start="21342" end="21356" title="Schocken Books" label="Schocken Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886963" start="21609" end="21623" title="Malcolm Bowie" label="Bowie, Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558913" start="21686" end="21708" title="Demetrios Capetanakis" label="Capetanakis, Demetrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q932390" start="22298" end="22312" title="Józef Czapski" label="Czapski, Józef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325099" start="22430" end="22454" title="Richard Davenport-Hines" label="Davenport-Hines, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q123273" start="22527" end="22543" title="Alain de Botton" label="De Botton, Alain"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="22623" end="22638" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Deleuze, Gilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q353754" start="22741" end="22753" title="Paul De Man" label="De Man, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q342931" start="22859" end="22877" title="Vincent Descombes" label="Descombes, Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q266247" start="23277" end="23292" title="Gérard Genette" label="Genette, Gérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q298051" start="23378" end="23391" title="Julien Gracq" label="Gracq, Julien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364928" start="23681" end="23695" title="Ronald Hayman" label="Hayman, Ronald"/>
<link wikidata="Q159876" start="24155" end="24170" title="Julia Kristeva" label="Kristeva, Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290002" start="24374" end="24387" title="Joshua Landy" label="Landy, Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q62501895" start="24492" end="24512" title="Justin O&amp;#x27;Brien (scholar)" label="O&amp;#x27;Brien, Justin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408417" start="24622" end="24640" title="George D. Painter" label="Painter, George D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1367032" start="24736" end="24751" title="Georges Poulet" label="Poulet, Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q78739" start="25191" end="25203" title="Leo Spitzer" label="Spitzer, Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161885" start="25319" end="25334" title="Roger Shattuck" label="Shattuck, Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170208" start="25452" end="25468" title="Jean-Yves Tadié" label="Tadié, Jean-Yves"/>
<link wikidata="Q729117" start="25531" end="25544" title="Edmund White" label="White, Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149655" start="25647" end="25658" title="In Our Time (BBC Radio 4)" label="In Our Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="25726" end="25748" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354532" start="25781" end="25808" title="Project Gutenberg Australia" label="Project Gutenberg Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21019" wikidata="Q5592" url="?curid=21019" title="Michelangelo">
<text>Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni (6March 147518February 1564), known mononymously as Michelangelo, was an Italian sculptor, painter, architect, and poet of the High Renaissance. Born in the Republic of Florence, his work was inspired by models from classical antiquity and had a lasting influence on Western art. Michelangelo&#x27;s creative abilities and mastery in a range of artistic arenas define him as an archetypal Renaissance man, along with his rival and elder contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci. Given the sheer volume of surviving correspondence, sketches, and reminiscences, Michelangelo is one of the best-documented artists of the 16th century. He was lauded by contemporary biographers as the most accomplished artist of his era.

Michelangelo achieved fame early. Two of his best-known works, the &quot;Pietà&quot; and &quot;David&quot;, were sculpted before the age of 30. Although he did not consider himself a painter, Michelangelo created two of the most influential frescoes in the history of Western art: the scenes from Genesis on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Rome, and &quot;The Last Judgment&quot; on its altar wall. His design of the Laurentian Library pioneered Mannerist architecture. At the age of 71, he succeeded Antonio da Sangallo the Younger as the architect of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica. Michelangelo transformed the plan so that the Western end was finished to his design, as was the dome, with some modification, after his death.

Michelangelo was the first Western artist whose biography was published while he was alive. Three biographies were published during his lifetime. One of them, by Giorgio Vasari, proposed that Michelangelo&#x27;s work transcended that of any artist living or dead, and was &quot;supreme in not one art alone but in all three&quot;.

In his lifetime, Michelangelo was often called (&quot;the divine one&quot;). His contemporaries admired his &quot;terribilità&quot;—his ability to instill a sense of awe in viewers of his art. Attempts by subsequent artists to imitate the expressive physicality of Michelangelo&#x27;s style contributed to the rise of Mannerism, a short-lived movement in Western art between the High Renaissance and the Baroque.

==Life==

===Early life, 1475–1488===
Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni was born on 6 March 1475 in Caprese, known today as Caprese Michelangelo, a small town situated in Valtiberina, near Arezzo, Tuscany. For several generations, his family had been small-scale bankers in Florence; but the bank failed, and his father Ludovico briefly took a government post in Caprese. At the time of Michelangelo&#x27;s birth, his father was the town&#x27;s judicial administrator and &quot;podestà&quot; (local administrator) of Chiusi della Verna. Michelangelo&#x27;s mother was Francesca di Neri del Miniato di Siena. The Buonarrotis claimed to descend from the Countess Matilde di Canossa—a claim that remains unproven, but which Michelangelo believed.

Several months after Michelangelo&#x27;s birth, the family returned to Florence, where he was raised. During his mother&#x27;s later prolonged illness, and after her death in 1481 (when he was six years old), Michelangelo lived with a nanny and her husband, a stonecutter, in the town of Settignano, where his father owned a marble quarry and a small farm. There the young boy gained his love for marble. As his biographer Giorgio Vasari quotes him:
===Apprenticeships, 1488–1492===

As a young boy, Michelangelo was sent to the city of Florence to study grammar under the Humanist Francesco da Urbino. Michelangelo showed no interest in his schooling, preferring to copy paintings from churches and seek the company of other painters. Florence was at that time Italy&#x27;s greatest centre of the arts and learning. Art was sponsored by the (the town council), the merchant guilds, and wealthy patrons such as the Medici and their banking associates. The Renaissance, a renewal of Classical scholarship and the arts, had its first flowering in Florence. In the early 15th century, the architect Filippo Brunelleschi, having studied the remains of Classical buildings in Rome, had created two churches, San Lorenzo&#x27;s and Santo Spirito, which embodied the Classical precepts. The sculptor Lorenzo Ghiberti had laboured for 50 years to create the north and east bronze doors of the Baptistry, which Michelangelo was to describe as &quot;The Gates of Paradise&quot;. The exterior niches of the Church of Orsanmichele contained a gallery of works by the most acclaimed sculptors of Florence: Donatello, Ghiberti, Andrea del Verrocchio, and Nanni di Banco. The interiors of the older churches were covered with frescos (mostly in Late Medieval, but also in the Early Renaissance style), begun by Giotto and continued by Masaccio in the Brancacci Chapel, both of whose works Michelangelo studied and copied in drawings.

During Michelangelo&#x27;s childhood, a team of painters had been called from Florence to the Vatican to decorate the walls of the Sistine Chapel. Among them was Domenico Ghirlandaio, a master in fresco painting, perspective, figure drawing and portraiture who had the largest workshop in Florence. In 1488, at the age of 13, Michelangelo was apprenticed to Ghirlandaio. The next year, his father persuaded Ghirlandaio to pay Michelangelo as an artist, which was rare for someone that young. When in 1489, Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici, &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of Florence, asked Ghirlandaio for his two best pupils, Ghirlandaio sent Michelangelo and Francesco Granacci.

From 1490 to 1492, Michelangelo attended the Platonic Academy, a Humanist academy founded by the Medicis. There, his work and outlook were influenced by many of the most prominent philosophers and writers of the day, including Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Mirandola and Poliziano. At this time, Michelangelo sculpted the reliefs &quot;Madonna of the Stairs&quot; and &quot;Battle of the Centaurs&quot;, the latter based on a theme suggested by Poliziano and commissioned by Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici. Michelangelo worked for a time with the sculptor Bertoldo di Giovanni. When he was 17, another pupil, Pietro Torrigiano, struck him on the nose, causing the disfigurement that is conspicuous in the portraits of Michelangelo.

===Bologna, Florence, and Rome, 1492–1499===
Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici&#x27;s death on 8 April 1492 changed Michelangelo&#x27;s circumstances. He left the security of the Medici court and returned to his father&#x27;s house. In the following months he carved a polychrome wooden &quot;Crucifix&quot; (1493), as a gift to the prior of the Florentine church of Santo Spirito, which had allowed him to do some anatomical studies of the corpses from the church&#x27;s hospital. This was the first of several instances during his career that Michelangelo studied anatomy by dissecting cadavers.

Between 1493 and 1494, Michelangelo bought a block of marble, and carved a larger-than-life statue of Hercules. On 20 January 1494, after heavy snowfalls, Lorenzo&#x27;s heir, Piero de Medici, commissioned a statue made of snow, and Michelangelo again entered the court of the Medici. In the same year, the Medici were expelled from Florence as the result of the rise of Savonarola. Michelangelo left the city before the end of the political upheaval, moving to Venice and then to Bologna. In Bologna, he was commissioned to carve several of the last small figures for the completion of the Shrine of St. Dominic, in the church dedicated to that saint. At this time Michelangelo studied the robust reliefs carved by Jacopo della Quercia around the main portal of the Basilica of St Petronius, including the panel of &quot;The Creation of Eve&quot;, the composition of which was to reappear on the Sistine Chapel ceiling. Towards the end of 1495, the political situation in Florence was calmer; the city, previously under threat from the French, was no longer in danger as Charles VIII had suffered defeats. Michelangelo returned to Florence but received no commissions from the new city government under Savonarola. He returned to the employment of the Medici. During the half-year he spent in Florence, he worked on two small statues, a child &quot;St. John the Baptist&quot; and a sleeping &quot;Cupid&quot;. According to Condivi, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de&#x27; Medici, for whom Michelangelo had sculpted &quot;St. John the Baptist&quot;, asked that Michelangelo &quot;fix it so that it looked as if it had been buried&quot; so he could &quot;send it to Rome ... pass [it off as] an ancient work and ... sell it much better.&quot; Both Lorenzo and Michelangelo were unwittingly cheated out of the real value of the piece by a middleman. Cardinal Raffaele Riario, to whom Lorenzo had sold it, discovered that it was a fraud, but was so impressed by the quality of the sculpture that he invited the artist to Rome. This apparent success in selling his sculpture abroad as well as the conservative Florentine situation may have encouraged Michelangelo to accept the prelate&#x27;s invitation.
Michelangelo arrived in Rome on 25 June 1496 at the age of 21. On 4 July of the same year, he began work on a commission for Cardinal Riario, an over-life-size statue of the Roman wine god &quot;Bacchus&quot;. Upon completion, the work was rejected by the cardinal, and subsequently entered the collection of the banker Jacopo Galli, for his garden. In November 1497, the French ambassador to the Holy See, Cardinal Jean de Bilhères-Lagraulas, commissioned him to carve a &quot;Pietà&quot;, a sculpture showing the Virgin Mary grieving over the body of Jesus. The subject, which is not part of the Biblical narrative of the Crucifixion, was common in religious sculpture of medieval northern Europe and would have been very familiar to the Cardinal. The contract was agreed upon in August of the following year. Michelangelo was 24 at the time of its completion. It was soon to be regarded as one of the world&#x27;s great masterpieces of sculpture, &quot;a revelation of all the potentialities and force of the art of sculpture&quot;. Contemporary opinion was summarised by Vasari: &quot;It is certainly a miracle that a formless block of stone could ever have been reduced to a perfection that nature is scarcely able to create in the flesh.&quot; It is now located in St Peter&#x27;s Basilica.

===Florence, 1499–1505===
Michelangelo returned to Florence in 1499. The Republic was changing after the fall of its leader, anti-Renaissance priest Girolamo Savonarola, who was executed in 1498, and the rise of the &quot;gonfaloniere&quot; Piero Soderini. Michelangelo was asked by the consuls of the Guild of Wool to complete an unfinished project begun 40 years earlier by Agostino di Duccio: a colossal statue of Carrara marble portraying David as a symbol of Florentine freedom to be placed on the gable of Florence Cathedral. Michelangelo responded by completing his most famous work, the statue of &quot;David&quot;, in 1504. The masterwork definitively established his prominence as a sculptor of extraordinary technical skill and strength of symbolic imagination. A team of consultants, including Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci, Filippino Lippi, Pietro Perugino, Lorenzo di Credi, Antonio and Giuliano da Sangallo, Andrea della Robbia, Cosimo Rosselli, Davide Ghirlandaio, Piero di Cosimo, Andrea Sansovino and Michelangelo&#x27;s dear friend Granacci, was called together to decide upon its placement, ultimately the Piazza della Signoria, in front of the Palazzo Vecchio. It now stands in the Academia while a replica occupies its place in the square. In the same period of placing the &quot;David&quot;, Michelangelo may have been involved in creating the sculptural profile on Palazzo Vecchio&#x27;s façade known as the Importuno di Michelangelo. The hypothesis of Michelangelo&#x27;s possible involvement in the creation of the profile is based on the strong resemblance of the latter to a profile drawn by the artist, datable to the beginning of the 16th century, now preserved in the Louvre.

With the completion of the &quot;David&quot; came another commission. In early 1504 Leonardo da Vinci had been commissioned to paint &quot;The Battle of Anghiari&quot; in the council chamber of the Palazzo Vecchio, depicting the battle between Florence and Milan in 1440. Michelangelo was then commissioned to paint the &quot;Battle of Cascina&quot;. The two paintings are very different: Leonardo depicts soldiers fighting on horseback, while Michelangelo has soldiers being ambushed as they bathe in the river. Neither work was completed and both were lost forever when the chamber was refurbished. Both works were much admired, and copies remain of them, Leonardo&#x27;s work having been copied by Rubens and Michelangelo&#x27;s by Bastiano da Sangallo.

Also during this period, Michelangelo was commissioned by Angelo Doni to paint a &quot;Holy Family&quot; as a present for his wife, Maddalena Strozzi. It is known as the &quot;Doni Tondo&quot; and hangs in the Uffizi Gallery in its original magnificent frame, which Michelangelo may have designed. He also may have painted the Madonna and Child with John the Baptist, known as the &quot;Manchester Madonna&quot; and now in the National Gallery, London.

===Tomb of Julius II, 1505–1545===
In 1505 Michelangelo was invited back to Rome by the newly elected Pope Julius II and commissioned to build the Pope&#x27;s tomb, which was to include forty statues and be finished in five years. Under the patronage of the pope, Michelangelo experienced constant interruptions to his work on the tomb in order to accomplish numerous other tasks.

The commission for the tomb forced the artist to leave Florence with his planned &quot;Battle of Cascina&quot; painting unfinished. By this time, Michelangelo was established as an artist; both he and Julius II had hot tempers and soon argued. On 17 April 1506, Michelangelo left Rome in secret for Florence, remaining there until the Florentine government pressed him to return to the pope.

Although Michelangelo worked on the tomb for 40 years, it was never finished to his satisfaction. It is located in the Church of San Pietro in Vincoli in Rome and is most famous for the central figure of Moses, completed in 1516. Of the other statues intended for the tomb, two, known as the &quot;Rebellious Slave&quot; and the &quot;Dying Slave&quot;, are now in the Louvre.

===Sistine Chapel ceiling, 1508 –1512===
During the same period, Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, which took approximately four years to complete (1508–1512). According to Condivi&#x27;s account, Bramante, who was working on the building of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, resented Michelangelo&#x27;s commission for the pope&#x27;s tomb and convinced the pope to commission him in a medium with which he was unfamiliar, in order that he might fail at the task. Michelangelo was originally commissioned to paint the Twelve Apostles on the triangular pendentives that supported the ceiling, and to cover the central part of the ceiling with ornament. Michelangelo persuaded Pope Julius II to give him a free hand and proposed a different and more complex scheme, representing the Creation, the Fall of Man, the Promise of Salvation through the prophets, and the genealogy of Christ. The work is part of a larger scheme of decoration within the chapel that represents much of the doctrine of the Catholic Church.

The composition stretches over 500 square metres of ceiling and contains over 300 figures. At its centre are nine episodes from the Book of Genesis, divided into three groups: God&#x27;s creation of the earth; God&#x27;s creation of humankind and their fall from God&#x27;s grace; and lastly, the state of humanity as represented by Noah and his family. On the pendentives supporting the ceiling are painted twelve men and women who prophesied the coming of Jesus, seven prophets of Israel, and five Sibyls, prophetic women of the Classical world. Among the most famous paintings on the ceiling are The Creation of Adam, Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, the Deluge, the Prophet Jeremiah, and the Cumaean Sibyl.

===Florence under Medici popes, 1513 – early 1534===
In 1513, Pope Julius II died and was succeeded by Pope Leo X, the second son of Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici. From 1513 to 1516, Pope Leo was on good terms with Pope Julius&#x27;s surviving relatives, so encouraged Michelangelo to continue work on Julius&#x27;s tomb, but the families became enemies again in 1516 when Pope Leo tried to seize the Duchy of Urbino from Julius&#x27;s nephew Francesco Maria I della Rovere. Pope Leo then had Michelangelo stop working on the tomb, and commissioned him to reconstruct the façade of the Basilica of San Lorenzo in Florence and to adorn it with sculptures. He spent three years creating drawings and models for the façade, as well as attempting to open a new marble quarry at Pietrasanta specifically for the project. In 1520, the work was abruptly cancelled by his financially strapped patrons before any real progress had been made. The basilica lacks a façade to this day.

In 1520, the Medici came back to Michelangelo with another grand proposal, this time for a family funerary chapel in the Basilica of San Lorenzo. For posterity, this project, occupying the artist for much of the 1520s and 1530s, was more fully realised. Michelangelo used his own discretion to create the composition of the Medici Chapel, which houses the large tombs of two of the younger members of the Medici family, Giuliano, Duke of Nemours, and Lorenzo, his nephew. It also serves to commemorate their more famous predecessors, Lorenzo the Magnificent and his brother Giuliano, who are buried nearby. The tombs display statues of the two Medici and allegorical figures representing &quot;Night&quot; and &quot;Day&quot;, and &quot;Dusk&quot; and &quot;Dawn&quot;. The chapel also contains Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;Medici Madonna&quot;. In 1976, a concealed corridor was discovered with drawings on the walls that related to the chapel itself.

Pope Leo X died in 1521 and was succeeded briefly by the austere Adrian VI, and then by his cousin Giulio Medici as Pope Clement VII. In 1524, Michelangelo received an architectural commission from the Medici pope for the Laurentian Library at San Lorenzo&#x27;s Church. He designed both the interior of the library itself and its vestibule, a building utilising architectural forms with such dynamic effect that it is seen as the forerunner of Baroque architecture. It was left to assistants to interpret his plans and carry out construction. The library was not opened until 1571, and the vestibule remained incomplete until 1904.

In 1527, Florentine citizens, encouraged by the sack of Rome, threw out the Medici and restored the republic. A siege of the city ensued, and Michelangelo went to the aid of his beloved Florence by working on the city&#x27;s fortifications from 1528 to 1529. The city fell in 1530, and the Medici were restored to power, with the young Alessandro Medici as the first Duke of Florence. Pope Clement, a Medici, sentenced Michelangelo to death. It is thought that Michelangelo hid for two months in a small chamber under the Medici chapels in the Basilica of San Lorenzo with light from just a tiny window, making many charcoal and chalk drawings which remained hidden until the room was rediscovered in 1975, and opened to small numbers of visitors in 2023. Michelangelo was eventually pardoned by the Medicis and the death sentence lifted, so that he could complete work on the Sistine Chapel and the Medici family tomb. He left Florence for Rome in 1534. Despite Michelangelo&#x27;s support of the republic and resistance to the Medici rule, Pope Clement reinstated an allowance that he had previously granted the artist and made a new contract with him over the tomb of Pope Julius.

===Rome, 1534–1546===
In Rome, Michelangelo lived near the church of Santa Maria di Loreto. It was at this time that he met the poet Vittoria Colonna, marchioness of Pescara, who was to become one of his closest friends until her death in 1547.

Shortly before his death in 1534, Pope Clement VII commissioned Michelangelo to paint a fresco of &quot;The Last Judgment&quot; on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel. His successor, Pope Paul III, was instrumental in seeing that Michelangelo began and completed the project, which he laboured on from 1534 to October 1541. The fresco depicts the Second Coming of Christ and his Judgement of the souls. Michelangelo ignored the usual artistic conventions in portraying Jesus, showing him as a massive, muscular figure, youthful, beardless and naked. He is surrounded by saints, among whom Saint Bartholomew holds a drooping flayed skin, bearing the likeness of Michelangelo. The dead rise from their graves, to be consigned either to Heaven or to Hell.

Once completed, the depiction of Christ and the Virgin Mary naked was considered sacrilegious, and Cardinal Carafa and Monsignor Sernini (Mantua&#x27;s ambassador) campaigned to have the fresco removed or censored, but the Pope resisted. At the Council of Trent, shortly before Michelangelo&#x27;s death in 1564, it was decided to obscure the genitals and Daniele da Volterra, an apprentice of Michelangelo, was commissioned to make the alterations. An uncensored copy of the original, by Marcello Venusti, is in the Capodimonte Museum of Naples.

Michelangelo worked on a number of architectural projects at this time. They included a design for the Capitoline Hill with its trapezoid piazza displaying the ancient bronze statue of Marcus Aurelius. He designed the upper floor of the Palazzo Farnese and the interior of the Church of Santa Maria degli Angeli, in which he transformed the vaulted interior of an Ancient Roman bathhouse. Other architectural works include San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, the Sforza Chapel (Capella Sforza) in the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore and the Porta Pia.

===St Peter&#x27;s Basilica, 1546–1564===

While still working on the &quot;Last Judgment&quot;, Michelangelo received yet another commission for the Vatican. This was for the painting of two large frescos in the Cappella Paolina depicting significant events in the lives of the two most important saints of Rome, the &quot;Conversion of Saint Paul&quot; and the &quot;Crucifixion of Saint Peter&quot;. Like the &quot;Last Judgment&quot;, these two works are complex compositions containing a great number of figures. They were completed in 1550. In the same year, Giorgio Vasari published his &quot;Vita&quot;, including a biography of Michelangelo.

In 1546, Michelangelo was appointed architect of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, Rome. The process of replacing the Constantinian basilica of the 4th century had been underway for fifty years and in 1506 foundations had been laid to the plans of Bramante. Successive architects had worked on it, but little progress had been made. Michelangelo was persuaded to take over the project. He returned to the concepts of Bramante, and developed his ideas for a centrally planned church, strengthening the structure both physically and visually. The dome, not completed until after his death, has been called by Banister Fletcher, &quot;the greatest creation of the Renaissance&quot;.

As construction was progressing on St Peter&#x27;s, there was concern that Michelangelo would die before the dome was finished. However, once building commenced on the lower part of the dome, the supporting ring, the completion of the design was inevitable.

==Personal life==

===Faith===
Michelangelo was a devout Catholic whose faith deepened at the end of his life. Along with Raphael, he was enrolled in the Secular Franciscan Order.

His poetry includes the following closing lines from what is known as poem 285 (written in 1554): &quot;Neither painting nor sculpture will be able any longer to calm my soul, now turned toward that divine love that opened his arms on the cross to take us in.&quot;

===Personal habits===
Michelangelo was moderate in his personal life, and once told his apprentice, Ascanio Condivi: &quot;However rich I may have been, I have always lived like a poor man.&quot; Michelangelo&#x27;s bank accounts and numerous deeds of purchase show that his net worth was about 50,000 gold ducats, more than many princes and dukes of his time. Condivi said he was indifferent to food and drink, eating &quot;more out of necessity than of pleasure&quot; and that he &quot;often slept in his clothes and ... boots.&quot; His biographer Paolo Giovio says, &quot;His nature was so rough and uncouth that his domestic habits were incredibly squalid, and deprived posterity of any pupils who might have followed him.&quot; This, however, may not have affected him, as he was by nature a solitary and melancholy person, , a man who &quot;withdrew himself from the company of men.&quot;

===Relationships and poetry===
It is impossible to know whether Michelangelo had any physical relationships. Understanding about his sexuality is rooted in his art, especially his poetry. He wrote more than three hundred sonnets and . About sixty are addressed to men – &quot;the first significant modern corpus of love poetry from one man to another&quot;.

The longest sequence, displaying deep loving feeling, was written to the young Roman patrician Tommaso dei Cavalieri (), who was 23 years old when Michelangelo first met him in 1532, at the age of 57. In his &quot;Lives of the Artists&quot;, Vasari observed: &quot;But infinitely more than any of the others he loved M. Tommaso de&#x27; Cavalieri, a Roman gentleman, for whom, being a young man and much inclined to these arts, [Michelangelo] made, to the end that he might learn to draw, many most superb drawings of divinely beautiful heads, designed in black and red chalk; and then he drew for him a Ganymede rapt to Heaven by Jove&#x27;s Eagle, a Tityus with the Vulture devouring his heart, the Chariot of the Sun falling with Phaëthon into the Po, and a Bacchanal of children, which are all in themselves most rare things, and drawings the like of which have never been seen.&quot; Some scholars downplay the relationship between Michelangelo and Cavalieri as one of platonic friendship. The poems to Cavalieri make up the first large sequence of poems in any modern tongue addressed by one man to another; they predate by 50 years Shakespeare&#x27;s sonnets to the fair youth:

Cavalieri replied: &quot;I swear to return your love. Never have I loved a man more than I love you, never have I wished for a friendship more than I wish for yours.&quot; Cavalieri remained devoted to Michelangelo until his death.

In 1542, Michelangelo met Cecchino dei Bracci who died only a year later, inspiring Michelangelo to write 48 funeral . Some of the objects of Michelangelo&#x27;s affections, and subjects of his poetry, took advantage of him: the model Febo di Poggio asked for money in response to a love-poem, and a second model, Gherardo Perini, shamelessly stole from him.

The nature of the poetry has been a source of discomfort to later generations. Michelangelo&#x27;s grandnephew, Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger, published the poems in 1623 with the gender of pronouns changed; he also removed words or in other instances insisted that Michelangelo&#x27;s poems be read allegorically and philosophically, a judgment some modern scholars still repeat today. It was not until John Addington Symonds translated the poems into English in 1893 that the original genders were restored. Since then it has become more accepted that his poems should be understood at face value, that is, as indicating his personal feelings and a preference by him for young men over women.

Late in life, Michelangelo nurtured a friendship with the poet and noble widow Vittoria Colonna, whom he met in Rome in 1536 or 1538 and who was in her late forties at the time. They wrote sonnets for each other and were in regular contact until she died. These sonnets mostly deal with the spiritual issues that occupied them. Condivi, who in his biography was preoccupied with downplaying Michelangelo&#x27;s attraction to men, alleged Michelangelo said his sole regret in life was that he did not kiss the widow&#x27;s face in the same manner that he had her hand.

===Feuds with other artists===
In a letter from late 1542, Michelangelo blamed the tensions between Julius II and him on the envy of Bramante and Raphael, saying of the latter, &quot;all he had in art, he got from me&quot;. According to Gian Paolo Lomazzo, Michelangelo and Raphael met once: the former was alone, while the latter was accompanied by several others. Michelangelo commented that he thought he had encountered the chief of police with such an assemblage, and Raphael replied that he thought he had met an executioner, as they are wont to walk alone.

==Works==
===Madonna and Child===
The &quot;Madonna of the Stairs&quot; is Michelangelo&#x27;s earliest known work in marble. It is carved in shallow relief, a technique often employed by the master-sculptor of the early 15th century, Donatello, and others such as Desiderio da Settignano. While the Madonna is in profile, the easiest aspect for a shallow relief, the child displays a twisting motion that was to become characteristic of Michelangelo&#x27;s work. The &quot;Taddei Tondo&quot; of 1502 shows the Christ Child frightened by a Bullfinch, a symbol of the Crucifixion. The lively form of the child was later adapted by Raphael in the &quot;Bridgewater Madonna&quot;. The &quot;Madonna of Bruges&quot; was, at the time of its creation, unlike other such statues depicting the Virgin proudly presenting her son. Here, the Christ Child, restrained by his mother&#x27;s clasping hand, is about to step off into the world. The &quot;Doni Tondo&quot;, depicting the Holy Family, has elements of all three previous works: the frieze of figures in the background has the appearance of a low-relief, while the circular shape and dynamic forms echo the Taddeo Tondo. The twisting motion present in the &quot;Madonna of Bruges&quot; is accentuated in the painting. The painting heralds the forms, movement and colour that Michelangelo was to employ on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.

===Male figure===
The kneeling &quot;Angel&quot; is an early work, one of several that Michelangelo created as part of a large decorative scheme for the Arca di San Domenico in the church dedicated to that saint in Bologna. Several other artists had worked on the scheme, beginning with Nicola Pisano in the 13th century. In the late 15th century, the project was managed by Niccolò dell&#x27;Arca. An angel holding a candlestick, by Niccolò, was already in place. Although the two angels form a pair, there is a great contrast between the two works, the one depicting a delicate child with flowing hair clothed in Gothic robes with deep folds, and Michelangelo&#x27;s depicting a robust and muscular youth with eagle&#x27;s wings, clad in a garment of Classical style. Everything about Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;Angel&quot; is dynamic. Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;Bacchus&quot; was a commission with a specified subject, the youthful God of Wine. The sculpture has all the traditional attributes, a vine wreath, a cup of wine and a fawn, but Michelangelo ingested an air of reality into the subject, depicting him with bleary eyes, a swollen bladder and a stance that suggests he is unsteady on his feet. While the work is plainly inspired by Classical sculpture, it is innovative for its rotating movement and strongly three-dimensional quality, which encourages the viewer to look at it from every angle.

In the so-called &quot;Dying Slave&quot;, Michelangelo again utilised the figure with marked contrapposto to suggest a particular human state, in this case waking from sleep. With the &quot;Rebellious Slave&quot;, it is one of two such earlier figures for the Tomb of Pope Julius II, now in the Louvre, that the sculptor brought to an almost finished state. These two works were to have a profound influence on later sculpture, through Rodin who studied them at the Louvre. The &quot;Atlas Slave&quot; is one of the later figures for Pope Julius&#x27; tomb. The works, known collectively as &quot;The Captives&quot;, each show the figure struggling to free itself, as if from the bonds of the rock in which it is lodged. The works give a unique insight into the sculptural methods that Michelangelo employed and his way of revealing what he perceived within the rock.

===Sistine Chapel ceiling===
The Sistine Chapel ceiling was painted between 1508 and 1512. The ceiling is a flattened barrel vault supported on twelve triangular pendentives that rise from between the windows of the chapel. The commission, as envisaged by Julius II, was to adorn the pendentives with figures of the twelve apostles. Michelangelo, who was reluctant to take the job, persuaded the Pope to give him a free hand in the composition. The resultant scheme of decoration awed his contemporaries and has inspired other artists ever since. The scheme is of nine panels illustrating episodes from the Book of Genesis, set in an architectonic frame. On the pendentives, Michelangelo replaced the proposed Apostles with Prophets and Sibyls who heralded the coming of the Messiah.

Michelangelo began painting with the later episodes in the narrative, the pictures including locational details and groups of figures, the &quot;Drunkenness of Noah&quot; being the first of this group. In the later compositions, painted after the initial scaffolding had been removed, Michelangelo made the figures larger. One of the central images, &quot;The Creation of Adam&quot; is one of the best known and most reproduced works in the history of art. The final panel, showing the &quot;Separation of Light from Darkness&quot; is the broadest in style and was painted in a single day. As the model for the Creator, Michelangelo has depicted himself in the action of painting the ceiling.

As supporters to the smaller scenes, Michelangelo painted twenty youths who have variously been interpreted as angels, as muses, or simply as decoration. Michelangelo referred to them as &quot;ignudi&quot;. The figure reproduced may be seen in context in the above image of the &quot;Separation of Light from Darkness&quot;.
In the process of painting the ceiling, Michelangelo made studies for different figures, of which some, such as that for &quot;The Libyan Sibyl&quot; have survived, demonstrating the care taken by Michelangelo in details such as the hands and feet. The prophet Jeremiah, contemplating the downfall of Jerusalem, is a self-portrait.
===Figure compositions===

Michelangelo&#x27;s relief of the &quot;Battle of the Centaurs&quot;, created while he was still a youth associated with the Medici Academy, is an unusually complex relief in that it shows a great number of figures involved in a vigorous struggle. Such a complex disarray of figures was rare in Florentine art, where it would usually only be found in images showing either the Massacre of the Innocents or the Torments of Hell. The relief treatment, in which some of the figures are boldly projecting, may indicate Michelangelo&#x27;s familiarity with Roman sarcophagus reliefs from the collection of Lorenzo Medici, and similar marble panels created by Nicola and Giovanni Pisano, and with the figurative compositions on Ghiberti&#x27;s Baptistry Doors.

The composition of the &quot;Battle of Cascina&quot; is known in its entirety only from copies, as the original cartoon, according to Vasari, was so admired that it deteriorated and was eventually in pieces. It reflects the earlier relief in the energy and diversity of the figures, with many different postures, and many being viewed from the back, as they turn towards the approaching enemy and prepare for battle.

In &quot;The Last Judgment&quot; it is said that Michelangelo drew inspiration from a fresco by Melozzo da Forlì in Rome&#x27;s Santi Apostoli. Melozzo had depicted figures from different angles, as if they were floating in the Heaven and seen from below. Melozzo&#x27;s majestic figure of Christ, with windblown cloak, demonstrates a degree of foreshortening of the figure that had also been employed by Andrea Mantegna, but was not usual in the frescos of Florentine painters. In &quot;The Last Judgment&quot; Michelangelo had the opportunity to depict, on an unprecedented scale, figures in the action of either rising heavenward or falling and being dragged down.

In the two frescos of the Pauline Chapel, &quot;The Crucifixion of St. Peter&quot; and &quot;The Conversion of Saul&quot;, Michelangelo has used the various groups of figures to convey a complex narrative. In the &quot;Crucifixion of Peter&quot; soldiers busy themselves about their assigned duty of digging a post hole and raising the cross while various people look on and discuss the events. A group of horrified women cluster in the foreground, while another group of Christians is led by a tall man to witness the events. In the right foreground, Michelangelo walks out of the painting with an expression of disillusionment.

===Architecture===

Michelangelo&#x27;s architectural commissions included a number that were not realised, notably the façade for Brunelleschi&#x27;s Church of San Lorenzo in Florence, for which Michelangelo had a wooden model constructed, but which remains to this day unfinished rough brick. At the same church, Giulio de&#x27; Medici (later Pope Clement VII) commissioned him to design the Medici Chapel and the tombs of Giuliano and Lorenzo Medici. Pope Clement also commissioned the Laurentian Library, for which Michelangelo also designed the extraordinary vestibule with columns recessed into niches, and a staircase that appears to spill out of the library like a flow of lava, according to Nikolaus Pevsner, &quot;... revealing Mannerism in its most sublime architectural form&quot;.

In 1546 Michelangelo produced the highly complex ovoid design for the pavement of the Campidoglio and began designing an upper storey for the Farnese Palace. In 1547 he took on the job of completing St Peter&#x27;s Basilica, begun to a design by Bramante, and with several intermediate designs by several architects. Michelangelo returned to Bramante&#x27;s design, retaining the basic form and concepts by simplifying and strengthening the design to create a more dynamic and unified whole. Although the late 16th-century engraving depicts the dome as having a hemispherical profile, the dome of Michelangelo&#x27;s model is somewhat ovoid and the final product, as completed by Giacomo della Porta, is more so.

===Final years===

In his old age, Michelangelo created a number of &quot;Pietàs&quot; in which he apparently reflects upon mortality. They are heralded by the &quot;Victory&quot;, perhaps created for the tomb of Pope Julius II but left unfinished. In this group, the youthful victor overcomes an older hooded figure, with the features of Michelangelo. The &quot;Pietà of Vittoria Colonna&quot; is a chalk drawing of a type described as &quot;presentation drawings&quot;, as they might be given as a gift by an artist, and were not necessarily studies towards a painted work. In this image, Mary&#x27;s upraised arms and hands are indicative of her prophetic role. The frontal aspect is reminiscent of Masaccio&#x27;s fresco of the Holy Trinity in the Basilica of Santa Maria Novella, Florence. In the &quot;Florentine Pietà&quot;, Michelangelo again depicts himself, this time as the aged Nicodemus lowering the body of Jesus from the cross into the arms of Mary his mother and Mary Magdalene. Michelangelo smashed the left arm and leg of the figure of Jesus. His pupil Tiberio Calcagni repaired the arm and drilled a hole in which to fix a replacement leg which was not subsequently attached. He also worked on the figure of Mary Magdalene.

The last sculpture that Michelangelo worked on (six days before his death), the &quot;Rondanini Pietà,&quot; could never be completed because Michelangelo carved it away until there was insufficient stone. The legs and a detached arm remain from a previous stage of the work. As it remains, the sculpture has an abstract quality, in keeping with 20th-century concepts of sculpture.

Michelangelo died in Rome on 18 February 1564, at the age of 88. His body was taken from Rome for interment at the Basilica of Santa Croce, fulfilling the maestro&#x27;s last request to be buried in his beloved Florence. His heir Lionardo Buonarroti commissioned Vasari to design and build the &quot;Tomb of Michelangelo&quot;, a monumental project that cost 770 scudi, and took over 14 years to complete. Marble for the tomb was supplied by Cosimo I de&#x27; Medici, Duke of Tuscany, who had also organized a state funeral to honour Michelangelo in Florence.

==Legacy==
Michelangelo, with Leonardo da Vinci and Raphael, is one of the three giants of the Florentine High Renaissance. Although their names are often cited together, Michelangelo was younger than Leonardo by 23 years, and eight years older than Raphael. Because of his reclusive nature, he had little to do with either artist and outlived both of them by more than 40 years. Michelangelo took few sculpture students. He employed Granacci, who was his fellow pupil at the Medici Academy, and became one of several assistants on the Sistine Chapel ceiling. Michelangelo appears to have used assistants mainly for the more manual tasks of preparing surfaces and grinding colours. Despite this, his works were to have a great influence on painters, sculptors and architects for many generations to come.

While Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;David&quot; is the most famous male nude of all time, some of his other works have had perhaps even greater impact on the course of art. The twisting forms and tensions of the &quot;Victory&quot;, the &quot;Bruges Madonna&quot; and the &quot;Medici Madonna&quot; make them the heralds of the Mannerist art. The unfinished giants for the tomb of Pope Julius II had profound effect on sculptors such as Rodin and Henry Moore.

Michelangelo&#x27;s vestibule of the Laurentian Library was one of the earliest buildings to use classical forms in a plastic and expressive manner. This dynamic quality was later to find its major expression in his centrally planned St. Peter&#x27;s, with its giant order, its rippling cornice and its upward-launching pointed dome. The dome of St. Peter&#x27;s was to influence the building of churches for many centuries, including Sant&#x27;Andrea della Valle in Rome and St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, London, as well as the civic domes of public buildings and state capitals across the United States.

Artists who were directly influenced by Michelangelo include Raphael, whose monumental treatment of the figure in the &quot;School of Athens&quot; and &quot;The Expulsion of Heliodorus from the Temple&quot; owes much to Michelangelo, and whose fresco of &quot;Isaiah&quot; in Sant&#x27;Agostino closely imitates the older master&#x27;s prophets. Other artists, such as Pontormo, drew on the writhing forms of the &quot;Last Judgment&quot; and the frescoes of the Cappella Paolina.

The Sistine Chapel ceiling was a work of unprecedented grandeur, both for its architectonic forms, to be imitated by many Baroque ceiling painters, and also for the wealth of its inventiveness in the study of figures. Vasari wrote:
==In popular culture==
* &quot;Vita di Michelangelo&quot; (1964)
* &quot;The Agony and the Ecstasy&quot; (1965), directed by Carol Reed and starring Charlton Heston as Michelangelo
* &quot;A Season of Giants&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Michelangelo - Endless&quot; (2018), starring Enrico Lo Verso as Michelangelo
* &quot;Sin&quot; (2019), directed by Andrei Konchalovsky

==See also==
* Michelangelo and the Medici
* Italian Renaissance sculpture
* Italian Renaissance painting
* Michelangelo phenomenon
* Nicodemite
* Restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes

==Notes==

==References==

==Sources==
* 
* 
* Gardner, Helen; Fred S. Kleiner, Christin J. Mamiya, &quot;Gardner&#x27;s Art through the Ages&quot;. Thomson Wadsworth, (2004) .
* Hirst, Michael and Jill Dunkerton. (1994) &quot;The Young Michelangelo: The Artist in Rome 1496–1501&quot;. London: National Gallery Publications, 
* Paoletti, John T. and Radke, Gary M., (2005) &quot;Art in Renaissance Italy&quot;, Laurence King, 

==Further reading==
* 
* Barenboim, Peter (with Shiyan, Sergey). &quot;Michelangelo in the Medici Chapel: Genius in Details&quot; (in English &amp; Russian), LOOM, Moscow, 2011. 
* Barenboim, Peter (with Heath, Arthur). &quot;Michelangelo&#x27;s Moment: The British Museum Madonna&quot;, LOOM, Moscow, 2018.
* Barenboim, Peter (with Heath, Arthur). &quot;500 years of the New Sacristy: Michelangelo in the Medici Chapel&quot;, LOOM, Moscow, 2019. 
* Einem, Herbert von (1973). &quot;Michelangelo&quot;. Trans. Ronald Taylor. London: Methuen.
* Gilbert, Creighton (1994). &quot;Michelangelo: On and Off the Sistine Ceiling&quot;. New York: George Braziller.
* Hartt, Frederick (1987). &quot;David by the Hand of Michelangelothe Original Model Discovered&quot;, Abbeville, 
* Hibbard, Howard (1974). &quot;Michelangelo&quot;. New York: Harper &amp; Row.
* Pietrangeli, Carlo, et al. (1994). &quot;The Sistine Chapel: A Glorious Restoration&quot;. New York: Harry N. Abrams
* 
* 
* Seymour, Charles, Jr. (1972). &quot;Michelangelo: The Sistine Chapel Ceiling&quot;. New York: W.W. Norton.
* Summers, David (1981). &quot;Michelangelo and the Language of Art&quot;. Princeton University Press.
* Symonds, John Addington (1893). &quot;The Life of Michelangelo Buonarroti&quot;, John C. Nimmo; reprinted by The Modern Library, Random House, 1927.
* Tolnay, Charles de. (1964). &quot;The Art and Thought of Michelangelo&quot;. 5 vols. New York: Pantheon Books.
* Wallace, William E. (2019). &quot;Michelangelo, God&#x27;s Architect: The Story of His Final Years and Greatest Masterpiece&quot;. Princeton University Press, 
* Wilde, Johannes (1978). &quot;Michelangelo: Six Lectures&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

==External links==
* The Digital Michelangelo Project from Stanford University
* 
* The BP Special Exhibition Michelangelo Drawings – closer to the master from the British Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="0" end="42" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985549" start="79" end="86" title="mononym" label="mononym"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="95" end="107" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="170" end="186" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="200" end="220" title="Republic of Florence" label="Republic of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="259" end="278" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="310" end="321" title="Western art" label="Western art"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="432" end="447" title="Renaissance man" label="Renaissance man"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="494" end="511" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q235242" start="826" end="831" title="Pietà (Michelangelo)" label="Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q179900" start="848" end="853" title="David (Michelangelo)" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="994" end="1000" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q500242" start="1038" end="1057" title="The Creation of Adam" label="scenes from Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844675" start="1065" end="1094" title="Sistine Chapel ceiling" label="ceiling of the Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q567861" start="1114" end="1131" title="The Last Judgment (Michelangelo)" label="The Last Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q856419" start="1175" end="1193" title="Laurentian Library" label="Laurentian Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1204" end="1226" title="Mannerism#Mannerist architecture" label="Mannerist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q357276" start="1259" end="1290" title="Antonio da Sangallo the Younger" label="Antonio da Sangallo the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="1311" end="1336" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="1645" end="1659" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086319" start="1929" end="1940" title="terribilità" label="terribilità"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="2133" end="2142" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="2219" end="2226" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q52069" start="2338" end="2345" title="Caprese Michelangelo" label="Caprese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378" start="2427" end="2433" title="Arezzo" label="Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="2435" end="2442" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="2512" end="2520" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="2683" end="2705" title="Magistrate" label="judicial administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q694019" start="2716" end="2723" title="podestà" label="podestà"/>
<link wikidata="Q52077" start="2755" end="2773" title="Chiusi della Verna" label="Chiusi della Verna"/>
<link wikidata="Q464162" start="2899" end="2917" title="Matilde of Canossa" label="Matilde di Canossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q936969" start="3218" end="3223" title="nanny" label="nanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q942605" start="3271" end="3281" title="Settignano" label="Settignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="3406" end="3420" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="3538" end="3545" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="3556" end="3564" title="Renaissance Humanism" label="Humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="3898" end="3904" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="3939" end="3950" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="3965" end="3974" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="4079" end="4099" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Filippo Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q573881" start="4186" end="4204" title="San Lorenzo, Florence" label="San Lorenzo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519975" start="4209" end="4222" title="Santo Spirito, Florence" label="Santo Spirito"/>
<link wikidata="Q208125" start="4276" end="4292" title="Lorenzo Ghiberti" label="Lorenzo Ghiberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q732511" start="4368" end="4377" title="Florence Baptistery" label="Baptistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q860816" start="4489" end="4501" title="Orsanmichele" label="Orsanmichele"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="4576" end="4585" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q183458" start="4597" end="4618" title="Andrea del Verrocchio" label="Andrea del Verrocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q465917" start="4624" end="4638" title="Nanni di Banco" label="Nanni di Banco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="4779" end="4785" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5811" start="4803" end="4811" title="Masaccio" label="Masaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996075" start="4819" end="4835" title="Brancacci Chapel" label="Brancacci Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="5034" end="5048" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191423" start="5065" end="5085" title="Domenico Ghirlandaio" label="Domenico Ghirlandaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="5409" end="5432" title="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="5440" end="5448" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q717097" start="5551" end="5569" title="Francesco Granacci" label="Francesco Granacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579791" start="5617" end="5633" title="Platonic Academy (Florence)" label="Platonic Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192374" start="5799" end="5814" title="Marsilio Ficino" label="Marsilio Ficino"/>
<link wikidata="Q182128" start="5816" end="5836" title="Pico della Mirandola" label="Pico della Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q250414" start="5841" end="5850" title="Poliziano" label="Poliziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078173" start="5906" end="5927" title="Madonna of the Stairs" label="Madonna of the Stairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313006" start="5944" end="5966" title="Battle of the Centaurs (Michelangelo)" label="Battle of the Centaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q828363" start="6119" end="6139" title="Bertoldo di Giovanni" label="Bertoldo di Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q948332" start="6172" end="6189" title="Pietro Torrigiano" label="Pietro Torrigiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572984" start="6579" end="6587" title="Crucifix (Michelangelo)" label="Crucifix"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="6701" end="6711" title="anatomical" label="anatomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="6987" end="6995" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q262212" start="7061" end="7076" title="Piero di Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Piero de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q110651789" start="7256" end="7266" title="Savonarola" label="Savonarola"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="7347" end="7353" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="7366" end="7373" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417706" start="7476" end="7497" title="Arca di San Domenico" label="Shrine of St. Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q314797" start="7601" end="7621" title="Jacopo della Quercia" label="Jacopo della Quercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q810103" start="7652" end="7676" title="San Petronio Basilica" label="Basilica of St Petronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q844675" start="7782" end="7804" title="Sistine Chapel ceiling" label="Sistine Chapel ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="7957" end="7969" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q581925" start="8283" end="8288" title="Cupid (Michelangelo)" label="Cupid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379683" start="8318" end="8358" title="Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q966188" start="8736" end="8751" title="Raffaele Riario" label="Raffaele Riario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144620" start="9275" end="9282" title="Bacchus (Michelangelo)" label="Bacchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906960" start="9496" end="9522" title="Jean Bilhères de Lagraulas" label="Jean de Bilhères-Lagraulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q235242" start="9558" end="9563" title="Pietà (Michelangelo)" label="Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="9595" end="9606" title="St Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="10351" end="10375" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="10451" end="10459" title="Republic of Florence" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164823" start="10527" end="10546" title="Girolamo Savonarola" label="Girolamo Savonarola"/>
<link wikidata="Q289104" start="10619" end="10633" title="Piero Soderini" label="Piero Soderini"/>
<link wikidata="Q395755" start="10754" end="10772" title="Agostino di Duccio" label="Agostino di Duccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q40088" start="10795" end="10809" title="Carrara marble" label="Carrara marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="10821" end="10826" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="10890" end="10908" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q179900" start="10989" end="10994" title="David (Michelangelo)" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="11184" end="11194" title="Botticelli" label="Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="11196" end="11213" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q296265" start="11215" end="11230" title="Filippino Lippi" label="Filippino Lippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="11232" end="11247" title="Pietro Perugino" label="Pietro Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8511" start="11249" end="11265" title="Lorenzo di Credi" label="Lorenzo di Credi"/>
<link wikidata="Q456861" start="11267" end="11274" title="Antonio da Sangallo the Elder" label="Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q312365" start="11279" end="11299" title="Giuliano da Sangallo" label="Giuliano da Sangallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q195655" start="11301" end="11320" title="Andrea della Robbia" label="Andrea della Robbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29447" start="11322" end="11337" title="Cosimo Rosselli" label="Cosimo Rosselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145811" start="11339" end="11357" title="Davide Ghirlandaio" label="Davide Ghirlandaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q280851" start="11359" end="11374" title="Piero di Cosimo" label="Piero di Cosimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q495011" start="11376" end="11392" title="Andrea Sansovino" label="Andrea Sansovino"/>
<link wikidata="Q271928" start="11543" end="11558" title="Palazzo Vecchio" label="Palazzo Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855544" start="11581" end="11589" title="Galleria dell&amp;#x27;Accademia" label="Academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902748" start="11810" end="11835" title="Importuno di Michelangelo" label="Importuno di Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="12077" end="12083" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045726" start="12225" end="12247" title="The Battle of Anghiari (painting)" label="The Battle of Anghiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779008" start="12315" end="12348" title="Battle of Anghiari" label="battle between Florence and Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236899" start="12412" end="12429" title="Battle of Cascina (Michelangelo)" label="Battle of Cascina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="12787" end="12793" title="Rubens" label="Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q737782" start="12821" end="12841" title="Bastiano da Sangallo" label="Bastiano da Sangallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q618057" start="12931" end="12942" title="Holy Family" label="Holy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473546" start="13020" end="13030" title="Doni Tondo" label="Doni Tondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="13194" end="13210" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684762" start="13231" end="13249" title="Manchester Madonna" label="Manchester Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="13271" end="13287" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="13400" end="13414" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q651551" start="13445" end="13461" title="Tomb of Pope Julius II" label="Pope&amp;#x27;s tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q542070" start="14192" end="14223" title="San Pietro in Vincoli" label="Church of San Pietro in Vincoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989744" start="14267" end="14282" title="Moses (Michelangelo)" label="figure of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203231" start="14371" end="14387" title="Rebellious Slave" label="Rebellious Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q83862" start="14408" end="14419" title="Dying Slave" label="Dying Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="14442" end="14448" title="Louvre Museum" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="14670" end="14678" title="Bramante" label="Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="14715" end="14740" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="14985" end="15000" title="Twelve Apostles" label="Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q734605" start="15019" end="15029" title="pendentive" label="pendentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="15248" end="15256" title="Genesis creation story" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="15262" end="15273" title="Fall of Man" label="Fall of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q51630" start="15330" end="15349" title="genealogy of Christ" label="genealogy of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="15613" end="15628" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="15814" end="15818" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="15952" end="15959" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="15981" end="15986" title="Sibyl" label="Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q500242" start="16080" end="16100" title="The Creation of Adam" label="The Creation of Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="16102" end="16114" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="16122" end="16136" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="16142" end="16148" title="Deluge myth" label="Deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="16162" end="16170" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q762835" start="16180" end="16193" title="Cumaean Sibyl" label="Cumaean Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="16299" end="16309" title="Pope Leo X" label="Pope Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q649202" start="16591" end="16606" title="Duchy of Urbino" label="Duchy of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q555015" start="16633" end="16663" title="Francesco Maria I della Rovere" label="Francesco Maria I della Rovere"/>
<link wikidata="Q573881" start="16776" end="16811" title="Basilica of San Lorenzo, Florence" label="Basilica of San Lorenzo in Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q219330" start="16964" end="16975" title="Pietrasanta" label="Pietrasanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q660876" start="17489" end="17502" title="Medici Chapel (Michelangelo)" label="Medici Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q333340" start="17585" end="17610" title="Giuliano de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Nemours" label="Giuliano, Duke of Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="17699" end="17722" title="Lorenzo the Magnificent" label="Lorenzo the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q660876" start="17859" end="17864" title="Night (Michelangelo)" label="Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q660876" start="17881" end="17884" title="Day (Michelangelo)" label="Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q660876" start="17902" end="17906" title="Dusk (Michelangelo)" label="Dusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q660876" start="17923" end="17927" title="Dawn (Michelangelo)" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q57087" start="18181" end="18190" title="Pope Adrian VI" label="Adrian VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="18232" end="18248" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Pope Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q856419" start="18338" end="18356" title="Laurentian Library" label="Laurentian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="18561" end="18581" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="18798" end="18810" title="sack of Rome (1527)" label="sack of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q461997" start="20004" end="20025" title="Santa Maria di Loreto (Rome)" label="Santa Maria di Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q255368" start="20068" end="20084" title="Vittoria Colonna" label="Vittoria Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704" start="20101" end="20108" title="Pescara" label="Pescara"/>
<link wikidata="Q567861" start="20285" end="20302" title="The Last Judgment (Michelangelo)" label="The Last Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="20365" end="20378" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="20771" end="20788" title="Saint Bartholomew" label="Saint Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q101430" start="21035" end="21050" title="Pope Paul IV" label="Cardinal Carafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="21074" end="21080" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="21181" end="21197" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q540489" start="21292" end="21311" title="Daniele da Volterra" label="Daniele da Volterra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716659" start="21425" end="21441" title="Marcello Venusti" label="Marcello Venusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q290549" start="21453" end="21471" title="Museo di Capodimonte" label="Capodimonte Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="21475" end="21481" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="21587" end="21602" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="21669" end="21684" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q848386" start="21721" end="21736" title="Palazzo Farnese" label="Palazzo Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q569253" start="21771" end="21795" title="Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri" label="Santa Maria degli Angeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629700" start="21907" end="21934" title="San Giovanni dei Fiorentini" label="San Giovanni dei Fiorentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="21978" end="22010" title="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338582" start="22019" end="22028" title="Porta Pia" label="Porta Pia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432043" start="22355" end="22379" title="The Conversion of Saul (Michelangelo)" label="Conversion of Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886263" start="22400" end="22426" title="The Crucifixion of St. Peter (Michelangelo)" label="Crucifixion of Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645493" start="22631" end="22635" title="Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects" label="Vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634186" start="23283" end="23300" title="Banister Fletcher" label="Banister Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096577" start="23770" end="23794" title="Secular Franciscan Order" label="Secular Franciscan Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q721545" start="24164" end="24179" title="Ascanio Condivi" label="Ascanio Condivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="24371" end="24376" title="ducat" label="ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q437543" start="24615" end="24627" title="Paolo Giovio" label="Paolo Giovio"/>
<link wikidata="Q538960" start="25415" end="25436" title="Tommaso dei Cavalieri" label="Tommaso dei Cavalieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645493" start="25534" end="25554" title="Lives of the Artists" label="Lives of the Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="26459" end="26470" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q662550" start="26478" end="26485" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s sonnets" label="sonnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664078" start="26765" end="26784" title="Cecchino dei Bracci" label="Cecchino dei Bracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439713" start="26974" end="26988" title="Febo di Poggio" label="Febo di Poggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="27053" end="27068" title="Gherardo Perini" label="Gherardo Perini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930983" start="27211" end="27246" title="Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger" label="Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q538549" start="27509" end="27531" title="John Addington Symonds" label="John Addington Symonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="28516" end="28523" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q982538" start="28607" end="28625" title="Gian Paolo Lomazzo" label="Gian Paolo Lomazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q954917" start="29200" end="29223" title="Desiderio da Settignano" label="Desiderio da Settignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500548" start="29409" end="29421" title="Taddei Tondo" label="Taddei Tondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251302" start="29475" end="29484" title="Bullfinch" label="Bullfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842391" start="29586" end="29605" title="Bridgewater Madonna" label="Bridgewater Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q567833" start="29623" end="29640" title="Madonna of Bruges" label="Madonna of Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354236" start="30360" end="30365" title="Angel (Michelangelo)" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q364413" start="30610" end="30623" title="Nicola Pisano" label="Nicola Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715131" start="30698" end="30720" title="Niccolò dell&amp;#x27;Arca" label="Niccolò dell&amp;#x27;Arca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="31256" end="31267" title="Bacchus" label="God of Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q514847" start="31823" end="31835" title="contraposto" label="contrapposto"/>
<link wikidata="Q30755" start="32166" end="32171" title="Rodin" label="Rodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057930" start="32214" end="32225" title="Atlas Slave" label="Atlas Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q917098" start="32717" end="32729" title="barrel vault" label="barrel vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="33374" end="33381" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955636" start="33876" end="33909" title="Separation of Light from Darkness" label="Separation of Light from Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q643474" start="35139" end="35164" title="Massacre of the Innocents" label="Massacre of the Innocents"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="35320" end="35331" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q314932" start="35427" end="35442" title="Giovanni Pisano" label="Giovanni Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q208125" start="35484" end="35492" title="Ghiberti" label="Ghiberti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35500" end="35515" title="Florence Baptistery#Lorenzo Ghiberti" label="Baptistry Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q196668" start="36003" end="36014" title="Artistic inspiration" label="inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q314579" start="36032" end="36048" title="Melozzo da Forlì" label="Melozzo da Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515300" start="36064" end="36078" title="Santi Apostoli, Rome" label="Santi Apostoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681" start="36341" end="36356" title="Andrea Mantegna" label="Andrea Mantegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="37936" end="37952" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="37974" end="37983" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661523" start="38004" end="38022" title="architectural form" label="architectural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="38117" end="38128" title="Campidoglio" label="Campidoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q848386" start="38173" end="38187" title="Farnese Palace" label="Farnese Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q175566" start="38711" end="38730" title="Giacomo della Porta" label="Giacomo della Porta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438217" start="38911" end="38918" title="The Genius of Victory" label="Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="39477" end="39489" title="Holy Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51175" start="39497" end="39528" title="Basilica of Santa Maria Novella" label="Basilica of Santa Maria Novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q295084" start="39635" end="39644" title="Nicodemus" label="Nicodemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528076" start="39816" end="39832" title="Tiberio Calcagni" label="Tiberio Calcagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878666" start="40075" end="40090" title="Rondanini Pietà" label="Rondanini Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q51177" start="40487" end="40510" title="Basilica of Santa Croce, Florence" label="Basilica of Santa Croce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117831" start="40735" end="40740" title="scudi" label="scudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48547" start="40814" end="40838" title="Cosimo I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Cosimo I de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="41039" end="41055" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q151097" start="42182" end="42193" title="Henry Moore" label="Henry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q840111" start="42457" end="42468" title="giant order" label="giant order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631593" start="42631" end="42659" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Andrea della Valle" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Andrea della Valle"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="42672" end="42696" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q186953" start="42923" end="42939" title="School of Athens" label="School of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294201" start="42956" end="42999" title="The Expulsion of Heliodorus from the Temple" label="The Expulsion of Heliodorus from the Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226022" start="43059" end="43065" title="The Prophet Isaiah (Raphael)" label="Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q207929" start="43168" end="43176" title="Pontormo" label="Pontormo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="43403" end="43410" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43544" end="43564" title=":it:Vita di Michelangelo" label="Vita di Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824915" start="43586" end="43611" title="The Agony and the Ecstasy (film)" label="The Agony and the Ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95143" start="43638" end="43648" title="Carol Reed" label="Carol Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="43662" end="43677" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646703" start="43702" end="43720" title="A Season of Giants" label="A Season of Giants"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43742" end="43764" title=":it:Michelangelo - Infinito" label="Michelangelo - Endless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343824" start="43788" end="43803" title="Enrico Lo Verso" label="Enrico Lo Verso"/>
<link wikidata="Q59208708" start="43828" end="43831" title="Sin (2019 film)" label="Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55208" start="43858" end="43877" title="Andrei Konchalovsky" label="Andrei Konchalovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836672" start="43894" end="43921" title="Michelangelo and the Medici" label="Michelangelo and the Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953198" start="43924" end="43953" title="Italian Renaissance sculpture" label="Italian Renaissance sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914470" start="43956" end="43984" title="Italian Renaissance painting" label="Italian Renaissance painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511114" start="43987" end="44010" title="Michelangelo phenomenon" label="Michelangelo phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894162" start="44013" end="44023" title="Nicodemite" label="Nicodemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449872" start="44026" end="44068" title="Restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes" label="Restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702331" start="44117" end="44131" title="Helen Gardner (art historian)" label="Gardner, Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822096" start="45803" end="45817" title="Modern Library" label="Modern Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="46265" end="46284" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="46370" end="46384" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21021" wikidata="Q5806" url="?curid=21021" title="Mecca">
<text>Mecca (; officially Makkah al-Mukarramah, commonly shortened to Makkah) is the capital of Mecca Province in the Hejaz region of western Saudi Arabia; it is the holiest city according to Islam. It is inland from Jeddah on the Red Sea, in a narrow valley above sea level. Its metropolitan population in 2022 was 2.4million, making it the third-most populated city in Saudi Arabia after Riyadh and Jeddah. Around 44.5% of the population are Saudi citizens and around 55.5% are Muslim foreigners from other countries. Pilgrims more than triple the population number every year during the pilgrimage, observed in the twelfth Hijri month of . With over 10.8 million international visitors in 2023, Mecca was one of the ten most visited cities in the world.

Mecca is generally considered &quot;the fountainhead and cradle of Islam&quot;. Mecca is revered in Islam as the birthplace of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. The Hira cave atop the (&quot;Mountain of Light&quot;), just outside the city, is where Muslims believe the Quran was first revealed to Muhammad. Visiting Mecca for the is an obligation upon all able Muslims. The Great Mosque of Mecca, known as the , is home to the Ka&#x27;bah, believed by Muslims to have been built by Abraham and Ishmael. It is Islam&#x27;s holiest site and the direction of prayer () for all Muslims worldwide.

Muslim rulers from in and around the region long tried to take the city and keep it in their control, and thus, much like most of the Hejaz region, the city has seen several regime changes. The city was most recently conquered in the Saudi conquest of Hejaz by Ibn Saud and his allies in 1925. Since then, Mecca has seen a tremendous expansion in size and infrastructure, with newer, modern buildings such as the Abraj Al Bait, the world&#x27;s fourth-tallest building and third-largest by floor area, towering over the Great Mosque. The Saudi government has also carried out the destruction of several historical structures and archaeological sites, such as the Ajyad Fortress. However, many of the demolitions have officially been part of the continued expansion of the Masjid al-Haram at Mecca and the Prophet&#x27;s Mosque in Medina and their auxiliary service facilities in order to accommodate the ever-increasing number of Muslims performing the pilgrimage (&quot;hajj&quot;). Non-Muslims are 
prohibited from entering the city.

Under the Saudi government, Mecca is governed by the Mecca Regional Municipality, a municipal council of 14 locally elected members headed by the mayor (called in Arabic) appointed by the Saudi government. In 2015, the mayor of the city was Osama bin Fadhel Al-Barr; , the mayor is Saleh Al-Turki. The City of Mecca , which constitutes Mecca and the surrounding region, is the capital of the Mecca Province, which includes the neighbouring cities of Jeddah and Ta&#x27;if, even though Jeddah is considerably larger in population than Mecca. Prince Khalid bin Faisal Al Saud has been the provincial governor of the province since 16 May 2007.

== Etymology ==
Mecca has been referred to by many names. As with many Arabic words, its etymology is obscure. Widely believed to be a synonym for , it is said to be more specifically the early name for the valley located therein, while Muslim scholars generally use it to refer to the sacred area of the city that immediately surrounds and includes the Ka&#x27;bah.


The Quran refers to the city as  in Surah Al Imran (3), verse 96: &quot;Indeed the first House [of worship], established for mankind was that at Bakkah&quot;. This is said to have been the name of the city at the time of Ibrahim and it is also transliterated as and , among others. It was a name for the city in the ancient world.

=== and &quot;Mecca&quot;===

 is the official transliteration used by the Saudi government and is closer to the Arabic pronunciation. The government adopted as the official spelling in the 1980s, but it is not universally known or used worldwide. The full official name is (). is used to refer to the city in the Quran in Surah Al-Fath (48), verse 24.

The word &quot;Mecca&quot; in English has come to be used to refer to any place that draws large numbers of people, and because of this some English-speaking Muslims have come to regard the use of this spelling for the city as offensive. Nonetheless, &quot;Mecca&quot; is the familiar form of the English transliteration for the Arabic name of the city.

Macoraba, another ancient city name Claudius Ptolemy says was within Arabia Felix, was also claimed to be Mecca. Some studies have questioned this association. Many etymologies have been proposed: the traditional one is that it is derived from the Old South Arabian root M-K-R-B which means &quot;temple&quot;.

===Other names===
Another name used for Mecca in the Quran is at 6:92 where it is called (, meaning &quot;Mother of all Settlements&quot;). The city has been called several other names in both the Quran and . Another name used historically for Mecca is . According to an Islamic suggestion, another name for Mecca, , is synonymous with the Desert of Paran mentioned in the Old Testament at Genesis 21:21. Arab and Islamic tradition holds that the wilderness of Paran, broadly speaking, is the Tihamah coastal plain and the site where Ishmael settled was Mecca. Yaqut al-Hamawi, the 12th-century Syrian geographer, wrote that was &quot;an arabized Hebrew word, one of the names of Mecca mentioned in the Torah.&quot; 

==History==

=== Prehistory ===
In 2010, Mecca and the surrounding area became an important site for paleontology with respect to primate evolution, with the discovery of a &quot;Saadanius&quot; fossil. &quot;Saadanius&quot; is considered to be a primate closely related to the common ancestor of the Old World monkeys and apes. The fossil habitat, near what is now the Red Sea in western Saudi Arabia, was a damp forest area between 28 million and 29 million years ago. Paleontologists involved in the research hope to find further fossils in the area.

===Early history (up to 6th century CE)===

The early history of Mecca is still largely shrouded by a lack of clear sources. The city lies in the hinterland of the middle part of western Arabia of which there are sparse textual or archaeological sources available. This lack of knowledge is in contrast to both the northern and southern areas of western Arabia, specifically the Syro-Palestinian frontier and Yemen, where historians have various sources available such as physical remains of shrines, inscriptions, observations by Greco-Roman authors, and information collected by church historians. The area of Hejaz that surrounds Mecca was characterized by its remote, rocky, and inhospitable nature, supporting only meagre settled populations in scattered oases and occasional stretches of fertile land. The Red Sea coast offered no easily accessible ports and the oasis dwellers and bedouins in the region were illiterate.

While one individual has suggested that Mecca’s population at the time of Muhammad was around 550, research published by Binimad Al-Ateeqi in 2020 shows that the population was closer to 10,000 individuals, a figure extrapolated from data taken from historical records about the Battle of Badr and other military expeditions, emigrants to both Abyssinia and Madinah, and Muhammad’s own household. Al-Ateeqi, a researcher from Kuwait who has written extensively about the early history of Mecca, also makes deductions about the numbers of women, children, servants, and slaves living in Mecca at the time, pointing out that some wealthy individuals, such as Abdullah ibn Jud’an, had as many as 100 slaves.

The first clear reference to Mecca in non-Islamic literature appears in 741 CE, long after the death of Muhammad, in the Byzantine-Arab Chronicle, though here the author places the region in Mesopotamia rather than the Hejaz.

Possible earlier mentions are not unambiguous. The Greek historian Diodorus Siculus writes about Arabia in the 1st century BCE in his work &quot;Bibliotheca historica&quot;, describing a holy shrine: &quot;And a temple has been set up there, which is very holy and exceedingly revered by all Arabians&quot;. Claims have been made this could be a reference to the Ka&#x27;bah in Mecca. However, the geographic location Diodorus describes is located in northwest Arabia, around the area of Leuke Kome, within the former Nabataean Kingdom and the Roman province of Arabia Petraea.

Ptolemy lists the names of 50 cities in Arabia, one going by the name of Macoraba. There has been speculation since 1646 that this could be a reference to Mecca. Historically, there has been a general consensus in scholarship that Macoraba mentioned by Ptolemy in the 2nd century CE is indeed Mecca, but more recently, this has been questioned. Bowersock favors the identity of the former, with his theory being that &quot;Macoraba&quot; is the word &quot;Makkah&quot; followed by the aggrandizing Aramaic adjective &quot;rabb&quot; (great). The Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus also enumerated many cities of Western Arabia, most of which can be identified. According to Bowersock, he did mention Mecca as &quot;Geapolis&quot; or &quot;Hierapolis&quot;, the latter one meaning &quot;holy city&quot; potentially referring to the sanctuary of the Kaaba. Patricia Crone, from the Revisionist school of Islamic studies on the other hand, writes that &quot;the plain truth is that the name Macoraba has nothing to do with that of Mecca [...] if Ptolemy mentions Mecca at all, he calls it Moka, a town in Arabia Petraea&quot;.

Procopius&#x27; 6th century statement that the Ma&#x27;add tribe possessed the coast of western Arabia between the Ghassanids and the Himyarites of the south supports the Arabic sources tradition that associates Quraysh as a branch of the Ma&#x27;add and Muhammad as a direct descendant of Ma&#x27;add ibn Adnan.

Historian Patricia Crone has cast doubt on the claim that Mecca was a major historical trading outpost. However, other scholars such as Glen W. Bowersock disagree and assert that Mecca was a major trading outpost. Crone later on disregarded some of her theories. She argues that Meccan trade relied on skins, hides, manufactured leather goods, clarified butter, Hijazi woollens, and camels. She suggests that most of these goods were destined for the Roman army, which is known to have required colossal quantities of leather and hides for its equipment.

Mecca is mentioned in the following early Quranic manuscripts:
* Codex Is. 1615 I, folio 47v, radiocarbon dated to 591–643 CE.
* Codex Ṣanʿāʾ DAM 01–29.1, folio 29a, radiocarbon dated between 633 and 665 CE.
* Codex Arabe 331, folio 40 v, radiocarbon dated between 652 and 765 CE.

The earliest Muslim inscriptions are from the Mecca-Ta&#x27;if area.

Islamic narrative

In the Islamic view, the beginnings of Mecca are attributed to the Biblical figures, Adam, Abraham, Hagar and Ishmael. It was Adam himself who built the first God&#x27;s house in Mecca according to a heavenly prototype but this building was destroyed in the Noahic Flood. The civilization of Mecca is believed to have started after Ibrāhīm (Abraham) left his son Ismāʿīl (Ishmael) and wife Hājar (Hagar) in the valley at Allah&#x27;s command. Some people from the Yemeni tribe of Jurhum settled with them, and Isma&#x27;il reportedly married two women, one after divorcing the first, on Ibrahim&#x27;s advice. At least one man of the Jurhum helped Ismāʿīl and his father to construct or according to Islamic narratives, reconstruct, the &quot;Ka&#x27;bah&quot; (&#x27;Cube&#x27;), which would have social, religious, political and historical implications for the site and region.

Muslims see the mention of a pilgrimage at the Valley of the Bakha in the Old Testament chapter Psalm 84:3–6 as a reference to Mecca, similar to the Quran at Surah In the &#x27;āl ʿimrān&quot;, a commentary on the Samaritan midrashic chronology of the Patriarchs, of unknown date but probably composed in the 10th century CE, it is claimed that Mecca was built by the sons of Nebaioth, the eldest son of Ismāʿīl or Ishmael.

Thamudic inscriptions

Some Thamudic inscriptions which were discovered in the south Jordan contained names of some individuals such as &quot;ʿAbd Mekkat&quot; (, &quot;Servant of Mecca&quot;).

There were also some other inscriptions which contained personal names such as &quot;Makki&quot; (, &quot;Makkan, of Makkah&quot;), but Jawwad Ali from the University of Baghdad suggested that there&#x27;s also a probability of a tribe named &quot;Makkah&quot;.

=== Under the Quraish ===
Sometime in the 5th century, the Ka&#x27;bah was a place of worship for the deities of Arabia&#x27;s pagan tribes. Mecca&#x27;s most important pagan deity was Hubal, which had been placed there by the ruling Quraish tribe. and remained until the Conquest of Mecca by Muhammad. In the 5th century, the Quraish took control of Mecca, and became skilled merchants and traders. In the 6th century, they joined the lucrative spice trade, since battles elsewhere were diverting trade routes from dangerous sea routes to more secure overland routes. The Byzantine Empire had previously controlled the Red Sea, but piracy had been increasing. Another previous route that ran through the Persian Gulf via the Tigris and Euphrates rivers was also being threatened by exploitations from the Sassanid Empire, and was being disrupted by the Lakhmids, the Ghassanids, and the Roman–Persian Wars. Mecca&#x27;s prominence as a trading center also surpassed the cities of Petra and Palmyra. The Sassanids however did not always pose a threat to Mecca, as in 575 CE they protected it from a Yemeni invasion, led by its Christian leader Abraha. The tribes of southern Arabia asked the Persian king Khosrau I for aid, in response to which he came south to Arabia with foot-soldiers and a fleet of ships near Mecca.

By the middle of the 6th century, there were three major settlements in northern Arabia, all along the south-western coast that borders the Red Sea, in a habitable region between the sea and the Hejaz mountains to the east. Although the area around Mecca was completely barren, it was the wealthiest of the three settlements with abundant water from the renowned Zamzam Well and a position at the crossroads of major caravan routes.

The harsh conditions and terrain of the Arabian peninsula meant a near-constant state of conflict between the local tribes, but once a year they would declare a truce and converge upon Mecca in an annual pilgrimage. Up to the 7th century, this journey was intended for religious reasons by the pagan Arabs to pay homage to their shrine, and to drink Zamzam. However, it was also the time each year that disputes would be arbitrated, debts would be resolved, and trading would occur at Meccan fairs. These annual events gave the tribes a sense of common identity and made Mecca an important focus for the peninsula.

The Year of the Elephant (570 CE)

The &quot;Year of the Elephant&quot; is the name in Islamic history for the year approximately equating to 570–572 CE, when, according to Islamic sources such as Ibn Ishaq, Abraha descended upon Mecca, riding an elephant, with a large army after building a cathedral at San&#x27;aa, named &quot;al-Qullays&quot; in honor of the Negus of Axum. It gained widespread fame, even gaining attention from the Byzantine Empire. Abraha attempted to divert the pilgrimage of the Arabs from the Ka&#x27;bah to al-Qullays, effectively converting them to Christianity. According to Islamic tradition, this was the year of Muhammad&#x27;s birth. Abraha allegedly sent a messenger named Muhammad ibn Khuza&#x27;i to Mecca and Tihamah with a message that al-Qullays was both much better than other houses of worship and purer, having not been defiled by the housing of idols. When Muhammad ibn Khuza&#x27;i got as far as the land of Kinana, the people of the lowland, knowing what he had come for, sent a man of Hudhayl called ʿUrwa bin Hayyad al-Milasi, who shot him with an arrow, killing him. His brother Qays who was with him, fled to Abraha and told him the news, which increased his rage and fury and he swore to raid the Kinana tribe and destroy the Ka&#x27;bah. Ibn Ishaq further states that one of the men of the Quraysh tribe was angered by this, and going to Sana&#x27;a, entering the church at night and defiling it; widely assumed to have done so by defecating in it.

Abraha marched upon the Ka&#x27;bah with a large army, which included one or more war elephants, intending to demolish it. When news of the advance of his army came, the Arab tribes of Quraysh, Kinanah, Khuza&#x27;a and Hudhayl united in the defense of the Ka&#x27;bah and the city. A man from the Himyarite Kingdom was sent by Abraha to advise them that Abraha only wished to demolish the Ka&#x27;bah and if they resisted, they would be crushed. Abdul Muttalib told the Meccans to seek refuge in the hills while he and some members of the Quraysh remained within the precincts of the Kaaba. Abraha sent a dispatch inviting Abdul-Muttalib to meet with Abraha and discuss matters. When Abdul-Muttalib left the meeting he was heard saying: &quot;The Owner of this House is its Defender, and I am sure he will save it from the attack of the adversaries and will not dishonor the servants of His House.&quot;

Abraha eventually attacked Mecca. However, the lead elephant, known as Mahmud, is said to have stopped at the boundary around Mecca and refused to enter. It has been theorized that an epidemic such as by smallpox could have caused such a failed invasion of Mecca. The reference to the story in Quran is rather short. According to the 105th Surah of the Quran, Al-Fil, the next day, a dark cloud of small birds sent by Allah appeared. The birds carried small rocks in their beaks, and bombarded the Ethiopian forces, and smashed them to a state like that of eaten straw.

Economy

Camel caravans, said to have first been used by Muhammad&#x27;s great-grandfather, were a major part of Mecca&#x27;s bustling economy. Alliances were struck between the merchants in Mecca and the local nomadic tribes, who would bring goods – leather, livestock, and metals mined in the local mountains – to Mecca to be loaded on the caravans and carried to cities in Shaam and Iraq. Historical accounts also provide some indication that goods from other continents may also have flowed through Mecca. Goods from Africa and the Far East passed through en route to Syria including spices, leather, medicine, cloth, and slaves; in return Mecca received money, weapons, cereals and wine, which in turn were distributed throughout Arabia. The Meccans signed treaties with both the Byzantines and the Bedouins, and negotiated safe passages for caravans, giving them water and pasture rights. Mecca became the center of a loose confederation of client tribes, which included those of the Banu Tamim. Other regional powers such as the Abyssinians, Ghassanids, and Lakhmids were in decline leaving Meccan trade to be the primary binding force in Arabia in the late 6th century.

=== Muhammad and the conquest of Mecca ===

Muhammad was born in Mecca in 570 CE, and thus Islam has been inextricably linked with it ever since. He was born into the faction of Banu Hashim in the ruling tribe of Quraysh. It was in the nearby mountain cave of Hira on Jabal al-Nour that Muhammad began receiving divine revelations from God through the archangel Jibreel in 610 CE, according to Islamic tradition. Advocating his form of Abrahamic monotheism against Meccan paganism, and after enduring persecution from the pagan tribes for 13 years, Muhammad emigrated (&quot;hijrah&quot;) in 622 CE with his companions, the &quot;Muhajirun&quot;, to Yathrib (later renamed Medina). The conflict between the Quraysh and the Muslims is accepted to have begun at this point. Overall, Meccan efforts to annihilate Islam failed and proved to be costly and unsuccessful. During the Battle of the Trench in 627 CE, the combined armies of Arabia were unable to defeat Muhammad&#x27;s forces (as the trench surrounding Muhammad&#x27;s forces protected them from harm and a storm was sent to breach the Quraysh tribe). In 628 CE, Muhammad and his followers wanted to enter Mecca for pilgrimage, but were blocked by the Quraysh. Subsequently, Muslims and Meccans entered into the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah, whereby the Quraysh and their allies promised to cease fighting Muslims and their allies and promised that Muslims would be allowed into the city to perform the pilgrimage the following year. It was meant to be a ceasefire for 10 years; however, just two years later, the Banu Bakr, allies of the Quraish, violated the truce by slaughtering a group of the Banu Khuza&#x27;ah, allies of the Muslims. Muhammad and his companions, now 10,000 strong, marched into Mecca and conquered the city. The pagan imagery was destroyed by Muhammad&#x27;s followers and the location Islamized and rededicated to the worship of Allah alone. Mecca was declared the holiest site in Islam ordaining it as the center of Muslim pilgrimage (&quot;Hajj&quot;), one of the Islamic faith&#x27;s Five Pillars.

Muhammad then returned to Medina, after assigning &#x27;Attab ibn Asid as governor of the city. His other activities in Arabia led to the unification of the Arabian Peninsula under the banner of Islam. Muhammad died in 632 CE. Within the next few hundred years, the area under the banner of Islam stretched from North Africa into Asia and parts of Europe. As the Islamic realm grew, Mecca continued to attract pilgrims from all across the Muslim world and beyond, as Muslims came to perform the annual Hajj pilgrimage. Mecca also attracted a year-round population of scholars, pious Muslims who wished to live close to the Kaaba, and local inhabitants who served the pilgrims. Due to the difficulty and expense of the Hajj, pilgrims arrived by boat at Jeddah, and came overland, or joined the annual caravans from Syria or Iraq.

=== Medieval and pre-modern times ===
Mecca was never the capital of any of the Islamic states. Muslim rulers did contribute to its upkeep, such as during the reigns of &#x27;Umar (r. 634–644 CE) and &#x27;Uthman ibn Affan (r. 644–656 CE) when concerns of flooding caused the caliphs to bring in Christian engineers to build barrages in the low-lying quarters and construct dykes and embankments to protect the area around the Kaaba.

Muhammad&#x27;s return to Medina shifted the focus away from Mecca and later even further away when &#x27;Ali, the fourth caliph, took power and chose Kufa as his capital. The Umayyad Caliphate moved the capital to Damascus in Syria and the Abbasid Caliphate to Baghdad, in modern-day Iraq, which remained the center of the Islamic Empire for nearly 500 years. Mecca re-entered Islamic political history during the Second Fitna, when it was held by Abdullah ibn az-Zubayr and the Zubayrids. The city was twice besieged by the Umayyads in 683 CE and 692 CE, and for some time thereafter, the city figured little in politics, remaining a city of devotion and scholarship governed by various other factions. In 930 CE, Mecca was attacked and sacked by Qarmatians, a millenarian Shi&#x27;a Isma&#x27;ili Muslim sect led by Abū-Tāhir Al-Jannābī and centered in eastern Arabia. The Black Death pandemic hit Mecca in 1349 CE.

==== Ibn Battuta&#x27;s description of Mecca ====

One of the most famous travelers to Mecca in the 14th century was a Moroccan scholar and traveler, Ibn Battuta. In his &quot;rihla&quot; (account), he provides a vast description of the city. Around the year 1327 CE or 729 AH, Ibn Battuta arrived at the holy city. Immediately, he says, it felt like a holy sanctuary, and thus he started the rites of the pilgrimage. He remained in Mecca for three years and left in 1330 CE. During his second year in the holy city, he says his caravan arrived &quot;with a great quantity of alms for the support of those who were staying in Mecca and Medina&quot;. While in Mecca, prayers were made for (not to) the King of Iraq and also for Salaheddin al-Ayyubi, Sultan of Egypt and Syria at the Ka&#x27;bah. Battuta says the Ka&#x27;bah was large, but was destroyed and rebuilt smaller than the original. According to Ibn Battuta, the original Kaaba, prior to the conquest of Makkah by the Prophet, contained images of angels and prophets including Jesus (Isa in Islamic tradition), his mother Mary (Maryam in Islamic tradition), and many others - Ibn Battuta however states these were all destroyed by the Prophet in the year of victory. Battuta describes the Ka&#x27;bah in his time as an important part of Mecca due to the fact that many people make the pilgrimage to it. Battuta describes the people of the city as being humble and kind, and also willing to give a part of everything they had to someone who had nothing. The inhabitants of Mecca and the village itself, he says, were very clean. There was also a sense of elegance to the village.

Under the OttomansIn 1517, the then Sharif of Mecca, Barakat bin Muhammad, acknowledged the supremacy of the Ottoman Caliph but retained a great degree of local autonomy. In 1803 the city was captured by the First Saudi State, which held Mecca until 1813, destroying some of the historic tombs and domes in and around the city. The Ottomans assigned the task of bringing Mecca back under Ottoman control to their powerful &quot;Khedive&quot; (viceroy) and &quot;Wali&quot; of Egypt, Muhammad Ali Pasha. Muhammad Ali Pasha successfully returned Mecca to Ottoman control in 1813. In 1818, the Saud were defeated again but survived and founded the Second Saudi State that lasted until 1891 and led on to the present country of Saudi Arabia. In 1853, Sir Richard Francis Burton undertook the Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina disguised as a Muslim. Although Burton was certainly not the first non-Muslim European to make the &quot;Hajj&quot; (Ludovico di Varthema did this in 1503), his pilgrimage remains one of the most famous and documented of modern times. Mecca was regularly hit by cholera outbreaks. Between 1830 and 1930, cholera broke out among pilgrims at Mecca 27 times.

=== Modern history ===

Hashemite Revolt and subsequent control by the Sharifate of Mecca

In World War I, the Ottoman Empire was at war with the Allies. It had successfully repulsed an attack on Istanbul in the Gallipoli campaign and on Baghdad in the Siege of Kut. The British intelligence officer T. E. Lawrence conspired with the Ottoman governor, Hussain bin Ali, the Sharif of Mecca to revolt against the Ottoman Empire and it was the first city captured by his forces in the 1916 Battle of Mecca. Sharif&#x27;s revolt proved a turning point of the war on the eastern front. Hussein declared a new state, the Kingdom of Hejaz, declaring himself the Sharif of the state and Mecca his capital. News reports in November 1916 via contact in Cairo with returning Hajj pilgrims, stated that with the Ottoman Turkish authorities gone, the Hajj of 1916 was free of the previous massive extortion and monetary demands made by the Turks who were agents of the Ottoman government.

Saudi Arabian conquest and modern history

Following the 1924 Battle of Mecca, the Sharif of Mecca was overthrown by the Saud family, and Mecca was incorporated into Saudi Arabia. Under Saudi rule, much of the historic city has been demolished as a result of the Saudi government fearing these sites might become sites of association in worship besides Allah (&quot;shirk&quot;). The city has been expanded to include several towns previously considered to be separate from the holy city and now is just a few kilometers outside the main sites of the Hajj, Mina, Muzdalifah and Arafat. Mecca is not served by any airport, due to concerns about the city&#x27;s safety. It is instead served by the King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah (approx. 70 km away) internationally and the Ta&#x27;if Regional Airport (approx. 120 km away) for domestic flights.

The city today is at the junction of the two most important highways in all of the Saudi Arabian highway system, Highway 40, which connects the city to Jeddah in the west and the capital, Riyadh and Dammam in the east and Highway 15, which connects it to Medina, Tabuk and onward to Jordan in the north and Abha and Jizan in the south. The Ottomans had planned to extend their railway network to the holy city, but were forced to abandon this plan due to their entry into the First World War. This plan was later carried out by the Saudi government, which connected the two holy cities of Medina and Mecca with the modern Haramain high-speed railway system which runs at 300 km/h (190 mph) and connects the two cities via Jeddah, King Abdulaziz International Airport and King Abdullah Economic City near Rabigh within two hours.

The haram area of Mecca, in which the entry of non-Muslims is forbidden, is much larger than that of Medina.

1979 Grand Mosque seizure
On 20 November 1979, two hundred armed dissidents led by Juhayman al-Otaibi, seized the Grand Mosque, claiming the Saudi royal family no longer represented pure Islam and that the Masjid al-Haram and the Ka&#x27;bah, must be held by those of true faith. The rebels seized tens of thousands of pilgrims as hostages and barricaded themselves in the mosque. The siege lasted two weeks, and resulted in several hundred deaths and significant damage to the shrine, especially the Safa-Marwah gallery. A multinational force was finally able to retake the mosque from the dissidents. Since then, the Grand Mosque has been expanded several times, with many other expansions being undertaken in the present day.

Destruction of Islamic heritage sites
Under Saudi rule, it has been estimated that since 1985, about 95% of Mecca&#x27;s historic buildings, most over a thousand years old, have been demolished. It has been reported that there are now fewer than 20 structures remaining in Mecca that date back to the time of Muhammad. Some important buildings that have been destroyed include the house of Khadijah, the wife of Muhammad, the house of Abu Bakr, Muhammad&#x27;s birthplace and the Ottoman-era Ajyad Fortress. The reason for much of the destruction of historic buildings has been for the construction of hotels, apartments, parking lots, and other infrastructure facilities for Hajj pilgrims.

Incidents during pilgrimage
Mecca has been the site of several incidents and failures of crowd control because of the large numbers of people who come to make the Hajj. For example, on 2 July 1990, a pilgrimage to Mecca ended in tragedy when the ventilation system failed in a crowded pedestrian tunnel and 1,426 people were either suffocated or trampled to death in a stampede. On 24 September 2015, 700 pilgrims were killed in a stampede at Mina during the stoning-the-Devil ritual at Jamarat.

2027 total solar eclipse

Mecca will experience a total solar eclipse on Monday, 2 August 2027, for a duration of 5 minutes and 8 seconds.

== Significance in Islam ==
Mecca holds an important place in Islam and is considered the holiest city in all branches of the religion. The city derives its importance from the role it plays in the Hajj and &#x27;Umrah and for its status as the birthplace of Muhammad.

=== Masjid al-Haram ===
The &quot;Masjid al-Haram&quot; is the site of two of the most important rites of both the Hajj and of the Umrah, the circumambulation around the Ka&#x27;bah (&quot;tawaf&quot;) and the walking between the two mounts of Safa and Marwa (&quot;sa&#x27;ee&quot;). The masjid is also the site of the Zamzam Well. According to Islamic tradition, a prayer in the masjid is equal to 100,000 prayers in any other masjid around the world.

====Kaaba====

There is a difference of opinion between Islamic scholars upon who first built the Ka&#x27;bah, some believe it was built by the angels while others believe it was built by Adam. Regardless, it was built several times before reaching its current state. The Ka&#x27;bah is also the common direction of prayer (&quot;qibla&quot;) for all Muslims. The surface surrounding the Ka&#x27;bah on which Muslims circumambulate it is known as the Mataf.

====Hajr-e-Aswad (The Black Stone)====
The Black Stone is a stone, considered by scientists to be a meteorite or of similar origin and believed by Muslims to be of divine origin. It is set in the eastern corner of the Ka&#x27;bah and it is Sunnah to touch and kiss the stone. The area around the stone is generally always crowded and guarded by policemen to ensure the pilgrims&#x27; safety. In Islamic tradition, the stone was sent down from Jannah (Paradise) and used to build the Ka&#x27;bah. It used to be a white stone (and was whiter than milk). Because of the worldly sins of man, it slowly changed color to black over the years after it was brought down to Earth.

====Maqam Ibrahim====

This is the stone that Ibrahim (Abraham) stood on to build the higher parts of the Ka&#x27;bah. It contains two footprints that are comparatively larger than average modern-day human feet. The stone is raised and housed in a golden hexagonal chamber beside the Ka&#x27;bah on the Mataf plate.
The stone inside the casing is square shaped and measures in length and width, and in height. It used to be enclosed by a structure called the &quot;Maqsurat Ibrahim&quot; which was covered by a &quot;sitara&quot;: an ornamental, embroidered curtain that was replaced annually. Currently, it is placed inside a golden-metal enclosure. The outer casing has changed a number of times over the years; historic photographs show that the arch of the Banu Shaybah Gate stood next to it.

====Safa and Marwa====

Muslims believe that in the divine revelation to Muhammad, the Quran, Allah describes the mountains of Safa and Marwah as symbols of His divinity. Walking between the two mountains seven times, four times from Safa to Marwah and three times from Marwah interchangeably, is considered a mandatory pillar (&quot;rukn&quot;) of &#x27;Umrah.

=== Hajj and &#x27;Umrah ===
The Hajj pilgrimage, also called the greater pilgrimage, attracts millions of Muslims from all over the world and almost triples Mecca&#x27;s population for one week in the twelfth and final Islamic month of &quot;Dhu al-Hijjah&quot;. In 2019, the Hajj attracted 2,489,406 pilgrims to the holy city. The &#x27;Umrah, or the lesser pilgrimage, can be done at anytime during the year. Every adult, healthy Muslim who has the financial and physical capacity to travel to Mecca must perform the Hajj at least once in a lifetime. Umrah, the lesser pilgrimage, is not obligatory, but is recommended in the Quran. In addition to the &quot;Masjid al-Haram&quot;, pilgrims also must visit the nearby towns of Mina/Muna, Muzdalifah and Mount Arafat for various rituals that are part of the Hajj.

=== Jabal al-Nour ===
Jabal al-Nour (or Jabal an-Nur) is a mountain believed by Muslims to have been the place where Muhammad spent his time away from the bustling city of Mecca in seclusion. The mountain is located on the eastern entrance of the city and is the highest point in the city at 642 meters (2,106 feet).

==== Hira&#x27;a Cave ====
Situated atop Jabal al-Nour, this is the cave where Muslims believe Muhammad received the first revelation from Allah through the archangel Gabriel (Jibril in Islamic tradition) at the age of 40.

==Geography==
 Mecca is located in the Hejaz region, a 200 km (124 mi) wide strip of mountains separating the Nafud desert from the Red Sea. The city is situated in a valley with the same name around 70 km (44 mi) east of the port city of Jeddah. Mecca is one of the lowest cities in elevation in the Hejaz region, located at an elevation of 277 m (909 ft) above sea level at 21º23&#x27; north latitude and 39º51&#x27; east longitude. Mecca is divided into 34 districts.

The city centers on the al-Haram area, which contains the Masjid al-Haram. The area around the mosque is the old city and contains the most famous district of Mecca, Ajyad. The main street that runs to &quot;al-Haram&quot; is the Ibrahim al-Khalil Street, named after Ibrahim. Traditional, historical homes built of local rock, two to three stories long are still present within the city&#x27;s central area, within view of modern hotels and shopping complexes. The total area of modern Mecca is over .

=== Elevation ===
Mecca is at an elevation of above sea level, and approximately 70 km (44 mi) inland from the Red Sea. It is one of the lowest in the Hejaz region, although some mountain peaks in Mecca reach in height.

=== Topography ===
The city center lies in a corridor between mountains, which is often called the &quot;Hollow of Mecca&quot;. The area contains the valley of al-Taneem, the valley of Bakkah and the valley of Abqar. This mountainous location has defined the contemporary expansion of the city.

=== Sources of water ===
Due to Mecca&#x27;s climatic conditions water scarcity has been an issue throughout its history. In pre-modern Mecca, the city used a few chief sources of water. Among them were local wells, such as the Zamzam Well, that produced generally brackish water. Finding a sustainable water source to supply Mecca&#x27;s permanent population and the large number of annual pilgrims was an undertaking that began in the Abbasid era under the auspices of Zubayda, the wife of the caliph Harun ar-Rashid. She donated funds for the deepening of Zamzam Well and funded a massive construction project likely costing 1.75 million gold dinars. The project encompassed the construction of an underground aqueduct from the and smaller water sources in the area to Mecca in addition to the construction of a waterworks on Mount Arafat called using a separate conduit to connect it to Mecca and the Masjid al-Haram. Over time however the system deteriorated and failed to fulfil its function. Thus in 1245 CE, 1361 CE, 1400 CE, 1474 CE, and 1510 CE different rulers invested into extensive repairs of the system. In 1525 CE due to the system&#x27;s troubles persisting however the Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent began a construction project to rebuild the aqueduct in its entirety, the project took until 1571 CE to be completed. Its water quality was greatly lacking during the 19th century until a restoration and cleaning project by Osman Pasha began.

Another source which sporadically provided water was rainfall which was stored by the people in small reservoirs or cisterns. According to al-Kurdī, there had been 89 floods by 1965. In the last century, the most severe flood was that of 1942. Since then, dams have been built to ameliorate this problem.

In the modern day, water treatment plants and desalination facilities have been constructed and are being constructed to provide suitable amounts of water fit for human consumption to the city.

=== Climate ===

Mecca features a hot desert climate (Köppen: &quot;BWh&quot;), in three different plant hardiness zones: 10, 11 and 12. Like most Saudi Arabian cities, Mecca retains warm to hot temperatures even in winter, which can range from at night to in the afternoon. Summer temperatures are extremely hot and consistently break the mark in the afternoon, dropping to in the evening, but humidity remains relatively low, at 30–40%. Rain usually falls in Mecca in small amounts scattered between November and January, with heavy thunderstorms also common during the winter. Occasional summer rainfall is associated with the northward movement of the Intertropical Convergence Zone. 
==Economy==

The Meccan economy has been heavily dependent on pilgrimages coming for Umrah and Hajj. Income generated through pilgrims not only powers the Meccan economy but has historically had far-reaching effects on the economy of the entire Arabian Peninsula. The income was generated in a number of ways. One method was taxing the pilgrims. Taxes were especially increased during the Great Depression, and many of these taxes existed to as late as 1972. Another way the Hajj generates income is through services to pilgrims. For example, the Saudi flag carrier, Saudia, generates 12% of its income from the pilgrimage. Fares paid by pilgrims to reach Mecca by land also generate income; as do the hotels and lodging companies that house them. The city takes in more than $100 million, while the Saudi government spends about $50 million on services for the Hajj. There are some industries and factories in the city, but Mecca no longer plays a major role in Saudi Arabia&#x27;s economy, which is mainly based on oil exports. The few industries operating in Mecca include textiles, furniture, and utensils. The majority of the economy is service-oriented.
Nevertheless, many industries have been set up in Mecca. Various types of enterprises that have existed since 1970 in the city include corrugated iron manufacturing, copper extraction, carpentry, upholstery, bakeries, farming and banking. The city has grown substantially in the 20th and 21st centuries, as the convenience and affordability of jet travel has increased the number of pilgrims participating in the Hajj. Thousands of Saudis are employed year-round to oversee the Hajj and staff the hotels and shops that cater to pilgrims; these workers in turn have increased the demand for housing and services. The city is now ringed by freeways and contains shopping malls and skyscrapers.

A new industrial city is being developed in &quot;Al Akashiya&quot; district of Makkah by the Saudi Authority for Industrial Cities and Technology Zones. It covers an area of .

==Human resources==
Formal education started to be developed in the late Ottoman period continuing slowly into Hashemite times. The first major attempt to improve the situation was made by a Jeddah merchant, Muhammad ʿAlī Zaynal Riḍā, who founded the Madrasat al-Falāḥ in Mecca in 1911–12 that cost £400,000. The school system in Mecca has many public and private schools for both males and females. As of 2005, there were 532 public and private schools for males and another 681 public and private schools for female students. The medium of instruction in both public and private schools is Arabic with emphasis on English as a second language, but some private schools founded by foreign entities such as International schools use the English language as the medium of instruction. Some of these are coeducational while other schools are not. For higher education, the city has only one university, Umm Al-Qura University, which was established in 1949 as a college and became a public university in 1981.

Healthcare is provided by the Saudi government free of charge to all pilgrims. There are ten main hospitals in Mecca:
* Ajyad Hospital ()
* King Faisal Hospital ()
* King Abdulaziz Hospital ()
* Al Noor Specialist Hospital ()
* Hira&#x27;a Hospital ()
* Maternity and Children&#x27;s Hospital ()
* King Abdullah Medical City ()
* Khulais General Hospital ()
* Al Kamel General Hospital ()
* Ibn Sina Hospital ()
There are also many walk-in clinics available for both residents and pilgrims. Several temporary clinics are set up during the Hajj to tend to wounded pilgrims.

==Demographics==

Mecca is very densely populated. Most long-term residents live in the Old City, the area around the Great Mosque and many work to support pilgrims, known locally as the &quot;Hajj&quot; industry. &#x27;Iyad Madani, the Saudi Arabian Minister for Hajj, was quoted saying, &quot;We never stop preparing for the Hajj.&quot;

Year-round, pilgrims stream into the city to perform the rites of &#x27;Umrah, and during the last weeks of eleventh Islamic month, Dhu al-Qi&#x27;dah, on average 2–4 million Muslims arrive in the city to take part in the rites known as Hajj. Pilgrims are from varying ethnicities and backgrounds, mainly South and Southeast Asia, Europe and Africa. Many of these pilgrims have remained and become residents of the city. By the 19th century, people of South Asian origin had come to constitute 20% of the population. The Burmese are an older, more established community who number roughly 250,000. Adding to this, the discovery of oil in the past 50 years has brought hundreds of thousands of working immigrants.

Non-Muslims are not permitted to enter Mecca under Saudi law, and using fraudulent documents to do so may result in arrest and prosecution. The prohibition extends to Ahmadis, as they are considered non-Muslims. Nevertheless, many non-Muslims and Ahmadis have visited the city as these restrictions are loosely enforced. The first such recorded example of a non-Muslim entering the city is that of Ludovico di Varthema of Bologna in 1503. Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, is said to have visited Mecca in December 1518. One of the most famous was Richard Francis Burton, who traveled as a Qadiriyya Sufi from Afghanistan in 1853.

Mecca Province is the only province where expatriates outnumber Saudis.

==Culture==
Mecca&#x27;s culture has been affected by the large number of pilgrims that arrive annually, and thus boasts a rich cultural heritage. As a result of the vast numbers of pilgrims coming to the city each year, Mecca has become by far the most diverse city in the Muslim world.

=== Sports ===

In pre-modern Mecca, the most common sports were impromptu wrestling and foot races. Football is now the most popular sport in Mecca and the kingdom. The city hosts some of the oldest sport clubs in Saudi Arabia, such as Al Wahda FC (established in 1945). King Abdulaziz Stadium is the largest stadium in Mecca with a capacity of 38,000.

=== Architectural landmarks ===

Adorning the southern facade of the Masjid al-Haram is the Abraj al-Bait Complex; towering over the Great Mosque, it is a seven-building complex with the central clock tower having a length of 601 m (1,972 feet), making it the world&#x27;s fourth-tallest building. All seven buildings in the complex also form the third-largest building by floor area.

The Mecca Gate, known popularly as the Quran Gate, sits on the western entrance of the city, which is the route from Jeddah. Located on Highway 40, it marks the boundary of the Haram area where non-Muslims are prohibited from entering. The gate was designed in 1979 by an Egyptian architect, Samir Elabd, for the architectural firm IDEA Center. The structure is that of a book, representing the Quran, sitting on a &quot;rehal&quot;, or bookrest.

==Communications==

=== Press and newspapers ===
The first press was brought to Mecca in 1885 by Osman Nuri Pasha, an Ottoman Wāli. During the Hashemite period, it was used to print the city&#x27;s official gazette, &quot;Al Qibla&quot;. The Saudi regime expanded this press into a larger operation, introducing the new Saudi official gazette of Mecca, &quot;Umm al-Qurā&quot;. Mecca also has its own paper owned by the city, &quot;Al Nadwa&quot;. However, other Saudi newspapers are also provided in Mecca such as the &quot;Saudi Gazette&quot;, &quot;Al Madinah&quot;, &quot;Okaz&quot; and &quot;Al Bilad,&quot; in addition to other international newspapers.

=== Television ===
Telecommunications in the city were emphasized early under the Saudi reign. King Abdulaziz pressed them forward as he saw them as a means of convenience and better governance. While under Hussein bin Ali, there were about 20 public telephones in the entire city; in 1936, the number jumped to 450, totaling about half the telephones in the country. During that time, telephone lines were extended to Jeddah and Ta&#x27;if, but not to the capital, Riyadh. By 1985, Mecca, like other Saudi cities, possessed modern telephone, telex, radio and television communications. Many television stations serve the city area, including Saudi TV1, Saudi TV2, Saudi TV Sports, Al-Ekhbariya, Arab Radio and Television Network and various cable, satellite and other specialty television providers.

=== Radio ===
Limited radio communication was established within the Kingdom under the Hashemites. In 1929, wireless stations were set up in various towns in the region, creating a network that would become fully functional by 1932. Soon after World War II, the existing network was greatly expanded and improved. Since then, radio communication has been used extensively in directing the pilgrimage and addressing the pilgrims. This practice started in 1950, with the initiation of broadcasts on the Day of &#x27;Arafah (9 Dhu al-Hijjah), and increased until 1957, at which time Radio Makkah became the most powerful station in the Middle East at 50 kW. Later, power was increased nine-fold to 450 kW. Music was not immediately broadcast; gradually, folk music was introduced.

==Transportation==

===Air===
The only airport near the city is the Mecca East airport, which is not active. Mecca is primarily served by King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah for international and regional connections and Ta&#x27;if Regional Airport for regional connections. To cater to the large number of Hajj pilgrims, Jeddah Airport has a Hajj Terminal, specifically for use during the &quot;Hajj&quot; season; the terminal can accommodate 47 planes simultaneously while receiving 3,800 pilgrims per hour during the Hajj season.

===Roads===
Mecca, similar to Medina, lies at the junction of two of the most important highways in Saudi Arabia, Highway 40, connecting it to the important port city of Jeddah in the west and the capital of Riyadh and the other major port city, Dammam, in the east. The other, Highway 15, connects Mecca to the other holy Islamic city of Medina approximately 400 km (250 mi) in the north and onward to Tabuk and Jordan. While in the south, it connects Mecca to Abha and Jizan. Mecca is served by four ring roads, and these are very crowded compared to the three ring roads of Medina. Mecca also has many tunnels.

===Rapid transit===
Al Masha&#x27;er Al Muqaddassah Metro

The Al Masha&#x27;er Al Muqaddassah Metro is a metro line in Mecca opened on 13 November 2010. The 18.1-kilometer (11.2-mile) elevated metro transports pilgrims to the holy sites of &#x27;Arafat, Muzdalifah and Mina in the city to reduce congestion on the road and is only operational during the &quot;Hajj&quot; season. It consists of nine stations, three in each of the aforementioned towns.

Mecca Metro

The Mecca Metro, officially known as Makkah Mass Rail Transit, is a planned four-line metro system for the city. This will be in addition to the Al Masha&#x27;er Al Muqaddassah Metro which carries pilgrims.

=== Rail ===

====Intercity====
In 2018, a high speed intercity rail line, part of the Haramain High Speed Rail Project, named the Haramain high-speed railway line entered operation, connecting the holy cities of Mecca and Medina together via Jeddah, King Abdulaziz International Airport and King Abdullah Economic City in Rabigh. The railway consists of 35 electric trains and is capable of transporting 60 million passengers annually. Each train can achieve speeds of up to 300 kmh (190 mph), traveling a total distance of 450 km (280 mi), reducing the travel time between the two cities to less than two hours.

==See also==

* &quot;Bayt al-Mawlid&quot;, the house where Muhammad is believed to have been born
* Mecca Province
* Masjid al-Haram
* Sharifate of Mecca
* Masar Destination

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Watt, W. Montgomery. &quot;Makka – The pre-Islamic and early Islamic periods.&quot; &quot;Encyclopaedia of Islam&quot;. Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2008. Brill Online. 6 June 2008
* Winder, R.B. &quot;Makka – The Modern City.&quot; &quot;Encyclopaedia of Islam&quot;. Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2008. Brill Online. 2008

=== Online ===
* Mecca Saudi Arabia, in &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica Online&quot;, by John Bagot Glubb, Assʿad Sulaiman Abdo, Swati Chopra, Darshana Das, Michael Levy, Gloria Lotha, Michael Ray, Surabhi Sinha, Noah Tesch, Amy Tikkanen, Grace Young and Adam Zeidan

==External links==

* Holy Makkah Municipality
* Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to Al Madinah and Makkahh, by Richard Burton</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="0" end="5" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="20" end="40" title="Mecca" label="Makkah al-Mukarramah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="64" end="70" title="Mecca" label="Makkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q234167" start="90" end="104" title="Mecca Province" label="Mecca Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="112" end="117" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="136" end="148" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885943" start="160" end="191" title="Holiest sites in Islam" label="holiest city according to Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="211" end="217" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="225" end="232" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q690057" start="336" end="377" title="List of cities in Saudi Arabia by population" label="third-most populated city in Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="384" end="390" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18600381" start="438" end="452" title="Saudis" label="Saudi citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="474" end="491" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim foreigners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="584" end="594" title="Pilgrimage#Islam" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="620" end="625" title="Islamic calendar" label="Hijri"/>
<link wikidata="Q55524481" start="717" end="736" title="List of cities by international visitors" label="most visited cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="819" end="824" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="883" end="898" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="Islamic prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="899" end="907" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033157" start="913" end="922" title="Hira cave" label="Hira cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="1017" end="1022" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q428858" start="1122" end="1143" title="Great Mosque of Mecca" label="Great Mosque of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="1175" end="1186" title="Kaaba" label="Ka&amp;#x27;bah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768161" start="1230" end="1237" title="Abraham in Islam" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q470988" start="1242" end="1249" title="Ishmael in Islam" label="Ishmael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885943" start="1257" end="1282" title="Holiest sites in Islam" label="Islam&amp;#x27;s holiest site"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="1476" end="1481" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673271" start="1516" end="1529" title="regime change" label="regime change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427167" start="1576" end="1599" title="Saudi conquest of Hejaz" label="Saudi conquest of Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q151509" start="1603" end="1611" title="Ibn Saud" label="Ibn Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q189476" start="1755" end="1768" title="Abraj Al Bait" label="Abraj Al Bait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029700" start="1815" end="1842" title="List of largest buildings in the world" label="third-largest by floor area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837899" start="1880" end="1896" title="Saudi government" label="Saudi government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265410" start="1922" end="1991" title="Destruction of early Islamic heritage sites in Saudi Arabia" label="destruction of several historical structures and archaeological sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078407" start="2005" end="2019" title="Ajyad Fortress" label="Ajyad Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q428858" start="2114" end="2129" title="Masjid al-Haram" label="Masjid al-Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q486080" start="2147" end="2168" title="Al-Masjid al-Nabawi" label="Prophet&amp;#x27;s Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="2313" end="2317" title="hajj" label="hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q211450" start="2343" end="2376" title="Closed city" label="prohibited from entering the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837899" start="2567" end="2583" title="Politics of Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi government"/>
<link wikidata="Q182640" start="2840" end="2850" title="Ta&amp;#x27;if" label="Ta&amp;#x27;if"/>
<link wikidata="Q31711" start="2920" end="2926" title="House of Saud" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q371263" start="2927" end="2952" title="Khalid bin Faisal Al Saud" label="Khalid bin Faisal Al Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="3111" end="3120" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="3376" end="3387" title="Kaaba" label="Ka&amp;#x27;bah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849464" start="3423" end="3423" title="Bakkah" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="3427" end="3432" title="Surah" label="Surah"/>
<link wikidata="Q219682" start="3433" end="3441" title="Al Imran" label="Al Imran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="3480" end="3497" title="Place of worship" label="House [of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768161" start="3612" end="3619" title="Abraham in Islam" label="Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="4046" end="4051" title="Surah" label="Surah"/>
<link wikidata="Q230638" start="4052" end="4059" title="Al-Fath" label="Al-Fath"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="4468" end="4484" title="Claudius Ptolemy" label="Claudius Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q544230" start="4501" end="4513" title="Arabia Felix" label="Arabia Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q35025" start="4680" end="4697" title="Old South Arabian" label="Old South Arabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q912861" start="5084" end="5099" title="Desert of Paran" label="Desert of Paran"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="5117" end="5130" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861549" start="5134" end="5144" title="Vayeira" label="Genesis 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127195" start="5237" end="5258" title="Tihamah" label="Tihamah coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q316364" start="5305" end="5320" title="Yaqut al-Hamawi" label="Yaqut al-Hamawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="5563" end="5575" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="5592" end="5599" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618800" start="5641" end="5650" title="Saadanius" label="Saadanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q182968" start="5763" end="5779" title="Old World monkey" label="Old World monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="5785" end="5789" title="apes" label="apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="6629" end="6634" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q486124" start="7225" end="7239" title="Battle of Badr" label="Battle of Badr"/>
<link wikidata="Q106223212" start="7250" end="7270" title="List of expeditions of Muhammad" label="military expeditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402073" start="7290" end="7299" title="Migration to Abyssinia" label="Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131482" start="7304" end="7311" title="Hijrah" label="Madinah"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="7372" end="7378" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7603" end="7622" title="Abdullah ibn Jud’an" label="Abdullah ibn Jud’an"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="7946" end="7962" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q672803" start="8024" end="8045" title="Bibliotheca historica" label="Bibliotheca historica"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="8242" end="8253" title="Ka&amp;#x27;bah" label="Ka&amp;#x27;bah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237114" start="8367" end="8377" title="Leuke Kome" label="Leuke Kome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029653" start="8397" end="8414" title="Nabataean Kingdom" label="Nabataean Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="8441" end="8455" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia Petraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="8711" end="8718" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="8956" end="8963" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172198" start="9020" end="9040" title="Ammianus Marcellinus" label="Ammianus Marcellinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="9308" end="9313" title="Kaaba" label="Kaaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q286019" start="9315" end="9329" title="Patricia Crone" label="Patricia Crone"/>
<link wikidata="Q26495438" start="9340" end="9377" title="Revisionist school of Islamic studies" label="Revisionist school of Islamic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="9562" end="9576" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia Petraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="9585" end="9594" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12244037" start="9632" end="9643" title="Ma&amp;#x27;add" label="Ma&amp;#x27;add"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="9700" end="9710" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="9719" end="9729" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Himyarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q485732" start="9797" end="9804" title="Quraysh" label="Quraysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q286019" start="9909" end="9923" title="Patricia Crone" label="Patricia Crone"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="10549" end="10566" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q182640" start="10789" end="10799" title="Ta&amp;#x27;if" label="Ta&amp;#x27;if"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903279" start="10893" end="10909" title="Biblical people in Islam" label="Biblical figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="10911" end="10915" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="10917" end="10924" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q214617" start="10926" end="10931" title="Hagar" label="Hagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183403" start="10936" end="10943" title="Ishmael" label="Ishmael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532837" start="11084" end="11096" title="Genesis flood narrative" label="Noahic Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768161" start="11158" end="11165" title="Abraham in Islam" label="Ibrāhīm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711668" start="11216" end="11221" title="Hagar in Islam" label="Hājar"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="11247" end="11252" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326914" start="11306" end="11312" title="Jurhum" label="Jurhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="11569" end="11580" title="Kaaba" label="Ka&amp;#x27;bah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11754" end="11773" title="Bakkah#Valley of the Bakha" label="Valley of the Bakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="11781" end="11794" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323538" start="11803" end="11811" title="Psalm 84" label="Psalm 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q219682" start="11884" end="11893" title="Al Imran" label="āl ʿimrān"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="11921" end="11930" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="11931" end="11938" title="midrash" label="midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773487" start="12083" end="12091" title="Nebaioth" label="Nebaioth"/>
<link wikidata="Q183403" start="12122" end="12129" title="Ishmael" label="Ishmael"/>
<link wikidata="Q843030" start="12160" end="12168" title="Thamudic" label="Thamudic"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="12217" end="12223" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q550376" start="12483" end="12504" title="University of Baghdad" label="University of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="12703" end="12729" title="Arabian mythology" label="Arabia&amp;#x27;s pagan tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="12759" end="12764" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="12765" end="12770" title="deity" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q289933" start="12775" end="12780" title="Hubal" label="Hubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q485732" start="12824" end="12831" title="Quraysh (tribe)" label="Quraish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092033" start="12862" end="12879" title="Conquest of Mecca" label="Conquest of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="12883" end="12891" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="13036" end="13047" title="spice trade" label="spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="13088" end="13099" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="13163" end="13179" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="13210" end="13217" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="13223" end="13229" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="13295" end="13307" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="13316" end="13322" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="13327" end="13336" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="13396" end="13411" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="13444" end="13452" title="Lakhmids" label="Lakhmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="13458" end="13468" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q500409" start="13478" end="13496" title="Roman–Persian Wars" label="Roman–Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="13571" end="13576" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747" start="13581" end="13588" title="Palmyra" label="Palmyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q323363" start="13734" end="13740" title="Abraha" label="Abraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q207381" start="13795" end="13804" title="Khosrau I" label="Khosrau I"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="13993" end="13999" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q146038" start="14275" end="14286" title="Zamzam Well" label="Zamzam Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149527" start="14329" end="14336" title="Camel train" label="caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502723" start="14456" end="14468" title="Tribes of Arabia" label="local tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q146038" start="14696" end="14702" title="Zamzam Well" label="Zamzam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265281" start="15007" end="15027" title="Year of the Elephant" label="Year of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="15049" end="15054" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="15112" end="15114" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q334847" start="15159" end="15168" title="Ibn Ishaq" label="Ibn Ishaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="15254" end="15263" title="Church (building)" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471" start="15267" end="15278" title="Sanaa" label="San&amp;#x27;aa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532681" start="15325" end="15330" title="Negus" label="Negus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5832" start="15334" end="15338" title="Axum" label="Axum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="15399" end="15415" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="15606" end="15614" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127195" start="15708" end="15715" title="Tihamah" label="Tihamah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882516" start="15914" end="15920" title="Banu Kinanah" label="Kinana"/>
<link wikidata="Q807004" start="15993" end="16000" title="Banu Hudhayl" label="Hudhayl"/>
<link wikidata="Q485732" start="16303" end="16310" title="Quraysh" label="Quraysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="16444" end="16454" title="defecation" label="defecating"/>
<link wikidata="Q323363" start="16463" end="16469" title="Abraha" label="Abraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="16487" end="16498" title="Kaaba" label="Ka&amp;#x27;bah"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="16545" end="16557" title="war elephant" label="war elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883553" start="16666" end="16678" title="Banu Khuza&amp;#x27;a" label="Khuza&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="16761" end="16778" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Himyarite Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q380479" start="16910" end="16924" title="Abdul Muttalib" label="Abdul Muttalib"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="17573" end="17581" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="17663" end="17668" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="17709" end="17713" title="Sura" label="Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q233766" start="17729" end="17735" title="Al-Fil" label="Al-Fil"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="18316" end="18321" title="Syria (region)" label="Shaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="18326" end="18330" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="18744" end="18751" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633574" start="18930" end="18940" title="Banu Tamim" label="Banu Tamim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566832" start="18976" end="18987" title="Habesha people" label="Abyssinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193027" start="19176" end="19180" title="mawlid" label="born"/>
<link wikidata="Q4987" start="19297" end="19308" title="Banu Hashim" label="Banu Hashim"/>
<link wikidata="Q485732" start="19332" end="19339" title="Quraysh" label="Quraysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033157" start="19387" end="19400" title="Jabal al-Nour" label="Jabal al-Nour"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="19438" end="19448" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178342" start="19471" end="19480" title="archangel" label="archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="19481" end="19488" title="Gabriel" label="Jibreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="19555" end="19575" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131482" start="19688" end="19706" title="Hijra (Islam)" label="&amp;quot;hijrah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q475247" start="19749" end="19758" title="Muhajirun" label="Muhajirun"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="19792" end="19798" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q826083" start="19995" end="20015" title="Battle of the Trench" label="Battle of the Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647162" start="20388" end="20409" title="Treaty of Hudaybiyyah" label="Treaty of Hudaybiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883541" start="20683" end="20692" title="Banu Bakr" label="Banu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="20979" end="20988" title="Islamized" label="Islamized"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="21023" end="21028" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="21136" end="21140" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q176770" start="21181" end="21193" title="Five Pillars of Islam" label="Five Pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12224314" start="21252" end="21266" title="Attab ibn Asid" label="Attab ibn Asid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="21559" end="21572" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Islamic realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="21635" end="21647" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="22106" end="22120" title="caliphate" label="Islamic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="22201" end="22205" title="Umar" label="Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="22232" end="22248" title="Uthman ibn Affan" label="Uthman ibn Affan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="22567" end="22570" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="22612" end="22616" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="22637" end="22654" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="22676" end="22684" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="22702" end="22719" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="22723" end="22730" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769089" start="22876" end="22888" title="Second Fitna" label="Second Fitna"/>
<link wikidata="Q307665" start="22910" end="22932" title="Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr" label="Abdullah ibn az-Zubayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023525" start="22999" end="23002" title="Siege of Mecca (683)" label="683"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019401" start="23010" end="23013" title="Siege of Mecca (692)" label="692"/>
<link wikidata="Q119295176" start="23187" end="23206" title="Sack of Mecca" label="attacked and sacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q138803" start="23210" end="23220" title="Qarmatians" label="Qarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="23224" end="23235" title="millenarianism" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="23236" end="23246" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="23247" end="23260" title="Ismailism" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192063" start="23261" end="23272" title="Islamic schools and branches" label="Muslim sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q325220" start="23280" end="23300" title="Abū-Tāhir Al-Jannābī" label="Abū-Tāhir Al-Jannābī"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="23337" end="23348" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="23349" end="23357" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="23531" end="23542" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="24108" end="24128" title="Saladin" label="Salaheddin al-Ayyubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034358" start="25129" end="25143" title="Ottoman Caliphate" label="Ottoman Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q146871" start="25228" end="25245" title="First Saudi State" label="First Saudi State"/>
<link wikidata="Q127878" start="25448" end="25455" title="Khedive" label="Khedive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12087689" start="25482" end="25486" title="Wali (administrative title)" label="Wali"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="25503" end="25521" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608484" start="25589" end="25596" title="Ottoman return of Mecca 1813" label="in 1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q146862" start="25665" end="25683" title="Second Saudi State" label="Second Saudi State"/>
<link wikidata="Q125057" start="25771" end="25793" title="Richard Francis Burton" label="Richard Francis Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q375804" start="25963" end="25983" title="Ludovico di Varthema" label="Ludovico di Varthema"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="26108" end="26115" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q959265" start="26116" end="26125" title="Cholera outbreaks and pandemics" label="outbreaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="26297" end="26308" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="26349" end="26355" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="26399" end="26407" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="26415" end="26433" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q815166" start="26456" end="26468" title="Siege of Kut" label="Siege of Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="26503" end="26517" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q128906" start="26555" end="26570" title="Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca" label="Hussain bin Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089020" start="26685" end="26705" title="Battle of Mecca (1916)" label="1916 Battle of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q956357" start="26818" end="26834" title="Kingdom of Hejaz" label="Kingdom of Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="26946" end="26951" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="26967" end="26971" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871705" start="27237" end="27257" title="Battle of Mecca (1924)" label="1924 Battle of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q901150" start="27546" end="27551" title="Shirk (Islam)" label="shirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q153592" start="27876" end="27912" title="King Abdulaziz International Airport" label="King Abdulaziz International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="27916" end="27922" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876136" start="27968" end="27995" title="Ta&amp;#x27;if Regional Airport" label="Ta&amp;#x27;if Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="28229" end="28235" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q160320" start="28240" end="28246" title="Dammam" label="Dammam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="28296" end="28302" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q244232" start="28304" end="28309" title="Tabuk, Saudi Arabia" label="Tabuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="28324" end="28330" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190948" start="28348" end="28352" title="Abha" label="Abha"/>
<link wikidata="Q27660" start="28357" end="28362" title="Jizan" label="Jizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="28517" end="28532" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q737791" start="28663" end="28690" title="Haramain high-speed railway" label="Haramain high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285450" start="28812" end="28839" title="King Abdullah Economic City" label="King Abdullah Economic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914190" start="28875" end="28885" title="Haram (site)" label="haram area"/>
<link wikidata="Q330662" start="29064" end="29082" title="Juhayman al-Otaibi" label="Juhayman al-Otaibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q829839" start="29084" end="29107" title="Grand Mosque Seizure" label="seized the Grand Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q428858" start="29187" end="29202" title="Masjid al-Haram" label="Masjid al-Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q900671" start="29482" end="29493" title="Al-Safa and Al-Marwah" label="Safa-Marwah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42034" start="30101" end="30109" title="Khadija bint Khuwaylid" label="Khadijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="30146" end="30154" title="Abu Bakr" label="Abu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078407" start="30203" end="30217" title="Ajyad Fortress" label="Ajyad Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="30387" end="30391" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q18409574" start="30772" end="30780" title="1990 Hajj stampede" label="stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q21007721" start="30817" end="30828" title="2015 Mina stampede" label="were killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q753276" start="30846" end="30850" title="Mina, Saudi Arabia" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577554" start="30950" end="30969" title="Solar eclipse of August 2, 2027" label="total solar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="31238" end="31242" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q640480" start="31253" end="31258" title="Umrah" label="Umrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="31499" end="31504" title="tawaf" label="tawaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q900671" start="31576" end="31586" title="sa&amp;#x27;ee" label="sa&amp;#x27;ee"/>
<link wikidata="Q146038" start="31630" end="31641" title="Zamzam Well" label="Zamzam Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="31863" end="31874" title="Ka&amp;#x27;bah" label="Ka&amp;#x27;bah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266031" start="31909" end="31915" title="Angels in Islam" label="angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="31953" end="31957" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q175047" start="32095" end="32100" title="qibla" label="qibla"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="32324" end="32333" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="32464" end="32470" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q106372429" start="33408" end="33426" title="Sitara (textile)" label="&amp;quot;sitara&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q844614" start="34029" end="34033" title="Fard" label="rukn"/>
<link wikidata="Q640480" start="34050" end="34055" title="Umrah" label="Umrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q186022" start="34301" end="34314" title="Dhu al-Hijjah" label="Dhu al-Hijjah"/>
<link wikidata="Q753276" start="34787" end="34796" title="Mina, Saudi Arabia" label="Mina/Muna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788735" start="34798" end="34808" title="Muzdalifah" label="Muzdalifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q216894" start="34813" end="34825" title="Mount Arafat" label="Mount Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033157" start="34896" end="34909" title="Jabal al-Nour" label="Jabal al-Nour"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="35359" end="35366" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266031" start="35368" end="35374" title="Angels in Islam" label="Jibril"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="35455" end="35467" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz region"/>
<link wikidata="Q749205" start="35526" end="35538" title="An Nafud" label="Nafud desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="35548" end="35555" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="35655" end="35661" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768161" start="36156" end="36163" title="Abraham in Islam" label="Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="36543" end="36548" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376358" start="36974" end="36988" title="water scarcity" label="water scarcity"/>
<link wikidata="Q146038" start="37137" end="37148" title="Zamzam Well" label="Zamzam Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388506" start="37380" end="37387" title="Zubaidah bint Ja&amp;#x27;far" label="Zubayda"/>
<link wikidata="Q131002" start="37412" end="37427" title="Harun al-Rashid" label="Harun ar-Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220294" start="37550" end="37560" title="gold dinar" label="gold dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="37622" end="37630" title="Aqueduct (water supply)" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q216894" start="37738" end="37750" title="Mount Arafat" label="Mount Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="38096" end="38103" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="38111" end="38135" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="38496" end="38503" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="38705" end="38727" title="Water treatment" label="water treatment plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="38732" end="38755" title="Desalination" label="desalination facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="38915" end="38933" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="38935" end="38941" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="38980" end="39001" title="Hardiness zone" label="plant hardiness zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="39537" end="39567" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="39815" end="39832" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="39959" end="39975" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="40123" end="40135" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q541179" start="40137" end="40143" title="Saudia" label="Saudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030245" start="40533" end="40560" title="Economy of Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="40865" end="40894" title="Iron mining" label="corrugated iron manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q766401" start="40896" end="40913" title="copper extraction" label="copper extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123578" start="40926" end="40936" title="upholstery" label="upholstery"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="41074" end="41077" title="jet aircraft" label="jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="41143" end="41147" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385574" start="41517" end="41575" title="Saudi Authority for Industrial Cities and Technology Zones" label="Saudi Authority for Industrial Cities and Technology Zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="42028" end="42034" title="State school" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="42230" end="42245" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133606" start="42502" end="42524" title="Umm Al-Qura University" label="Umm Al-Qura University"/>
<link wikidata="Q428858" start="43302" end="43314" title="Great Mosque of Mecca" label="Great Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q640480" start="43596" end="43601" title="Umrah" label="Umrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q150853" start="43656" end="43674" title="Dhu al-Qi&amp;#x27;dah" label="Dhu al-Qi&amp;#x27;dah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="43793" end="43804" title="ethnic group" label="ethnicities"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="43829" end="43834" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="43976" end="43986" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616122" start="44289" end="44298" title="Basic Law of Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi law"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="44405" end="44412" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q375804" start="44636" end="44656" title="Ludovico di Varthema" label="Ludovico di Varthema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="44660" end="44667" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q83322" start="44677" end="44687" title="Guru Nanak" label="Guru Nanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q125057" start="44788" end="44810" title="Richard Francis Burton" label="Richard Francis Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q137108" start="44830" end="44839" title="Qadiriyyah" label="Qadiriyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="44840" end="44844" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="44850" end="44861" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234167" start="44872" end="44886" title="Mecca Province" label="Mecca Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468616" start="44914" end="44925" title="Expatriates in Saudi Arabia" label="expatriates"/>
<link wikidata="Q18600381" start="44936" end="44942" title="Saudis" label="Saudis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="45073" end="45090" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="45335" end="45343" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q812713" start="45471" end="45482" title="Al-Wahda (Mecca)" label="Al Wahda FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129161" start="45506" end="45528" title="King Abdul Aziz Stadium" label="King Abdulaziz Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189476" start="45681" end="45702" title="Abraj Al Bait" label="Abraj al-Bait Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029700" start="45936" end="45972" title="List of largest buildings in the world" label="third-largest building by floor area"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951758" start="45979" end="45989" title="Mecca Gate" label="Mecca Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914190" start="46152" end="46162" title="Haram (site)" label="Haram area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071487" start="46390" end="46407" title="Rehal (book rest)" label="&amp;quot;rehal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q546595" start="46520" end="46536" title="Osman Nuri Pasha" label="Osman Nuri Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12087689" start="46549" end="46553" title="Wali (administrative title)" label="Wāli"/>
<link wikidata="Q107504162" start="46645" end="46653" title="Al Qibla" label="Al Qibla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12205275" start="46855" end="46863" title="Al Nadwa (newspaper)" label="Al Nadwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325956" start="46948" end="46961" title="Saudi Gazette" label="Saudi Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="46975" end="46985" title="Al Madinah" label="Al Madinah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119335" start="46999" end="47003" title="Okaz" label="Okaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702298" start="47020" end="47028" title="Al-Bilad (Saudi newspaper)" label="Al Bilad"/>
<link wikidata="Q151509" start="47184" end="47193" title="Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia" label="Abdulaziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q128906" start="47291" end="47306" title="Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca" label="Hussein bin Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="47550" end="47556" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474187" start="47727" end="47736" title="Saudi T.V. Channel 1" label="Saudi TV1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474178" start="47738" end="47747" title="Saudi T.V. Channel II" label="Saudi TV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255884" start="47749" end="47764" title="Saudi TV Sports" label="Saudi TV Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703778" start="47766" end="47778" title="Al-Ekhbariya" label="Al-Ekhbariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859338" start="47780" end="47813" title="Arab Radio and Television Network" label="Arab Radio and Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="48130" end="48142" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371450" start="48387" end="48406" title="Day of Arafa" label="Day of &amp;#x27;Arafah"/>
<link wikidata="Q153592" start="48803" end="48839" title="King Abdulaziz International Airport" label="King Abdulaziz International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="48843" end="48849" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876136" start="48897" end="48924" title="Ta&amp;#x27;if Regional Airport" label="Ta&amp;#x27;if Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221737" start="49324" end="49334" title="Highway 40 (Saudi Arabia)" label="Highway 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="49380" end="49386" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="49418" end="49424" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q160320" start="49456" end="49462" title="Dammam" label="Dammam"/>
<link wikidata="Q244232" start="49613" end="49618" title="Tabuk, Saudi Arabia" label="Tabuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="49623" end="49629" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190948" start="49672" end="49676" title="Abha" label="Abha"/>
<link wikidata="Q27660" start="49681" end="49686" title="Jizan" label="Jizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240707" start="49888" end="49925" title="Al Mashaaer Al Mugaddassah Metro" label="Al Masha&amp;#x27;er Al Muqaddassah Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q216894" start="50072" end="50078" title="Mount Arafat" label="Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788735" start="50080" end="50090" title="Muzdalifah" label="Muzdalifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q753276" start="50095" end="50099" title="Mina, Saudi Arabia" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="50186" end="50190" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809993" start="50296" end="50307" title="Mecca Metro" label="Mecca Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="50378" end="50383" title="Rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240707" start="50437" end="50474" title="Al Mashaaer Al Mugaddassah Metro" label="Al Masha&amp;#x27;er Al Muqaddassah Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q737791" start="50587" end="50619" title="Haramain High Speed Rail Project" label="Haramain High Speed Rail Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q737791" start="50631" end="50658" title="Haramain high-speed railway" label="Haramain high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="50723" end="50729" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="50743" end="50749" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q153592" start="50751" end="50787" title="King Abdulaziz International Airport" label="King Abdulaziz International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285450" start="50792" end="50819" title="King Abdullah Economic City" label="King Abdullah Economic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q27274" start="50823" end="50829" title="Rabigh" label="Rabigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q625151" start="50858" end="50873" title="Electric locomotive" label="electric trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936504" start="51137" end="51151" title="Bayt al-Mawlid" label="Bayt al-Mawlid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936504" start="51163" end="51168" title="Makkah Al Mukarramah Library" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q234167" start="51216" end="51230" title="Mecca Province" label="Mecca Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q428858" start="51233" end="51248" title="Masjid al-Haram" label="Masjid al-Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121369" start="51251" end="51269" title="Sharifate of Mecca" label="Sharifate of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q110589693" start="51272" end="51289" title="Masar Destination" label="Masar Destination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145236" start="51455" end="51477" title="Encyclopaedia of Islam" label="Encyclopaedia of Islam"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21023" wikidata="Q747802" url="?curid=21023" title="Mormonism">
<text>Mormonism is the theology and religious tradition of the Latter Day Saint movement of Restorationist Christianity started by Joseph Smith in Western New York in the 1820s and 1830s. As a label, Mormonism has been applied to various aspects of the Latter Day Saint movement, although since 2018 there has been a push from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) to distance itself from this label. One historian, Sydney E. Ahlstrom, wrote in 1982 that, depending on the context, the term Mormonism could refer to &quot;a sect, a mystery cult, a new religion, a church, a people, a nation, or an American subculture; indeed, at different times and places it is all of these.&quot;

A prominent feature of Mormon theology is the Book of Mormon, a 19th-century text which describes itself as a chronicle of early Indigenous peoples of the Americas and their dealings with God. Mormon theology includes mainstream Christian beliefs with modifications stemming from belief in revelations to Smith and other religious leaders. This includes the use of and belief in the Bible and other religious texts, including the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. Mormonism includes significant doctrines of eternal marriage, eternal progression, baptism for the dead, polygamy or plural marriage, sexual purity, health (specified in the Word of Wisdom), fasting, and Sabbath observance.

The theology itself is not uniform; as early as 1831, and most significantly after Smith&#x27;s death, various groups split from the Church of Christ that Smith established. One source estimated over 400 denominations have sprung from founder Joseph Smith&#x27;s original movement. Other than differences in leadership, these groups most significantly differ in their stances on polygamy, which the Utah-based LDS Church banned in 1890, and Trinitarianism, which the LDS Church does not affirm. The branch of theology which seeks to maintain the practice of polygamy is known as Mormon fundamentalism and includes several different churches. Other groups affirm Trinitarianism, such as the Community of Christ (formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints), and describe their doctrine as Trinitarian Christian restorationist.

&quot;Cultural Mormonism&quot; is a term coined by cultural Mormons who identify with the culture, especially present in much of the American West, but do not necessarily identify with the theology.

==Historical overview==


The doctrines of Mormonism began with the farmboy Joseph Smith in the 1820s in Western New York during a period of religious excitement known as the Second Great Awakening. Smith, at 14 years old, was determined to find out which church taught the &quot;true&quot; doctrine of God. He believed that God existed, but was confused by what he believed to be contradictions in the beliefs of churches available to him. In &quot;Joseph Smith-History&quot;, he wrote: &quot;While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: &#x27;If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.&#x27;&quot; After praying about which denomination he should join, Smith said he received a vision in the spring of 1820. Called the &quot;First Vision&quot;, Smith said that God the Father and his son, Jesus Christ, appeared to him and instructed him to join none of the existing churches because they were all wrong. During the 1820s, Smith chronicled several angelic visitations, and was eventually told (by the angels) that God would use him to re-establish the &quot;true Christian church.&quot;

In 1830 Smith published the Book of Mormon which he claimed to have translated from ancient writings found on golden plates. He said an angel first showed him the location of the plates in 1823, buried in a nearby hill. After obtaining the plates in 1827, Smith began dictating the text of the Book of Mormon in April 1828 with the assistance of Martin Harris and later Oliver Cowdery. After several interruptions, Smith completed the manuscript in June 1829. Smith said the plates were returned to the angel after he finished the translation. 

The Book of Mormon claims to be a chronicle of early Israelites who left the Near East and traveled to the Americas. The book begins BC with the departure from Jerusalem of the family of a prophet named Lehi, and their sailing to the Americas. It tells of people in the Americas (presumably Native Americans) with a belief in Jesus hundreds of years before his birth; their witnessing Jesus&#x27;s personal visitation to them after his resurrection; and of their eventually losing Christianity after generations of wars and apostasy. According to Smith, the &quot;Book of Mormon&quot; and other revelations would be the means of establishing correct doctrine for a restored church. Smith began baptizing new converts in 1829, and formally organized the Church of Christ in 1830. Smith was seen by his followers as a modern-day prophet.

The early church encountered criticism and persecution from residents of Palmyra, New York and surrounding several towns when they began to organize. To avoid confrontation, Smith and the early church members, known as Mormons, moved West to Kirtland, Ohio, and Jackson County, Missouri where they hoped to establish a permanent New Jerusalem or City of Zion. However, they were expelled from Jackson County in 1833 and fled to other parts of Missouri. In 1838, between the Missourians and Mormons resulted in the governor of Missouri issuing an &quot;extermination order&quot; against the Mormons, forcing them to flee the state. The displaced church relocated to Illinois where under Smith&#x27;s direction, the church bought a small town, renamed it Nauvoo, and lived with a degree of peace and prosperity for a few years. However, tensions between Mormons and their neighbors again escalated. In 1844 Smith was killed by a mob, precipitating a succession crisis.

The largest group of Mormons, now called the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, followed Brigham Young as the new prophet and, under his direction, emigrated to what became the Utah Territory. There, the church began the open practice of plural marriage, a form of religious polygamy which Smith had instituted in Nauvoo. Polygamy became the faith&#x27;s most sensational characteristic during the 19th century, and vigorous opposition by the United States Congress threatened the church&#x27;s existence as a legal institution. Further, polygamy was also a major cause for the opposition to Mormonism in the states of Idaho and Arizona. In the 1890 Manifesto, church president Wilford Woodruff announced the official end of plural marriage.

Due to this formal abolition of plural marriage, several small groups broke from the LDS Church forming many smaller Mormon fundamentalist denominations. During the latter half of the 20th century the LDS Church grew rapidly, going from about 1.7 million members in 1960 to around 7.7 million members in 1990. Growth since then has slowed, and the church claimed a membership of 16 million in 2020.

==Theology==
===Nature of God===
In orthodox Mormonism, the term &quot;God&quot; generally refers to the biblical God the Father, whom Latter Day Saints refer to as &quot;Elohim&quot;, and the term &quot;Godhead&quot; refers to a council of three distinct divine persons consisting of God the Father, Jesus Christ (his firstborn Son, whom Latter Day Saints refer to as &quot;Jehovah&quot;), and the Holy Ghost. Latter Day Saints believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are three distinct beings, and that the Father and Jesus have perfected, glorified, physical bodies, while the Holy Ghost is a spirit without a physical body. Latter Day Saints also believe that there are other gods and goddesses outside the Godhead, such as a Heavenly Mother—who is married to God the Father—and that faithful Latter-day Saints may attain godhood in the afterlife. Joseph Smith taught that God was once a man on another planet before being exalted to Godhood.

This conception differs from the traditional Christian Trinity in several ways, one of which is that Mormonism has not adopted or continued to hold the doctrine of the Nicene Creed, that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are of the same substance or being. Also, Mormonism teaches that the intelligence dwelling in each human is coeternal with God. Mormons use the term &quot;omnipotent&quot; to describe God, and regard him as the creator: they understand him as being almighty and eternal but subject to eternal natural law which governs intelligences, justice and the eternal nature of matter (i.e. God organized the world but did not create it from nothing). The Mormon conception of God also differs substantially from the Jewish tradition of ethical monotheism in which &quot;elohim&quot; () is a completely different conception.

This description of God represents the Mormon orthodoxy, formalized in 1915 based on earlier teachings. Other currently existing and historical branches of Mormonism have adopted different views of god, such as the Adam–God doctrine and Trinitarianism.

===Restoration===


Mormonism describes itself as falling within world Christianity, but as a distinct restored dispensation; it characterizes itself as the only true form of the Christian religion since the time of a &quot;Great Apostasy&quot; that began not long after the ascension of Jesus Christ. According to Mormons this apostasy involved the corruption of the pure, original Christian doctrine with Greek and other philosophies, and followers dividing into different ideological groups. Additionally, Mormons claim the martyrdom of the Apostles led to the loss of Priesthood authority to administer the Church and its ordinances.

Mormons believe that God re-established the 1st-century early Christian church as found in the New Testament through the restoration of Joseph Smith. In particular, Mormons believe that angels such as Peter, James, John, and John the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and others and bestowed various Priesthood authorities on them. Mormons thus believe that their Church is the &quot;only true and living church&quot; because divine authority was restored to it through Smith. In addition, Mormons believe that Smith and his legitimate successors are modern prophets who receive revelation from God to guide the church. They maintain that other Christian religions have a portion of the truth and are guided by the light of Christ.

===Cosmology===
Smith&#x27;s cosmology is laid out mostly in Smith&#x27;s later revelations and sermons, but particularly the Book of Abraham, the Book of Moses, and the King Follett discourse. Mormon cosmology presents a unique view of God and the universe, and places a high importance on human agency. In Mormonism, life on earth is just a short part of an eternal existence. Mormons believe that in the beginning, all people existed as spirits or &quot;intelligences&quot;, in the presence of God. In this state, God proposed a plan of salvation whereby they could progress and &quot;have a privilege to advance like himself.&quot; The spirits were free to accept or reject this plan, and a &quot;third&quot; of them, led by Satan rejected it. The rest accepted the plan, coming to earth and receiving bodies with an understanding that they would experience sin and suffering.

In Mormonism, the central part of God&#x27;s plan is the atonement of Jesus Christ. Mormons believe that one purpose of earthly life is to learn to choose good over evil. In this process, people inevitably make mistakes, becoming unworthy to return to the presence of God. Mormons believe that Jesus paid for the sins of the world and that all people can be saved through his atonement. Mormons accept Christ&#x27;s atonement through faith, repentance, formal covenants or ordinances such as baptism, and consistently trying to live a Christ-like life.

According to Mormon scripture, the Earth&#x27;s creation was not &quot;ex nihilo&quot;, but organized from existing matter. The Earth is just one of many inhabited worlds, and there are many governing heavenly bodies, including the planet or star Kolob, which is said to be nearest the throne of God.

===America===

Mormon theology teaches that the United States is a unique place and that Mormons are God&#x27;s chosen people, selected for a singular destiny. The Book of Mormon alludes to the United States as being the Biblical promised land, with the Constitution of the United States being divinely inspired, and argues that America is an exceptional nation.

In Upstate New York in 1823, Joseph Smith claimed to have had a vision in which the Angel Moroni told him about engraved golden plates buried in a nearby hill. According to Smith, he received subsequent instruction from Moroni and, four years later, excavated the plates and translated them from &quot;reformed Egyptian&quot; into English; the resultant Book of Mormon—so called after an ancient American prophet who, according to Smith, had compiled the text recorded on the golden plates—recounts the history of a tribe of Israelites, led by the prophet Lehi, who migrated from Jerusalem to the Americas in the 7th century BCE. In Mormonism, these Israelite tribes who migrated to the Americas centuries before the birth of Jesus Christ are considered to be among the ancestors of pre-Columbian Native Americans.

Joseph Smith argued that the millennial New Jerusalem was to be built in America (10th Article of Faith). In the Doctrine and Covenants, Smith records God as saying &quot;it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another. And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood&quot; (D&amp;C 101:79–80). To Mormons, this places America as the originator of religious liberty and freedom, while noting a need to expand these American values worldwide.

Although officially shunned by the LDS Church, fundamentalist Mormons believe in the White Horse Prophecy, which argues that Mormons will be called upon to preserve the Constitution as it hangs &quot;by a thread&quot;.

===Ordinances===

In Mormonism, an ordinance is a religious ritual of special significance, often involving the formation of a covenant with God. Ordinances are performed by the authority of the priesthood and in the name of Jesus Christ. The term has a meaning roughly similar to that of the term &quot;sacrament&quot; in other Christian denominations.

Saving ordinances (or ordinances viewed as necessary for salvation) include: baptism by immersion after the age of accountability (normally age 8); confirmation and reception of the gift of the Holy Ghost, performed by laying hands on the head of a newly baptized member; ordination to the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods for males; an endowment (including washing and anointing) received in temples; and marriage (or sealing) to a spouse.

Mormons also perform other ordinances, which include the Lord&#x27;s supper (commonly called the sacrament), naming and blessing children, giving priesthood blessings and patriarchal blessings, anointing and blessing the sick, participating in prayer circles, and setting apart individuals who are called to church positions.

In Mormonism, the saving ordinances are seen as necessary for salvation, but they are not sufficient in and of themselves. For example, baptism is required for exaltation, but simply having been baptized does not guarantee any eternal reward. The baptized person is expected to be obedient to God&#x27;s commandments, to repent of any sinful conduct subsequent to baptism, and to receive the other saving ordinances.

Because Mormons believe that everyone must receive certain ordinances to be saved, Mormons perform ordinances on behalf of deceased persons. These ordinances are performed vicariously or by &quot;proxy&quot; on behalf of the dead. In accordance with their belief in each individual&#x27;s &quot;free agency&quot;, living or dead, Mormons believe that the deceased may accept or reject the offered ordinance in the spirit world, just as all spirits decided to accept or reject God&#x27;s plan originally. In addition, these &quot;conditional&quot; ordinances on behalf of the dead are performed only when a deceased person&#x27;s genealogical information has been submitted to a temple and correctly processed there before the ordinance ritual is performed. Only ordinances for salvation are performed on behalf of dead people.

===Scripture===

Mormons believe in the Old and New Testaments, and the LDS Church uses the Authorized King James Version as its official scriptural text of the Bible. While Mormons believe in the general accuracy of the modern day text of the Bible, they also believe that it is incomplete and that errors have been introduced. According to Mormon theology, many lost truths are restored in the Book of Mormon, which Mormons hold to be divine scripture and equal in authority to the Bible.

The Mormon scriptural canon also includes a collection of revelations and writings contained in the Doctrine and Covenants which contains doctrine and prophecy and the Pearl of Great Price which addresses briefly Genesis to Exodus. These books, as well as the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, have varying degrees of acceptance as divine scripture among different denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement.

===Revelation===

In Mormonism, continuous revelation is the principle that God or his divine agents still continue to communicate to mankind. This communication can be manifest in many ways: influences of the Holy Ghost (the principal form in which this principle is manifest), visions, visitations of divine beings, and others. Joseph Smith used the example of the Lord&#x27;s revelations to Moses in Deuteronomy to explain the importance of continuous revelation:

Mormons believe that Smith and subsequent church leaders could speak scripture &quot;when moved upon by the Holy Ghost.&quot; In addition, many Mormons believe that ancient prophets in other regions of the world received revelations that resulted in additional scriptures that have been lost and may, one day, be forthcoming. In Mormonism, revelation is not limited to church members. For instance, Latter Day Saints believe that the United States Constitution is a divinely inspired document.

Mormons are encouraged to develop a personal relationship with the Holy Ghost and receive personal revelation for their own direction and that of their family. The Latter Day Saint concept of revelation includes the belief that revelation from God is available to all those who earnestly seek it with the intent of doing good. It also teaches that everyone is entitled to revelation with respect to his or her stewardship (leadership responsibility). Thus, parents may receive inspiration from God in raising their families, individuals can receive divine inspiration to help them meet personal challenges, church officers may receive revelation for those whom they serve.

The important consequence of this is that each person may receive confirmation that particular doctrines taught by a prophet are true, as well as gain divine insight in using those truths for their own benefit and eternal progress. In the church, personal revelation is expected and encouraged, and many converts believe that personal revelation from God was instrumental in their conversion.

==Relationship with other faiths==

===Relationship with mainstream Christianity===


Mormonism categorizes itself within Christianity, and nearly all Mormons self-identify as Christian. For some who define Christianity within the doctrines of Catholicism, Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy, the Churches of the East, and Protestantism, Mormonism&#x27;s differences place it outside the umbrella of Christianity.

Since its beginnings, the faith has proclaimed itself to be Christ&#x27;s Church restored with its original authority, structure and power; maintaining that existing denominations believed in incorrect doctrines and were not acknowledged by God as his church and kingdom. Though the religion quickly gained a large following of Christian seekers, in the 1830s, many American Christians came to view the church&#x27;s early doctrines and practices as politically and culturally subversive, as well as doctrinally heretical, abominable, and condemnable. This discord led to a series of sometimes-deadly conflicts between Mormons and others who saw themselves as orthodox Christians. Although such violence declined during the twentieth century, the religion&#x27;s unique doctrinal views and practices still generate criticism, sometimes vehemently so. This gives rise to efforts by Mormons and opposing types of Christians to proselytize each other.

Mormons believe in Jesus Christ as the literal Son of God and Messiah, his crucifixion as a conclusion of a sin offering, and subsequent resurrection. However, Latter-day Saints (LDS) reject the ecumenical creeds and the definition of the Trinity. (In contrast, the second-largest Latter Day Saint denomination, the Community of Christ, is Trinitarian and monotheistic.) Mormons hold the view that the New Testament prophesied both the apostasy from the teachings of Christ and his apostles as well as the restoration of all things prior to the second coming of Christ.

Some notable differences with mainstream Christianity include a belief that Jesus began his atonement in the garden of Gethsemane and continued it to his crucifixion, rather than the orthodox belief that the crucifixion alone was the physical atonement; and an afterlife with three degrees of glory, with hell (often called spirit prison) being a temporary repository for the wicked between death and the resurrection. Additionally, Mormons do not believe in creation &quot;ex nihilo&quot;, believing that matter is eternal, and creation involved God organizing existing matter.

Much of the Mormon belief system is geographically oriented around the North and South American continents. Mormons believe that the people of the Book of Mormon lived in the western hemisphere, that Christ appeared in the western hemisphere after his death and resurrection, that the true faith was restored in Upstate New York by Joseph Smith, that the Garden of Eden was located in North America, and that the New Jerusalem would be built in Missouri. For this and other reasons, including a belief by many Mormons in American exceptionalism, Molly Worthen speculates that this may be why Leo Tolstoy described Mormonism as the &quot;quintessential &#x27;American religion.

===Relationship with Judaism===
Although Mormons do not claim to be part of Judaism, Mormon theology claims to situate Mormonism within the context of Judaism to an extent that goes beyond what most other Christian denominations claim. The faith incorporates many Old Testament ideas into its theology, and the beliefs of Mormons sometimes parallel those of Judaism and certain elements of Jewish culture. In the earliest days of Mormonism, Joseph Smith taught that the Indigenous peoples of the Americas were members of some of the Lost Tribes of Israel. Later, he taught that Mormons were Israelites, and that they may learn of their tribal affiliation within the twelve Israelite tribes. Members of the LDS Church receive Patriarchal blessings which declare the recipient&#x27;s lineage within one of the tribes of Israel. The lineage is either through true blood-line or adoption. The LDS Church teaches that if one is not a direct descendant of one of the twelve tribes, upon baptism he or she is adopted into one of the tribes. Patriarchal blessings also include personal information which is revealed through a patriarch by the power of the priesthood.

Smith hired Joshua (James) Seixas, son of Gershom Mendes Seixas and Hebrew school teacher at Congregation Shearith Israel, to teach Mormon leaders Hebrew. Smith himself attended some of these classes and went on to use his basic Hebrew in teachings. For example, Smith named the largest Mormon settlement he founded &quot;Nauvoo&quot;, which means &quot;beautiful&quot; (pl.) in Biblical Hebrew. Brigham Young named a tributary of the Great Salt Lake the &quot;Jordan River&quot;. The LDS Church has a Jerusalem Center in Israel, where students focus their study on Near Eastern history, culture, language, and the Bible.

There has been some controversy involving Jewish groups who see the actions of some elements of Mormonism as offensive. In the 1990s, Jewish groups vocally opposed the LDS practice of baptism for the dead on behalf of Jewish victims of the Holocaust and Jews in general. According to LDS Church general authority Monte J. Brough, &quot;Mormons who baptized 380,000 Holocaust victims posthumously were motivated by love and compassion and did not understand their gesture might offend Jews ... they did not realize that what they intended as a &#x27;Christian act of service&#x27; was &#x27;misguided and insensitive. Mormons believe that when the dead are baptized through proxy, they have the option of accepting or rejecting the ordinance.

===Relationship with UFOlogy===
Many Mormons are believers, experiencers, or promotors of UFOs as an interstellar or non-human phenomenon. Matthew Bowman, scholar of Mormon Studies, writes that while some people use this to try to make Mormonism look silly, &quot;a good number of Latter-day Saints&quot; have welcomed being associated with UFOs. &quot;Latter-day Saints have pointed to the phenomenon as either entirely consistent with their faith or even proof of it. ... These folks are the heirs to a strain of theology going back to Brigham Young that peaked with the early 20th-century writings of church leaders like B.H. Roberts or John Widtsoe.&quot;

==Theological divisions==

Mormon theology includes three main movements. By far the largest of these is &quot;mainstream Mormonism&quot;, defined by the leadership of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). The two broad movements outside mainstream Mormonism are Mormon fundamentalism, and liberal reformist Mormonism.

===Mainstream Mormon theology===
Mainstream Mormonism is defined by the leadership of the LDS Church which identifies itself as Christian. Members of the LDS Church consider their top leaders to be prophets and apostles, and are encouraged to accept their positions on matters of theology, while seeking confirmation of them through personal study of the Book of Mormon and the Bible. Personal prayer is encouraged as well. The LDS Church is by far the largest branch of Mormonism. It has continuously existed since the succession crisis of 1844 that split the Latter Day Saint movement after the death of founder Joseph Smith, Jr.

The LDS Church seeks to distance itself from other branches of Mormonism, particularly those that practice polygamy.
The church maintains a degree of orthodoxy by excommunicating or disciplining its members who take positions or engage in practices viewed as apostasy. For example, the LDS Church excommunicates members who practice polygamy or who adopt the beliefs and practices of Mormon fundamentalism.

===Mormon fundamentalism===

One way Mormon fundamentalism distinguishes itself from mainstream Mormonism is through the practice of plural marriage. Fundamentalists initially broke from the LDS Church after that doctrine was discontinued around the beginning of the 20th century. Mormon fundamentalism teaches that plural marriage is a requirement for exaltation (the highest degree of salvation), which will allow them to live as gods and goddesses in the afterlife. Mainstream Mormons, by contrast, believe that a single Celestial marriage is necessary for exaltation.

In distinction with the LDS Church, Mormon fundamentalists also often believe in a number of other doctrines taught and practiced by Brigham Young in the 19th century, which the LDS Church has either abandoned, repudiated, or put in abeyance. These include:
*the law of consecration also known as the United Order (put in abeyance by the LDS Church in the 19th century);
*the Adam–God teachings taught by Brigham Young and other early leaders of the LDS Church (repudiated by the LDS Church in the mid-20th century);
*the principle of blood atonement (repudiated by the LDS Church in the mid-19th century); and
*the exclusion of black men from the priesthood (abandoned by the LDS Church in 1978).

Mormon fundamentalists believe that these principles were wrongly abandoned or changed by the LDS Church, in large part due to the desire of its leadership and members to assimilate into mainstream American society and avoid the persecutions and conflict that had characterized the church throughout its early years. Others believe that it was a necessity at some point for &quot;a restoration of all things&quot; to be a truly restored Church.

===Liberal reformist theology===
Some LDS Church members have worked towards a more liberal reform of the church. Others have left the LDS Church and still consider themselves to be cultural Mormons. Others have formed new religions (many of them now defunct). For instance the Godbeites broke away from the LDS Church in the late 19th century, on the basis of both political and religious liberalism, and in 1985 the Restoration Church of Jesus Christ broke away from the LDS Church as an LGBT-friendly denomination, which was formally dissolved in 2010.

==Criticism==
As the largest denomination within Mormonism, the LDS Church has been the subject of criticism since it was founded by Joseph Smith in 1830.

Perhaps the most controversial, and a key contributing factor for Smith&#x27;s murder, is the claim that plural marriage (as defenders call it) or polygamy (as critics call it) is biblically authorized. Under heavy pressure—Utah would not be accepted as a state if polygamy was practiced—the church formally and publicly renounced the practice in 1890. Utah&#x27;s statehood soon followed. However, plural marriage remains a controversial and divisive issue, as despite the official renunciation of 1890, it still has sympathizers, defenders, and semi-secret practitioners within Mormonism, though not within the LDS Church.

More recent criticism has concerned questions of historical revisionism, homophobia, racism, sexist policies, inadequate financial disclosure, and the historical authenticity of the Book of Mormon.

==See also==
* Anti-Mormonism
* Black people and Mormonism
* Black people and early Mormonism
* Black people and Mormon priesthood
* &quot;Encyclopedia of Mormonism&quot;
* List of articles about Mormonism
* List of denominations in the Latter Day Saint movement
* Mormonism and Pacific Islanders
* Native American people and Mormonism
* Outline of Joseph Smith
* Outline of the Book of Mormon
* New religious movement
* &quot;The Joseph Smith Papers&quot;

==References==
===Citations===
===Cited and general sources===
*
*
*
*
*.
*
*
*

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

*PBS: &quot;Frontline&quot; + &quot;American Experience&quot;: Mormons PBS special on Mormon belief
*&quot;Religions: Mormonism&quot; BBC Religion

===Links to official websites of specific Mormon denominations===
*The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 
*Community of Christ (formerly the RLDS church)
*The Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite) 
*Church of Christ With the Elijah Message </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="0" end="9" title="Mormonism" label="Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="57" end="82" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="86" end="100" title="Restorationism" label="Restorationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="101" end="113" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="125" end="137" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988104" start="141" end="157" title="Western New York" label="Western New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="321" end="368" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506815" start="433" end="451" title="Sydney E. Ahlstrom" label="Sydney E. Ahlstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="747" end="761" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="830" end="864" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354479" start="889" end="892" title="God in Mormonism" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1084" end="1089" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q462463" start="1131" end="1153" title="Doctrine and Covenants" label="Doctrine and Covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q459864" start="1162" end="1182" title="Pearl of Great Price (Mormonism)" label="Pearl of Great Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294927" start="1228" end="1244" title="Celestial marriage" label="eternal marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851691" start="1246" end="1265" title="Exaltation (LDS Church)" label="eternal progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q81990" start="1267" end="1287" title="baptism for the dead" label="baptism for the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="1289" end="1316" title="Plural marriage" label="polygamy or plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458843" start="1318" end="1331" title="Law of chastity" label="sexual purity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034360" start="1333" end="1373" title="Word of Wisdom" label="health (specified in the Word of Wisdom)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1375" end="1382" title="Fasting#The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116511" start="1388" end="1406" title="Sabbath (LDS Church)" label="Sabbath observance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247467" start="1492" end="1510" title="death of Joseph Smith" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848233" start="1542" end="1558" title="Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints)" label="Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="1652" end="1664" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="1808" end="1812" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="1850" end="1864" title="Trinitarianism" label="Trinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q965093" start="1988" end="2009" title="Mormon fundamentalism" label="Mormon fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q625363" start="2099" end="2118" title="Community of Christ" label="Community of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="2234" end="2258" title="Restorationism (Christian primitivism)" label="Christian restorationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193649" start="2267" end="2285" title="Culture of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Cultural Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988890" start="2312" end="2327" title="cultural Mormon" label="cultural Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="2394" end="2407" title="Western United States" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988104" start="2566" end="2582" title="Western New York" label="Western New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="2636" end="2658" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="2717" end="2723" title="Christian denomination" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="2752" end="2760" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="2764" end="2767" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q131097" start="3090" end="3106" title="Epistle of James" label="Epistle of James"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="3324" end="3336" title="Christian denomination" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362130" start="3425" end="3437" title="First Vision" label="First Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="3461" end="3475" title="God the Father" label="God the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3489" end="3501" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="3816" end="3830" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741821" start="3898" end="3911" title="golden plates" label="golden plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q862248" start="3921" end="3929" title="Angel Moroni" label="an angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143842" start="3993" end="4006" title="Cumorah" label="a nearby hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893466" start="4134" end="4147" title="Martin Harris (Latter Day Saints)" label="Martin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q982343" start="4158" end="4172" title="Oliver Cowdery" label="Oliver Cowdery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943058" start="4366" end="4377" title="Book of Mormon chronology" label="a chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="4387" end="4397" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="4411" end="4420" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="4441" end="4449" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="4494" end="4503" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464947" start="4537" end="4541" title="Lehi (Book of Mormon prophet)" label="Lehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="4625" end="4641" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="4660" end="4665" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51628" start="4691" end="4700" title="Nativity of Jesus" label="his birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="4766" end="4782" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="his resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q864968" start="4858" end="4866" title="Apostasy in Christianity" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317803" start="4923" end="4940" title="Revelation in Mormonism" label="other revelations"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="4999" end="5014" title="Restorationism" label="restored church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857582" start="5028" end="5037" title="Baptism in Mormonism" label="baptizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848233" start="5087" end="5103" title="Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints)" label="Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="5161" end="5168" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270548" start="5244" end="5261" title="Palmyra (town), New York" label="Palmyra, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="5390" end="5397" title="Mormons" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q932039" start="5413" end="5427" title="Kirtland, Ohio" label="Kirtland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q127238" start="5433" end="5457" title="Jackson County, Missouri" label="Jackson County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q567888" start="5500" end="5513" title="New Jerusalem" label="New Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146159" start="5517" end="5529" title="Zion (Latter Day Saints)" label="City of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572004" start="5633" end="5668" title="Mormon War (1838)" label="between the Missourians and Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859295" start="5714" end="5748" title="Mormon Extermination Order" label="an &amp;quot;extermination order&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q576110" start="5924" end="5930" title="Nauvoo, Illinois" label="Nauvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247467" start="6076" end="6092" title="death of Joseph Smith" label="Smith was killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724996" start="6117" end="6136" title="Succession crisis (Latter Day Saints)" label="a succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="6184" end="6227" title="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="6238" end="6251" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q128026" start="6326" end="6340" title="Utah Territory" label="Utah Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="6387" end="6402" title="plural marriage" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="6424" end="6432" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6592" end="6614" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556452" start="6794" end="6808" title="1890 Manifesto" label="1890 Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q560707" start="6827" end="6843" title="Wilford Woodruff" label="Wilford Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q965093" start="7009" end="7030" title="Mormon fundamentalist" label="Mormon fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723008" start="7093" end="7116" title="Membership history of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="LDS Church grew rapidly"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="7406" end="7420" title="God the Father" label="God the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="7427" end="7444" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q868915" start="7463" end="7469" title="Elohim" label="Elohim"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="7593" end="7605" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352429" start="7621" end="7624" title="Son of God (Christianity)" label="Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678579" start="7667" end="7674" title="Jehovah" label="Jehovah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7691" end="7701" title="Holy Spirit (Christian denominational variations)#Latter Day Saints" label="Holy Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694886" start="8027" end="8042" title="Heavenly Mother (Mormonism)" label="Heavenly Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="8149" end="8161" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851691" start="8224" end="8231" title="Exaltation (Mormonism)" label="exalted"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="8300" end="8307" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="8413" end="8425" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q988243" start="8475" end="8489" title="Homoousion" label="same substance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8971" end="8987" title="Mormonism and Judaism#The nature of God" label="Jewish tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403414" start="8991" end="9009" title="ethical monotheism" label="ethical monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9025" end="9031" title="Elohim#Hebrew Bible" label="elohim"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="9126" end="9135" title="orthodoxy" label="orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354575" start="9295" end="9312" title="Adam–God doctrine" label="Adam–God doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815267" start="9399" end="9417" title="world Christianity" label="world Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9446" end="9458" title="Dispensation (period)#Latter Day Saint dispensations" label="dispensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039460" start="9558" end="9572" title="Great Apostasy (Latter Day Saints)" label="Great Apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="9609" end="9634" title="ascension of Jesus Christ" label="ascension of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="9741" end="9746" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q107013" start="9861" end="9870" title="Christian martyrdom" label="martyrdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="9878" end="9886" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492096" start="9906" end="9926" title="Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="Priesthood authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="10017" end="10028" title="Christianity in the 1st century" label="1st-century"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="10029" end="10051" title="Early Christianity" label="early Christian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="10068" end="10081" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316200" start="10094" end="10105" title="Restoration (Latter Day Saints)" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="10174" end="10179" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="10181" end="10186" title="James, son of Zebedee" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="10188" end="10192" title="John the Apostle" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="10198" end="10214" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492096" start="10272" end="10294" title="Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="Priesthood authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546198" start="10687" end="10702" title="light of Christ (Latter Day Saints)" label="light of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q997718" start="10831" end="10846" title="Book of Abraham" label="Book of Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257242" start="10852" end="10865" title="Book of Moses" label="Book of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680135" start="10875" end="10897" title="King Follett discourse" label="King Follett discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773159" start="10899" end="10915" title="Mormon cosmology" label="Mormon cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691988" start="11002" end="11008" title="Agency in Mormonism" label="agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q469736" start="11237" end="11254" title="Plan of salvation (Latter Day Saints)" label="plan of salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="11434" end="11439" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="11644" end="11653" title="Atonement in Christianity" label="atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139338" start="12212" end="12221" title="ex nihilo" label="ex nihilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775631" start="12388" end="12393" title="Kolob" label="Kolob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920452" start="12427" end="12440" title="throne of God" label="throne of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="12491" end="12504" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q926707" start="12555" end="12568" title="chosen people" label="chosen people"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="12607" end="12621" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44536" start="12673" end="12686" title="promised land" label="promised land"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="12697" end="12730" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284164" start="12737" end="12754" title="Divine inspiration" label="divinely inspired"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="12772" end="12804" title="American exceptionalism" label="America is an exceptional nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="12810" end="12826" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q862248" start="12891" end="12903" title="Angel Moroni" label="Angel Moroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741821" start="12928" end="12941" title="golden plates" label="golden plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143842" start="12954" end="12965" title="Cumorah" label="nearby hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238732" start="13109" end="13126" title="reformed Egyptian" label="reformed Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="13161" end="13175" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701214" start="13195" end="13219" title="Mormon (Book of Mormon prophet)" label="ancient American prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="13332" end="13342" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464947" start="13363" end="13367" title="Lehi (Book of Mormon prophet)" label="Lehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="13387" end="13396" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="13404" end="13412" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="13533" end="13545" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="13590" end="13603" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="13604" end="13620" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="13652" end="13662" title="Millennialism" label="millennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q567888" start="13663" end="13676" title="New Jerusalem" label="New Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q943670" start="13710" end="13726" title="Articles of Faith (Latter Day Saints)" label="Article of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q462463" start="13736" end="13758" title="Doctrine and Covenants" label="Doctrine and Covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="14124" end="14141" title="religious liberty" label="religious liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q965093" start="14266" end="14288" title="Mormon fundamentalism" label="fundamentalist Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994823" start="14304" end="14324" title="White Horse Prophecy" label="White Horse Prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100794" start="14474" end="14483" title="Ordinance (Latter Day Saints)" label="ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="14499" end="14505" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178963" start="14566" end="14574" title="Covenant (Latter Day Saints)" label="covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492096" start="14634" end="14644" title="Priesthood (Mormonism)" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="14664" end="14676" title="Jesus" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="14743" end="14752" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857582" start="14871" end="14878" title="Baptism (Latter Day Saints)" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299434" start="14882" end="14891" title="immersion baptism" label="immersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q123384190" start="14902" end="14923" title="age of accountability" label="age of accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160126" start="14942" end="14954" title="Confirmation (Latter Day Saints)" label="confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q976547" start="14976" end="14998" title="Baptism with the Holy Spirit" label="gift of the Holy Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357673" start="15084" end="15091" title="Aaronic priesthood (LDS Church)" label="Aaronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357681" start="15096" end="15118" title="Melchizedek priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="Melchizedek priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992575" start="15134" end="15143" title="Endowment (Latter Day Saints)" label="endowment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900196" start="15155" end="15176" title="washing and anointing" label="washing and anointing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654661" start="15190" end="15197" title="Temple (LDS Church)" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294927" start="15203" end="15211" title="Celestial marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283013" start="15216" end="15223" title="Sealing (Latter Day Saints)" label="sealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="15296" end="15314" title="Eucharist" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847991" start="15336" end="15345" title="Sacrament (Latter Day Saints)" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961867" start="15348" end="15376" title="naming and blessing children" label="naming and blessing children"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242905" start="15385" end="15404" title="priesthood blessing" label="priesthood blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q517314" start="15410" end="15431" title="patriarchal blessings" label="patriarchal blessings"/>
<link wikidata="Q193770" start="15433" end="15464" title="Anointing of the Sick" label="anointing and blessing the sick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239012" start="15483" end="15497" title="Prayer circle (Mormonism)" label="prayer circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456890" start="15503" end="15516" title="setting apart" label="setting apart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851691" start="15726" end="15736" title="Exaltation (Mormonism)" label="exaltation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81990" start="16083" end="16123" title="Baptism for the dead" label="ordinances on behalf of deceased persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301566" start="16398" end="16410" title="spirit world (Latter Day Saints)" label="spirit world"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="16852" end="16855" title="Old Testament" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="16860" end="16863" title="New Testament" label="New"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="16904" end="16933" title="Authorized King James Version" label="Authorized King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="16973" end="16978" title="Christian biblical canons" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="17208" end="17222" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462463" start="17404" end="17426" title="Doctrine and Covenants" label="Doctrine and Covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q459864" start="17472" end="17492" title="Pearl of Great Price (Mormonism)" label="Pearl of Great Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462340" start="17564" end="17601" title="Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible" label="Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458440" start="17755" end="17776" title="continuous revelation" label="continuous revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="17933" end="17943" title="Holy Ghost" label="Holy Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q42614" start="18126" end="18137" title="Deuteronomy" label="Deuteronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="18625" end="18651" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021836" start="19096" end="19107" title="stewardship (theology)" label="stewardship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="19876" end="19888" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="19930" end="19939" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19998" end="20009" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="20011" end="20018" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="20023" end="20041" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="20047" end="20055" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q435787" start="20056" end="20067" title="Ancient Church of the East" label="of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="20073" end="20086" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="20246" end="20254" title="Restorationism (Christian primitivism)" label="restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060330" start="20642" end="20652" title="subversion (politics)" label="subversive"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352429" start="21162" end="21172" title="Son of God (Christianity)" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="21177" end="21184" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="21186" end="21201" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="his crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q986507" start="21223" end="21235" title="sin offering" label="sin offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="21252" end="21264" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916350" start="21310" end="21327" title="ecumenical creeds" label="ecumenical creeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="21354" end="21361" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q625363" start="21431" end="21450" title="Community of Christ" label="Community of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="21471" end="21483" title="monotheistic" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="21517" end="21530" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039460" start="21551" end="21559" title="Great Apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="21621" end="21632" title="Restorationism (Christian primitivism)" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632147" start="21778" end="21787" title="Substitutionary atonement" label="atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q205333" start="21805" end="21815" title="Gethsemane" label="Gethsemane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603960" start="21968" end="21984" title="degrees of glory" label="degrees of glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="21991" end="21995" title="hell" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22010" end="22023" title="Spirit world (Latter Day Saints)#Spirit prison" label="spirit prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139338" start="22160" end="22169" title="ex nihilo" label="ex nihilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="22337" end="22342" title="North America" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="22347" end="22360" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="22413" end="22427" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="22441" end="22459" title="western hemisphere" label="western hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="22578" end="22594" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="22621" end="22635" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q567888" start="22679" end="22692" title="New Jerusalem" label="New Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="22711" end="22719" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="22787" end="22810" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896697" start="22812" end="22825" title="Molly Worthen" label="Molly Worthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="22858" end="22869" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="23020" end="23027" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="23208" end="23221" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="23414" end="23448" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125226" start="23477" end="23498" title="Lost Tribes of Israel" label="Lost Tribes of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q517314" start="23669" end="23689" title="Patriarchal blessing" label="Patriarchal blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289257" start="24147" end="24168" title="Gershom Mendes Seixas" label="Gershom Mendes Seixas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435187" start="24198" end="24226" title="Congregation Shearith Israel" label="Congregation Shearith Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q576110" start="24427" end="24433" title="Nauvoo, Illinois" label="Nauvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="24484" end="24499" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q178741" start="24540" end="24555" title="Great Salt Lake" label="Great Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628381" start="24566" end="24578" title="Jordan River (Utah)" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836910" start="24607" end="24623" title="BYU Jerusalem Center" label="Jerusalem Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="24627" end="24633" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81990" start="24912" end="24932" title="baptism for the dead" label="baptism for the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="24964" end="24977" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532323" start="25023" end="25040" title="general authority" label="general authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="25561" end="25564" title="Unidentified flying object" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850041" start="25637" end="25651" title="Mormon studies" label="Mormon Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q447850" start="26095" end="26107" title="B. H. Roberts" label="B.H. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217984" start="26111" end="26123" title="John A. Widtsoe" label="John Widtsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="26300" end="26347" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q965093" start="26419" end="26440" title="Mormon fundamentalism" label="Mormon fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620760" start="26687" end="26694" title="Apostle (Latter Day Saints)" label="apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724996" start="26996" end="27013" title="Succession crisis (Latter Day Saints)" label="succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="27650" end="27665" title="plural marriage" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851691" start="27870" end="27880" title="Exaltation (Latter Day Saints)" label="exaltation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294927" start="28041" end="28059" title="Celestial marriage" label="Celestial marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="28223" end="28236" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503445" start="28353" end="28372" title="law of consecration" label="law of consecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889010" start="28391" end="28403" title="United Order" label="United Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354575" start="28466" end="28484" title="Adam–God theory" label="Adam–God teachings"/>
<link wikidata="Q886831" start="28625" end="28640" title="blood atonement" label="blood atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485529" start="28706" end="28728" title="Black people and Mormonism" label="exclusion of black men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492096" start="28738" end="28748" title="Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988890" start="29417" end="29432" title="cultural Mormon" label="cultural Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356357" start="29513" end="29522" title="Godbeites" label="Godbeites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356484" start="29653" end="29687" title="Restoration Church of Jesus Christ" label="Restoration Church of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q661717" start="29725" end="29738" title="LGBT-friendly" label="LGBT-friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="30053" end="30068" title="plural marriage" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="30095" end="30103" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845577" start="30172" end="30176" title="History of Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556452" start="30292" end="30299" title="1890 Manifesto" label="in 1890"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30623" end="30645" title="Criticism of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints#Criticism" label="historical revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30647" end="30657" title="Criticism of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints#Views on homosexuality" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30659" end="30665" title="Criticism of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints#Racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30667" end="30682" title="Criticism of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints#Gender bias and sexism" label="sexist policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449565" start="30684" end="30715" title="Finances of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="inadequate financial disclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774204" start="30725" end="30770" title="historical authenticity of the Book of Mormon" label="historical authenticity of the Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774237" start="30788" end="30802" title="Anti-Mormonism" label="Anti-Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485529" start="30805" end="30831" title="Black people and Mormonism" label="Black people and Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922415" start="30834" end="30866" title="Black people and early Mormonism" label="Black people and early Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922417" start="30869" end="30903" title="Black people and Mormon priesthood" label="Black people and Mormon priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375710" start="30912" end="30937" title="Encyclopedia of Mormonism" label="Encyclopedia of Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576509" start="30946" end="30978" title="List of articles about Mormonism" label="List of articles about Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179248" start="30981" end="31035" title="List of denominations in the Latter Day Saint movement" label="List of denominations in the Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147273" start="31038" end="31069" title="Mormonism and Pacific Islanders" label="Mormonism and Pacific Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181053" start="31072" end="31108" title="Native American people and Mormonism" label="Native American people and Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228935" start="31111" end="31134" title="Outline of Joseph Smith" label="Outline of Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307925" start="31137" end="31166" title="Outline of the Book of Mormon" label="Outline of the Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="31169" end="31191" title="New religious movement" label="New religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743527" start="31200" end="31223" title="The Joseph Smith Papers" label="The Joseph Smith Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q747860" start="31505" end="31517" title="BBC Online" label="BBC Religion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21026" wikidata="Q152929" url="?curid=21026" title="Meat Loaf">
<text>Michael Lee Aday (born Marvin Lee Aday; September 27, 1947 – January 20, 2022), better known by his stage name Meat Loaf, was an American singer and actor. He was known for his powerful, wide-ranging voice and theatrical live shows. His &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; album trilogy—&quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; (1977), &quot;Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell&quot; (1993), and &quot;Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose&quot; (2006)—has sold more than 100 million records worldwide, making him one of the best-selling music artists of all time. The first album stayed on the charts for over nine years and is one of the best-selling albums in history, still selling an estimated 200,000 copies annually .

Despite the commercial success of &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; and &quot;Bat Out of Hell II: Back Into Hell&quot;, and earning a Grammy Award for Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance for the song &quot;I&#x27;d Do Anything for Love&quot;, Meat Loaf nevertheless experienced some difficulty establishing a steady career within the United States. However, his career still saw success due to his popularity in Europe, especially in the United Kingdom and Ireland. He received the 1994 Brit Award in the United Kingdom for best-selling album and single, and was ranked 23rd for the number of weeks spent on the UK charts in 2006. He ranks 96th on VH1&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock&quot;.

Meat Loaf also acted in over 50 films and television shows, sometimes as himself or as characters resembling his stage persona. His notable film roles include Eddie in &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; (1975), the bus driver in &quot;Spice World&quot; (1997), and Robert Paulson in &quot;Fight Club&quot; (1999). His early stage work included dual roles in the original Broadway cast of &quot;The Rocky Horror Show;&quot; he also appeared in the musical &quot;Hair&quot;, both on and Off-Broadway.
==Early life==
Marvin Lee Aday was born in Dallas, Texas, on September 27, 1947, the son of Wilma Artie (&quot;née&quot; Hukel), a schoolteacher and member of the Vo-di-o-do Girls gospel music quartet, and Orvis Wesley Aday, a former police officer who went into business selling a homemade cough remedy with his wife and a friend under the name of the Griffin Grocery Company. He stated in an interview that when he was born, he was &quot;bright red and stayed that way for days&quot; and that his father said he looked like &quot;nine pounds of ground chuck,” and convinced hospital staff to put the name &quot;Meat&quot; on his crib. He was later called &quot;M.L.&quot; in reference to his initials, but when his weight increased, his seventh-grade classmates referred to him as &quot;Meat Loaf&quot;, referring to his , stature. He also attributed the nickname to an incident where, after he stepped on a football coach&#x27;s foot, the coach yelled &quot;Get off my foot, you hunk of meatloaf!&quot;

Meat Loaf&#x27;s father would binge-drink alcohol for days at a time, a habit he started when he was medically discharged from the U.S. Army during World War II after being wounded by fragments from a mortar shell. Meat Loaf often accompanied his mother in driving to the bars in Dallas to look for his father, and often stayed with his grandmother. He attended church and Bible study every Sunday.

He was 16 years-old on November 22, 1963, the day of the assassination of John F. Kennedy. That morning, Meat Loaf had seen the President when he arrived at Dallas Love Field. Later, after hearing of Kennedy&#x27;s death, he and a friend drove to Parkland Hospital where he witnessed Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, covered in her husband&#x27;s blood, getting out of the car that brought her to the hospital.

In 1965, Meat Loaf graduated from Thomas Jefferson High School, having appeared in school stage productions such as &quot;Where&#x27;s Charley?&quot; and &quot;The Music Man&quot;. He played high school football as a defensive tackle. After attending college at Lubbock Christian College, he transferred to North Texas State University (now the University of North Texas).

In 1967, when Meat Loaf was 19 years old: his mother died of cancer, and his father lunged at him with a knife after falsely accusing the teen of having girls in his bedroom. Meat Loaf used the money his mother left him to rent an apartment in Dallas, where he isolated for three and a half months, at which time a friend found him. Soon after, he went to the airport and caught the next flight to Los Angeles.

Meat Loaf intentionally gained 60 pounds (27 kg) to fail his physical examination for the Vietnam War draft. Despite this strategy, he still received his notice to appear before his local draft board, but chose to ignore it.

==Career==
===Early career===
In Los Angeles, Meat Loaf formed his first band, Meat Loaf Soul. The band received several recording contracts. Meat Loaf Soul&#x27;s first gig was in Huntington Beach, California in 1968 at the Cave, opening for Van Morrison&#x27;s band Them and Question Mark and the Mysterians. Meat Loaf later described his early days in the music industry as being treated like a &quot;circus clown.&quot;

The band underwent several changes of lead guitarists, changing the name of the band each time, to names including Popcorn Blizzard and Floating Circus. As Floating Circus, they opened for the Who, the Fugs, the Stooges, MC5, the Grateful Dead, and the Grease Band. Their regional success led them to release a single, &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot;, backed with &quot;Hello&quot;. Meat Loaf then joined the Los Angeles production of the musical &quot;Hair&quot;.

===1970s===

With the publicity generated from &quot;Hair&quot;, Meat Loaf accepted an invitation by Motown, in Detroit. In addition to appearing as &quot;Mother&quot; and &quot;Ulysses S. Grant&quot; at Detroit&#x27;s Vest Pocket Theatre, he recorded the vocals with fellow &quot;Hair&quot; performer Shaun &quot;Stoney&quot; Murphy on an album of songs written and selected by the Motown production team. The album, titled &quot;Stoney &amp; Meatloaf&quot; (with Meatloaf spelled as one word), was released in September 1971 and included the single &quot;What You See Is What You Get&quot;; it reached number 36 on the Best Selling Soul Singles chart and number 71 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart. Meat Loaf and Stoney toured with Jake Wade and the Soul Searchers, opening for Richie Havens, the Who, the Stooges, Bob Seger, Alice Cooper, and Rare Earth. Meat Loaf left Motown soon after the label replaced his and Stoney&#x27;s vocals from the one song he liked, &quot;Who Is the Leader of the People?&quot; with new vocals by Edwin Starr. He moved to Freeland, Michigan for a year and was the opening act at the Grande Ballroom 80 times.

In December 1972, Meat Loaf was in the original off-Broadway production of &quot;Rainbow&quot; at the Orpheum Theatre in New York. After the tour, Meat Loaf rejoined the cast of &quot;Hair&quot;, this time at a Broadway theater. After he hired an agent, he auditioned for the Public Theater&#x27;s production of &quot;More Than You Deserve&quot;. During the audition, Meat Loaf met Jim Steinman. He sang a Stoney and Meat Loaf favorite of his, &quot;(I&#x27;d Love to Be) As Heavy as Jesus&quot;, and subsequently got the part of Rabbit, a maniac that blows up his fellow soldiers so they can &quot;go home.&quot; Ron Silver and Fred Gwynne were also in the show. In the summer between the show&#x27;s workshop production (April 1973) and full production (November 1973 – January 1974), Meat Loaf appeared in a Shakespeare in the Park production of &quot;As You Like It&quot; with Raul Julia and Mary Beth Hurt.

In late 1973, Meat Loaf was cast in the original L.A. Roxy cast of &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;, playing the part of Eddie. The success of the musical led to the filming of &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; in which Meat Loaf played only Eddie, a decision he said made the movie not as good as the musical.

About the same time, Meat Loaf and Steinman started work on &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot;. Meat Loaf convinced Epic Records to shoot music videos for four songs, &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot;, &quot;Paradise by the Dashboard Light&quot;, &quot;You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth&quot;, and &quot;Two Out of Three Ain&#x27;t Bad&quot; and convinced Lou Adler, the producer of &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;, to run the &quot;Paradise&quot; video as a trailer to the movie. During his recording of the soundtrack for &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;, Meat Loaf recorded two more songs: &quot;Stand by Me&quot; (a Ben E. King cover), and &quot;Clap Your Hands.&quot; They remained unreleased for a decade, until 1984, when they appeared as B-sides to the &quot;Nowhere Fast&quot; single.

In 1976, Meat Loaf recorded lead vocals for Ted Nugent&#x27;s album &quot;Free-for-All&quot; when regular Nugent lead vocalist Derek St. Holmes temporarily quit the band. Meat Loaf sang lead on five of the album&#x27;s nine tracks. That same year, Meat Loaf appeared in his final theatrical show in New York City, the short-lived Broadway production of Gower Champion&#x27;s rock musical &quot;Rockabye Hamlet&quot;. It closed two weeks into its initial run.
Meat Loaf and Steinman started working on &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; in 1972, but did not get serious about it until the end of 1974. Meat Loaf then decided to leave theater and concentrate exclusively on music. Meat Loaf was cast as an understudy for John Belushi in &quot;The National Lampoon Show&quot;. It was at the &quot;Lampoon&quot; show that Meat Loaf met Ellen Foley, the co-star who sang &quot;Paradise by the Dashboard Light&quot; and &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; with him on the album &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot;.

Meat Loaf and Steinman spent time seeking a record deal; however, their approaches were rejected by each record company, because their songs did not fit any specific recognized music industry style. Todd Rundgren, under the impression that they already had a record deal, agreed to produce the album as well as play lead guitar along with other members of Rundgren&#x27;s band Utopia and Max Weinberg. They then shopped the record around, but they still had no takers until Steve Popovich&#x27;s Cleveland International Records took a chance, releasing &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; in October 1977.

Meat Loaf and Steinman formed the band Neverland Express to tour in support of &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot;. Their first gig was opening for Cheap Trick in Chicago. Meat Loaf gained national exposure as the musical guest on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; on March 25, 1978. In 1978, Meat Loaf jumped off a stage in Ottawa, Ontario, breaking his leg. He finished his tour performing in a wheelchair.

&quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; has sold an estimated 43 million copies globally, including 15 million in the United States, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time. In the United Kingdom alone, its 2.1 million sales put it in 38th place. Despite peaking at No. 9 and spending only two weeks in the top ten in 1981, it has now spent 485 weeks on the UK Albums Chart (May 2015), a figure bettered only by &quot;Rumours&quot; by Fleetwood Mac with 487 weeks. In Australia, it knocked the Bee Gees off the No. 1 spot and became the biggest-selling album of all time in that country. &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; has, as of December 2020, spent a total of 522 weeks in the Top 200 in the UK chart.

===1980s===
In 1979, Steinman started to work on &quot;Bad for Good&quot;, the intended follow-up to 1977&#x27;s &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot;. During that time, a combination of touring, drugs and exhaustion had caused Meat Loaf to lose his voice. Without a singer, and pressured by the record company, Steinman decided that he should sing on &quot;Bad for Good&quot; himself. While Steinman worked on Bad for Good, Meat Loaf played the role of Travis Redfish in the movie &quot;Roadie&quot; until his singing voice returned. Steinman then wrote a new album for Meat Loaf, &quot;Dead Ringer&quot;, which was released in September 1981. Steinman had written five new songs which, in addition to the track &quot;More Than You Deserve&quot; (sung by Meat Loaf in the stage musical of the same name) and a reworked monolog, formed the album &quot;Dead Ringer&quot;, which was produced by Meat Loaf and Stephan Galfas, with backing tracks produced by Todd Rundgren, Jimmy Iovine, and Steinman. In 1976, Meat Loaf appeared on the track &quot;Keeper Keep Us&quot;, from the Intergalactic Touring Band&#x27;s self-titled album, produced by Galfas. The song &quot;Dead Ringer for Love&quot; was the pinnacle of the album, and launched Meat Loaf to even greater success. While it failed to chart in the US, it reached No. 5 in the United Kingdom and stayed in the UK Singles Chart for 19 weeks. Cher provided the lead female vocals in the song.

On December 5, 1981, Meat Loaf and the Neverland Express were the musical guests for &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; where he and former fellow &quot;Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; actor Tim Curry performed a skit depicting a One-Stop Rocky Horror Shop. Also on the show, Curry performed &quot;The Zucchini Song&quot; and Meat Loaf &amp; the Neverland Express performed &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; and &quot;Promised Land.&quot;

Following a dispute with his former songwriter Jim Steinman, Meat Loaf was contractually obliged to release a new album, resulting in &quot;Midnight at the Lost and Found&quot;, released in May 1983. According to Meat Loaf, Steinman had given the songs &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; and &quot;Making Love Out of Nothing at All&quot; to Meat Loaf for this album. However, Meat Loaf&#x27;s record company did not want Meat Loaf to sing Steinman&#x27;s songs, saying that nobody wanted to hear them. Bonnie Tyler&#x27;s version of &quot;Eclipse&quot; and Air Supply&#x27;s version of &quot;Making Love&quot; topped the charts together, holding No. 1 and No. 2 for a period during 1983. Meat Loaf is credited with having been involved in the writing of some of the tracks on the album, including the title track, &quot;Midnight at the Lost and Found.&quot;

Poor money management as well as 45 lawsuits totaling US$80 million, including ones from Steinman, resulted in Meat Loaf filing for personal bankruptcy in 1983. The bankruptcy resulted in Meat Loaf losing the rights to his songs, although he received royalties for &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; in 1997.

In 1984, Meat Loaf went to England, where he felt increasingly at home, to record the album &quot;Bad Attitude&quot;; it was released that year. It features two songs by Steinman, both previously recorded, &quot;Nowhere Fast&quot; and &quot;Surf&#x27;s Up.&quot; The American release on RCA Records was in April 1985 and features a slightly different track list, as well as alternate mixes for some songs. The title track features a duet with the Who&#x27;s lead singer Roger Daltrey. It was a minor success with a few commercially successful singles, the most successful being &quot;Modern Girl&quot;. In 1985, Meat Loaf took part in some comedy sketches in the UK with Hugh Laurie. Meat Loaf also tried stand-up comedy, appearing several times in Connecticut.

Meat Loaf worked with songwriter John Parr on his next album, &quot;Blind Before I Stop&quot;, which was released in 1986 by Arista Records. It features production, mixing, and general influence by Frank Farian. Meat Loaf was involved in the composition of three of the songs on the album. Meat Loaf performed &quot;Thrashin&quot; for the soundtrack of the 1986 skateboarding film &quot;Thrashin&#x27;&quot; (directed by David Winters and starring Josh Brolin).

===1990s===
Following the success of Meat Loaf&#x27;s touring in the 1980s, he and Steinman began work during December 1990 on &quot;Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell&quot;; the album was released in September 1993. The immediate success of &quot;Bat Out of Hell II&quot; led to the sale of over 15 million copies, and the single &quot;I&#x27;d Do Anything for Love (But I Won&#x27;t Do That)&quot; reached number one in 28 countries. In March 1994, at the 36th Annual Grammy Awards, Meat Loaf won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Vocal Performance, Solo for &quot;I&#x27;d Do Anything for Love.&quot; This song stayed at No. 1 in the UK chart for seven consecutive weeks. The single featured a female vocalist who was credited only as &quot;Mrs. Loud.&quot; Mrs. Loud was later identified as Lorraine Crosby, a performer from England. Meat Loaf promoted the song with American vocalist Patti Russo, who performed lead female vocals on tour with him. Also in 1994, he sang the U.S. national anthem &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; at the Major League Baseball All-Star Game. He released the single &quot;Rock and Roll Dreams Come Through&quot;, which reached No. 13 in the United States.

In 1995, Meat Loaf released his seventh studio album, &quot;Welcome to the Neighborhood&quot;. The album went platinum in the United States and the United Kingdom. It included three singles that hit the top 40, including &quot;I&#x27;d Lie for You (And That&#x27;s the Truth)&quot; (which reached No. 13 in the United States and No. 2 in the UK), and &quot;Not a Dry Eye in the House&quot; (which reached No. 7 in the UK chart). &quot;I&#x27;d Lie for You (And That&#x27;s the Truth)&quot; was a duet with Patti Russo, who had been touring with Meat Loaf and singing on his albums since 1993. Of the twelve songs on the album, two are written by Steinman. Both are cover versions, the &quot;Original Sin&quot; from Pandora&#x27;s Box&#x27;s &quot;Original Sin&quot; album and &quot;Left in the Dark&quot; first appeared on Steinman&#x27;s own &quot;Bad for Good&quot; as well as the 1984 album &quot;Emotion&quot; by Barbra Streisand. His other singles, &quot;I&#x27;d Lie for You (And That&#x27;s the Truth)&quot; and &quot;Not a Dry Eye in the House&quot;, were written by Diane Warren.

In 1998, Meat Loaf released &quot;The Very Best of Meat Loaf&quot;. The album featured three new songs co-written by Steinman – two with Andrew Lloyd Webber and one with Don Black, &quot;Is Nothing Sacred&quot;, released as a single. The single version of this song is a duet with Patti Russo, whereas the album version is a solo song by Meat Loaf.

===2000s===

In 2003, Meat Loaf released his album &quot;Couldn&#x27;t Have Said It Better&quot;. For only the third time in his career, Meat Loaf released an album without any songs written by Steinman (not counting live bonus tracks on special edition releases). Although Meat Loaf claimed that &quot;Couldn&#x27;t Have Said It Better&quot; was &quot;the most perfect album [he] did since &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot;&quot;, it was not as commercially successful. The album was a minor commercial success worldwide and reached No. 4 on the UK Albums Chart, accompanied by a sellout world tour to promote the album and some of Meat Loaf&#x27;s best selling singles. One such performance on his world tour was at the 2003 NRL Grand Final in Sydney. There were many writers for the album including Diane Warren and James Michael, who were both asked to contribute to his 2006 album, &quot;Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose&quot;. The album featured duets with Patti Russo and Meat Loaf&#x27;s daughter Pearl Aday.

On November 17, 2003, during a performance at London&#x27;s Wembley Arena, on his &quot;Couldn&#x27;t Have Said It Better&quot; tour, he collapsed of what was later diagnosed as Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome, a condition marked by an extra electrical pathway in the heart which causes symptoms like a rapid heartbeat. The following week, he underwent a surgical procedure intended to correct the problem. As a result, Meat Loaf&#x27;s insurance agency did not allow him to perform for any longer than one hour and 45 minutes.

From February 20 to 22, 2004, during an Australian tour, Meat Loaf performed with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, in a set of concerts recorded for the album &quot;Bat Out of Hell: Live with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra&quot;. The performances included the Australian Boys&#x27; Choir singing back-up on a &quot;Couldn&#x27;t Have Said It Better&quot; track, &quot;Testify.&quot;

Meat Loaf and Steinman had begun to work on the third installment of &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; when Steinman suffered a heart attack. According to Meat Loaf, Steinman was too ill to work on such an intense project while Steinman&#x27;s manager said health was not an issue.

Steinman had registered the phrase &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; as a trademark in 1995. In May 2006, Meat Loaf sued Steinman and his manager in federal District Court in Los Angeles, seeking $50 million and an injunction against Steinman&#x27;s use of the phrase. Steinman and his representatives attempted to block the album&#x27;s release. An agreement was reached in July 2006. Denying reports in the press over the years of a rift between Meat Loaf and Steinman, in an interview with Dan Rather, Meat Loaf stated that he and Steinman never stopped talking, and that the lawsuits reported in the press were between lawyers and managers, and not between Meat Loaf and Steinman.

The album &quot;Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose&quot; was released on October 31, 2006, and was produced by Desmond Child. The first single from the album &quot;It&#x27;s All Coming Back to Me Now&quot; (featuring Marion Raven) was released on October 16, 2006. It entered the UK Singles Chart at No. 6, giving Meat Loaf his highest UK chart position in nearly 11 years. The album debuted at No. 8 on the Billboard 200, and sold 81,000 copies in its opening week, but after that did not sell as well in the United States and yielded no hit singles, although it was certified gold. The album also featured duets with Patti Russo and Jennifer Hudson. In the weeks following the release of &quot;Bat III&quot;, Meat Loaf and the Neverland Express did a brief tour of the U.S. and Europe, known as the Bases are Loaded Tour. In October 2006, Meat Loaf&#x27;s private jet had to make an emergency landing at London Stansted Airport after the plane&#x27;s forward landing gear failed.

In 2007, Meat Loaf began The Seize the Night Tour, with Marion Raven, serving as a supporting act. Portions of the tour in February 2007 were featured in the documentary &quot;Meat Loaf: In Search of Paradise&quot;, directed by Bruce David Klein. The film was an official selection of the Montreal World Film Festival in 2007. It opened in theaters in March 2008 and was released on DVD in May 2008.
During a performance at the Metro Radio Arena in Newcastle upon Tyne, England, on October 31, 2007, at the opening of &quot;Paradise by the Dashboard Light&quot; Meat Loaf walked off the stage early in the song and said that it was his last performance. His tour promoter, Andrew Miller, said that it was a result of &quot;exhaustion and stress&quot; and said that Meat Loaf would continue touring after suitable rest. The next two gigs in the tour, at the NEC and Manchester Evening News Arena were canceled because of &quot;acute laryngitis&quot; and were rescheduled for late November. The concert scheduled for November 6, 2007, at London&#x27;s Wembley Arena was also canceled. Meat Loaf canceled his entire European tour for 2007 after being diagnosed with a cyst on his vocal cords.

On June 27, 2008, Meat Loaf began The Casa de Carne Tour in Plymouth, England alongside his longtime duet partner Patti Russo, who debuted one of her own original songs during the show. The tour continued through July and August with twenty dates throughout England, Ireland, Germany, Portugal, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Denmark. Six U.S. shows were also added for October and December 2008.

In May 2009, Meat Loaf began work on the album &quot;Hang Cool Teddy Bear&quot; in the studio with Green Day&#x27;s &quot;American Idiot&quot; album producer Rob Cavallo, working with such writers as Justin Hawkins, Rick Brantley, Ollie Wride, Tommy Henriksen, and Jon Bon Jovi. The album is based on the story of a fictional soldier, whose &quot;story&quot; furnishes the theme. The album is based on a short story by the Los Angeles-based screenwriter and director Kilian Kerwin, a long-time friend of the singer. Hugh Laurie and Jack Black both perform on the album, Laurie plays piano on the song &quot;If I Can&#x27;t Have You&quot;, while Black sings a duet with Meat Loaf on &quot;Like A Rose&quot;. Patti Russo and Kara DioGuardi also duet on the album. Brian May of Queen features on guitar along with Steve Vai. It received positive reviews from critics and fans alike. The first single from the album, &quot;Los Angeloser&quot;, was released for download on April 5 with the album charting at number 4 in the UK Albums Chart on April 25, 2010. The Hang Cool Tour followed in the United States, United Kingdom, and Canada. Patti Russo accompanied him on the tour, continuing through mid-2011.

===2010s===

&quot;Hell in a Handbasket&quot;, released in October 2011 for Australia and New Zealand, and February 2012 for the rest of the world, was recorded and produced by Paul Crook; Doug McKean did the mix with input from Rob Cavallo. The album features songs called &quot;All of Me&quot;, &quot;Blue Sky&quot;, &quot;The Giving Tree&quot;, &quot;Mad, Mad World&quot;, and a duet with Patti Russo called &quot;Our Love and Our Souls.&quot;

At the 2011 AFL Grand Final, the pre-match entertainment was headlined by a 12-minute medley performed by Meat Loaf. The performance was panned as the worst in the 34-year history of AFL Grand Final pre-game entertainment in a multitude of online reviews by football fans and Australian sport commentators. Meat Loaf responded by calling online critics &quot;butt-smellers&quot;, and the AFL &quot;jerks&quot;, vowing to convince other artists not to play at the event.

In 2011, Meat Loaf planned to release a Christmas album called &quot;Hot Holidays&quot; featuring Garth Brooks and Reba McEntire, but the album was never released.

In September 2016, &quot;Braver Than We Are&quot;, a 10-track album created with Jim Steinman, was released. Meat Loaf recorded reworked versions of Steinman&#x27;s songs &quot;Braver Than We Are&quot;, &quot;Speaking in Tongues&quot;, &quot;Who Needs the Young&quot;, and &quot;More&quot; (previously recorded by the Sisters of Mercy) for the album. Additionally, the song &quot;Prize Fight Lover&quot;, originally issued as a download-only bonus track for &quot;Hang Cool Teddy Bear&quot;, was re-recorded for the album.

===Later projects and Jim Steinman&#x27;s death===
In January 2020, during an interview for &quot;The Mirror&quot;, Meat Loaf announced, &quot;I&#x27;m not old. I&#x27;ve got songs for another record and I&#x27;m reading a script.&quot; In a February 2020 Facebook post, Meat Loaf announced his intention to record a new album containing &#x27;four or five new tracks&#x27;, including Steinman&#x27;s &quot;What Part of My Body Hurts the Most&quot; (a song long requested by fans, but previously under contract restrictions for the &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; musical), along with the original 1975 demo recordings made for the &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; album. Meat Loaf&#x27;s longtime collaborator Jim Steinman died on April 19, 2021, of kidney failure.

In a Facebook post in November 2021, he further elaborated that he and his band would be returning to the studio in January 2022 to record seven new songs for a forthcoming album, which would also include live tracks from the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. However, on January 20, 2022, he died at age 74. At the time of his death, the recording process had not yet begun.

===Acting===
In addition to his role in 1975 for &quot;Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot;, Meat Loaf also had a career as an actor in television and film. 1992 he was a main character in Leap Of Faith where he played as the band director/bus driver/piano player, He also played a small role as a doorman/bouncer in &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot;. He appeared as the Spice Girls&#x27; bus driver in the 1997 movie &quot;Spice World&quot; and as Red in the 1998 thriller/drama film &quot;Black Dog&quot; alongside Patrick Swayze and Randy Travis. In David Fincher&#x27;s 1999 film &quot;Fight Club&quot; he played Robert Paulsen, a man who joins a men&#x27;s self-help group. He also reportedly assisted director David Fincher with the editing of the film.

In 2000, he played a character in the sixth-season episode &quot;Gettysburg&quot; of &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;. Meat Loaf appears (uncredited) as Jack Black&#x27;s father in the 2006 film &quot;Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny&quot;, providing vocals on the film&#x27;s opening song &quot;Kickapoo.&quot;

In 2009, Meat Loaf acted in &quot;House (TV Series)&quot; S5 E20 &quot;Simple Explanation&quot;, playing Eddie - a husband who is determined to die in order to donate his liver to his wife.

On October 26, 2010, Meat Loaf (credited as Meat Loaf Aday) appeared on the Fox television series &quot;Glee&quot; in &quot;The Rocky Horror Glee Show&quot;, the series&#x27; tribute episode to &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot;. In 2011, he was a contestant in season 11 of &quot;Celebrity Apprentice&quot;, during which he was eliminated after task number 12. In the course of the contest he had a notable dramatic showdown with fellow contestant Gary Busey which was then televised.

==Personal life==
===Family and residences===

In December 1978, Meat Loaf went to work with Steinman in Woodstock, New York, where his future wife, Leslie G. Edmonds, was working as a secretary at Bearsville Studios; they were married in early 1979. From a previous marriage, Leslie had a daughter named Pearl, who later married Anthrax rhythm guitarist Scott Ian. Meat Loaf adopted Pearl in 1979, and her last name was changed to Aday. Also in 1979, he and his family moved to a house on Eagle Drive in Stamford, Connecticut. In 1981, Leslie gave birth to Amanda Aday, later a television actress. For a brief time after Amanda&#x27;s birth, they lived in Westport, Connecticut. He coached children&#x27;s baseball or softball in each of the Connecticut towns where he lived, including for his daughter&#x27;s team at Joel Barlow High School. He lived on Orchard Drive in Redding, Connecticut, from 1989 to 1998. He had also lived on Beach Road in Fairfield, Connecticut. In February 1998, the family purchased a house in Beverly Hills, California for $1.6 million. Meat Loaf and Leslie divorced in 2001.

In 2001, he sold his 5,083-square-foot house in Mandeville Canyon near Los Angeles to Greg Kinnear for $3.6 million. In 2003, the BBC said that he was seeking a residence in Hartlepool; Meat Loaf supported Hartlepool United F.C. In May 2005, he purchased a 7,142-square-foot Spanish-style home off Mulholland Highway in Calabasas, California, for $2,999,000; he sold it for $3,065,000 in May 2011.

Meat Loaf married Deborah Gillespie in 2007. In May 2012, he moved to Austin, Texas, purchasing a newly constructed 5,200-square-foot house at 17701 Flagler Drive for $1,475,000. Before his death, he lived in Brentwood, Tennessee.

===Name change===
In 1984, Meat Loaf legally changed his first name from Marvin to Michael because he was &quot;haunted&quot; by a Levi Strauss &amp; Co. commercial which—according to him—contained the line “Poor fat Marvin can&#x27;t wear Levi&#x27;s.”

===Sports===
Meat Loaf was a fan of the New York Yankees. He got Phil Rizzuto to recite the play-by-play of a young man racing around the bases in &quot;Paradise by the Dashboard Light&quot;. He participated in multiple fantasy baseball leagues every season. He also expressed support for the English Association football team Hartlepool United F.C. In June 2008, he took part in a football penalty shootout competition on behalf of two cancer charities in Newcastle upon Tyne. He auctioned shots to the 100 highest bidders and then took his place between the goal posts. He also participated in celebrity golf tournaments. In April 2005, he was one of the celebrity drivers in the 2005 Toyota Pro/Celebrity Race, finishing seventh among the 12 celebrity drivers in the race.

===Social anxiety===
He revealed that he had social anxiety and said, &quot;I never meet anybody much in a social situation because when I go into a social situation, I have no idea what to do.&quot; He said that he does not &quot;even go anywhere&quot; and that he felt that he led a &quot;boring life&quot;, in having said that he &quot;completely freaked&quot; when having to attend a party and that he was &quot;so nervous, so scared&quot; of the idea. He also said that he spent time with fellow musicians mainly in work-related situations rather than social ones. He also said that as a kid, &quot;Being too fat to play with the other children, I had to spend a lot of time alone, which probably has a lot to do with the way I am today. I&#x27;m usually alone in my hotel room from right after the show until the next day&#x27;s sound check. And I&#x27;m never bored; I don&#x27;t get bored. Probably because mothers wouldn&#x27;t let their kids play with me.&quot;

===Vegetarianism===
Meat Loaf was a vegetarian from 1981 to 1992. Discussing the confusion caused by his contrasting stage name and dietary habits, he once told &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;, &quot;There&#x27;ve been vegetarians who wouldn&#x27;t speak to me because of my name. I was sitting with Jon Bon Jovi at one of those awards things, and I say, &#x27;Oh, man, I love k.d. lang. I&#x27;d really like to meet her.&#x27; They went to find out if it was okay, and she goes, &#x27;No. His name is Meat Loaf.&#x27; I stopped being a k.d. lang fan after that.&quot; He declared in 2019 that he would try veganism for Veganuary in 2020 and would be partnering with UK restaurant chain Frankie &amp; Benny&#x27;s to promote its vegan options.

===Religion===
Although he did not belong to any faith-based institution, Meat Loaf was religious. While growing up, he attended church with his mother and studied the Bible, which influenced his work. Several of his songs, such as &quot;40 Days&quot; and &quot;Fall from Grace&quot;, have religious themes. He prayed every night.

===Politics===
====Political affiliations====
Meat Loaf was not officially registered with any political party. In 1997, he performed at an inaugural ball during the second inauguration of Bill Clinton, and attended the first inauguration of George W. Bush in 2001. He donated to the presidential campaigns of Republican candidates Rick Santorum and John McCain, the latter of whom became the party&#x27;s nominee in the 2008 United States presidential election.

On October 25, 2012, Meat Loaf endorsed Mitt Romney for president, citing poor Russia–United States relations as a major reason he had been &quot;arguing for Mitt Romney for a year.&quot; He said, &quot;I have never been in any political agenda in my life, but I think that in 2012 this is the most important election in the history of the United States.&quot; He then said there are &quot;storm clouds&quot; over the United States and &quot;thunder storms&quot; over Europe: &quot;There are hail storms – and I mean major hail storms! – in the Middle East. There are storms brewing through China, through Asia, through everywhere.&quot; The same day, he performed &quot;America the Beautiful&quot; standing next to Romney.

In a 2017 interview with &quot;Billboard&quot;, he made positive remarks about President Donald Trump, Ivanka Trump, and Donald Trump Jr.; they had worked together on &quot;The Celebrity Apprentice&quot; in 2011. When asked if he would vote for Trump, Meat Loaf said: &quot;I would vote for you. In fact, I&#x27;ll help you with your campaign.&quot; In 2020, however, he said he was not 100% supportive of Trump.

====Climate change views====
Meat Loaf said that he did not believe in climate change. In an interview with the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; in 2020, he called Greta Thunberg &quot;brainwashed&quot; due to her views on climate change, saying: &quot;I feel for that Greta. She has been brainwashed into thinking that there is climate change and there isn&#x27;t. She hasn&#x27;t done anything wrong but she&#x27;s been forced into thinking that what she is saying is true.”

====Criticism of COVID-19 rules====
He was critical of the COVID-19 lockdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic, telling the &quot;Pittsburgh Post-Gazette&quot; in August 2021: &quot;I hug people in the middle of COVID ... I understood stopping life for a little while, but they cannot continue to stop life because of politics.&quot; He opposed mask mandates and described a person who called for people on airplanes to wear masks as a &quot;Nazi&quot; and &quot;power-mad.&quot; Meat Loaf then said: &quot;If I die, I die, but I&#x27;m not going to be controlled.&quot;

===Health===

In 2003, Meat Loaf was diagnosed with Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome, a condition marked by an extra electrical pathway in the heart that causes symptoms like a rapid heartbeat. Meat Loaf had asthma and, in July 2011, he fainted on stage while performing in Pittsburgh due to an asthma attack.

He collapsed again while on stage in Edmonton in June 2016 due to severe dehydration, after having already canceled two other shows due to illness. The playback containing his pre-recorded, voice-over vocal track continued while he lay unconscious on the stage, which caused controversy over lip syncing, claims that Meat Loaf denied, saying that his mic was live. After the incident, Meat Loaf used acupuncture, physical therapy and a trainer for four days a week, an hour and a half each session. Meat Loaf had emergency back surgery in November 2016 including a spinal fusion due to a cyst that was pinching nerves, and in 2019, he was using a cane and a wheelchair to get around.

At the 2019 Texas Frightmare Weekend at the Hyatt Regency DFW hotel, Meat Loaf fell off an interview stage and broke his clavicle. Meat Loaf and his wife sued Texas Frightmare Weekend and Hyatt due to the accident.

===Death===
Meat Loaf died in Nashville, Tennessee, on the evening of January 20, 2022, at the age of 74. No official cause of death was released. He was reportedly ill with COVID-19 earlier in January, and reporting by TMZ suggested that he died from COVID-19 complications. As his health rapidly declined, his two daughters rushed to see him in the hospital with his wife being beside him as he died. His daughter had posted to Instagram in early January that: &quot;We are not sick, but we have too many friends and family testing positive [for COVID-19] right now, positive but doing OK.&quot; Notable people who posted tributes include Bonnie Tyler, Cher, Brian May, Boy George, Travis Tritt, Marlee Matlin, Stephen Fry, and his &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; co-star Nell Campbell. The Queen&#x27;s Guard performed a rendition of &quot;I&#x27;d Do Anything for Love (But I Won&#x27;t Do That).&quot;

==Discography==
 
* &quot;Bat Out of Hell&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Dead Ringer&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Midnight at the Lost and Found&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Bad Attitude&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Blind Before I Stop&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Welcome to the Neighbourhood&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Couldn&#x27;t Have Said It Better&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Hang Cool Teddy Bear&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Hell in a Handbasket&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Braver Than We Are&quot; (2016)
==Tours==
* Bat Out Of Hell (1977–1978)
* Neverland Express &#x27;81-&#x27;82 Tour (1981)
* In Euro &#x27;82 (1982)
* World Tour &#x27;83 (1983)
* Bad Attitude Tour &#x27;84/585 (1984–1985)
* 20/20 World Tour (1987)
* Lost Boys and Golden Girls World Tour (1988)
* World Tour &#x27;89 (1989)
* Irish Tour (1990)
* World Tour &#x27;90 (1990)
* Tour 1991 (1991)
* Bat Out Of Hell II: Back Into Hell Tour (1993)
* Everything Louder World Tour (1993–1994)
* Born To Rock Tour (1996)
* The Giants of Rock In Concert (1997)
* Meat Loaf &#x27;99 / The Very Best Of Tour (1999)
* VH1 Storytellers Tour (1999–2000)
* Night of the Proms (2001)
* Just Having Fun With Friends Tour (2002–2003)
* The Last World Tour (2003–2004)
* Hair Of The Dog Tour (2005)
* The Bases Are Loaded Tour (2006)
* The Seize the Night Tour (2007)
* The Casa de Carne Tour (2008)
* Hang Cool Tour (2010–2011)
* Guilty Pleasure Tour (2011)
* Mad Mad World Tour (2012)
* Last at Bat Tour (2013)
* Rocktellz &amp; Cocktails (2013–2014)
* In Concert Tour (2015–2016)
Note: Meat Loaf&#x27;s band The Neverland Express has since continued with American Idol winner Caleb Johnson


==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
==Books==

==See also==
* List of bestselling music artists

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152929" start="0" end="16" title="Meat Loaf" label="Michael Lee Aday"/>
<link wikidata="Q152929" start="23" end="38" title="Meat Loaf" label="Marvin Lee Aday"/>
<link wikidata="Q152929" start="111" end="120" title="Meat Loaf" label="Meat Loaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q776064" start="285" end="300" title="Bat Out of Hell" label="Bat Out of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="321" end="355" title="Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell" label="Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="380" end="421" title="Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose" label="Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="507" end="545" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling music artists of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="622" end="652" title="List of best-selling albums" label="best-selling albums in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542199" start="836" end="885" title="Grammy Award for Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q573354" start="905" end="934" title="I&amp;#x27;d Do Anything for Love (But I Won&amp;#x27;t Do That)" label="I&amp;#x27;d Do Anything for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="1186" end="1196" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="1347" end="1350" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q751921" start="1580" end="1609" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137856" start="1648" end="1659" title="Spice World (film)" label="Spice World"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="1702" end="1712" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1784" end="1792" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="1807" end="1828" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="1874" end="1878" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="1898" end="1910" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="1955" end="1961" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1963" end="1968" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="2092" end="2104" title="gospel music" label="gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3050" end="3059" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3067" end="3079" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="3120" end="3132" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortar shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q366732" start="3292" end="3303" title="Bible study (Christianity)" label="Bible study"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="3376" end="3408" title="assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q613569" start="3476" end="3493" title="Dallas Love Field" label="Dallas Love Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896131" start="3566" end="3583" title="Parkland Hospital" label="Parkland Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="3603" end="3629" title="Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis" label="Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791260" start="3760" end="3788" title="Thomas Jefferson High School (Dallas)" label="Thomas Jefferson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993096" start="3848" end="3869" title="Where&amp;#x27;s Charley?" label="Where&amp;#x27;s Charley?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457220" start="3886" end="3899" title="The Music Man" label="The Music Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550304" start="3943" end="3959" title="defensive tackle" label="defensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695115" start="3988" end="4013" title="Lubbock Christian University" label="Lubbock Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q860527" start="4071" end="4096" title="University of North Texas" label="University of North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="4573" end="4593" title="physical examination" label="physical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304775" start="4602" end="4619" title="Draft lottery (1969)" label="Vietnam War draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917" start="4919" end="4947" title="Huntington Beach, California" label="Huntington Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="4981" end="4993" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338638" start="5006" end="5010" title="Them (band)" label="Them"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887722" start="5015" end="5047" title="Question Mark and the Mysterians" label="Question Mark and the Mysterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="5352" end="5359" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q928304" start="5361" end="5369" title="the Fugs" label="the Fugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="5371" end="5382" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q830316" start="5384" end="5387" title="MC5" label="MC5"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="5393" end="5406" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q463025" start="5412" end="5427" title="the Grease Band" label="the Grease Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="5613" end="5617" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="5679" end="5683" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="5727" end="5733" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277408" start="5928" end="5959" title="Shaun Murphy (singer)" label="Shaun &amp;quot;Stoney&amp;quot; Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277307" start="6057" end="6078" title="Stoney &amp;amp; Meatloaf" label="Stoney &amp;amp; Meatloaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="6247" end="6272" title="Best Selling Soul Singles" label="Best Selling Soul Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="6300" end="6329" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070277" start="6370" end="6402" title="Jake Wade and the Soul Searchers" label="Jake Wade and the Soul Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q505285" start="6416" end="6429" title="Richie Havens" label="Richie Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="6431" end="6438" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="6440" end="6451" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q364131" start="6453" end="6462" title="Bob Seger" label="Bob Seger"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="6464" end="6476" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131764" start="6482" end="6492" title="Rare Earth (band)" label="Rare Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q708136" start="6667" end="6678" title="Edwin Starr" label="Edwin Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862998" start="6692" end="6710" title="Freeland, Michigan" label="Freeland, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595302" start="6753" end="6768" title="Grande Ballroom" label="Grande Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="6828" end="6840" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103965" start="6882" end="6897" title="Orpheum Theatre (Manhattan)" label="Orpheum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="6991" end="7007" title="Broadway theater" label="Broadway theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="7056" end="7070" title="Public Theater" label="Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911112" start="7098" end="7119" title="More Than You Deserve" label="More Than You Deserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q281908" start="7162" end="7174" title="Jim Steinman" label="Jim Steinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q382036" start="7394" end="7404" title="Ron Silver" label="Ron Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q222833" start="7409" end="7420" title="Fred Gwynne" label="Fred Gwynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013975" start="7591" end="7614" title="Shakespeare in the Park (New York City)" label="Shakespeare in the Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="7635" end="7649" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q317654" start="7661" end="7671" title="Raul Julia" label="Raul Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271460" start="7676" end="7690" title="Mary Beth Hurt" label="Mary Beth Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="7766" end="7787" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q751921" start="7877" end="7906" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q776064" start="8080" end="8095" title="Bat Out of Hell" label="Bat Out of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="8123" end="8135" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738082" start="8180" end="8195" title="Bat Out of Hell (song)" label="Bat Out of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131083" start="8209" end="8240" title="Paradise by the Dashboard Light" label="Paradise by the Dashboard Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023017" start="8254" end="8294" title="You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth" label="You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325876" start="8312" end="8343" title="Two Out of Three Ain&amp;#x27;t Bad" label="Two Out of Three Ain&amp;#x27;t Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q568770" start="8364" end="8373" title="Lou Adler" label="Lou Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513654" start="8592" end="8603" title="Stand by Me (Ben E. King song)" label="Stand by Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q356140" start="8613" end="8624" title="Ben E. King" label="Ben E. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066666" start="8760" end="8772" title="Nowhere Fast (Fire Inc. song)" label="Nowhere Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q334670" start="8832" end="8842" title="Ted Nugent" label="Ted Nugent"/>
<link wikidata="Q846531" start="8862" end="8874" title="Free-for-All (Ted Nugent album)" label="Free-for-All"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705848" start="8915" end="8931" title="Derek St. Holmes" label="Derek St. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112833" start="9141" end="9155" title="Gower Champion" label="Gower Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354928" start="9182" end="9197" title="Rockabye Hamlet" label="Rockabye Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23858" start="9500" end="9512" title="John Belushi" label="John Belushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q126870378" start="9522" end="9547" title="The National Lampoon Show" label="The National Lampoon Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q273509" start="9613" end="9624" title="Ellen Foley" label="Ellen Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="9952" end="9966" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="9974" end="9987" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601575" start="10152" end="10158" title="Utopia (American band)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q553264" start="10163" end="10175" title="Max Weinberg" label="Max Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613638" start="10249" end="10263" title="Steve Popovich" label="Steve Popovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271458" start="10271" end="10302" title="Cleveland International Records" label="Cleveland International Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982206" start="10413" end="10430" title="Neverland Express" label="Neverland Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="10514" end="10525" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="10603" end="10622" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="10689" end="10695" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="10761" end="10771" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="11133" end="11148" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q695405" start="11193" end="11200" title="Rumours (album)" label="Rumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="11210" end="11223" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="11269" end="11277" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q183321" start="11532" end="11544" title="Bad for Good" label="Bad for Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155931" start="11955" end="11961" title="Roadie (1980 film)" label="Roadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180846" start="12055" end="12066" title="Dead Ringer (album)" label="Dead Ringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608131" start="12374" end="12388" title="Stephan Galfas" label="Stephan Galfas"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="12422" end="12435" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q718427" start="12437" end="12449" title="Jimmy Iovine" label="Jimmy Iovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046521" start="12543" end="12569" title="Intergalactic Touring Band" label="Intergalactic Touring Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245366" start="12631" end="12651" title="Dead Ringer for Love" label="Dead Ringer for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="12861" end="12865" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="13003" end="13022" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="13100" end="13109" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q922897" start="13483" end="13513" title="Midnight at the Lost and Found" label="Midnight at the Lost and Found"/>
<link wikidata="Q138410" start="13602" end="13628" title="Total Eclipse of the Heart" label="Total Eclipse of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163857" start="13645" end="13678" title="Making Love Out of Nothing at All" label="Making Love Out of Nothing at All"/>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="13849" end="13861" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Bonnie Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q407814" start="13904" end="13914" title="Air Supply" label="Air Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="14211" end="14227" title="money management" label="money management"/>
<link wikidata="Q674293" start="14338" end="14357" title="personal bankruptcy" label="personal bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q798627" start="14607" end="14619" title="Bad Attitude (album)" label="Bad Attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066666" start="14721" end="14733" title="Nowhere Fast (Fire Inc. song)" label="Nowhere Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="14952" end="14959" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q311672" start="14979" end="14992" title="Roger Daltrey" label="Roger Daltrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859942" start="15093" end="15104" title="Modern Girl (Meat Loaf song)" label="Modern Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="15180" end="15191" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="15258" end="15269" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q326052" start="15305" end="15314" title="John Parr" label="John Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q884115" start="15340" end="15359" title="Blind Before I Stop" label="Blind Before I Stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q664167" start="15397" end="15411" title="Arista Records" label="Arista Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q62437" start="15470" end="15482" title="Frank Farian" label="Frank Farian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990842" start="15659" end="15673" title="Thrashin&amp;#x27; (film)" label="Thrashin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436141" start="15693" end="15706" title="David Winters (choreographer)" label="David Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q41396" start="15720" end="15731" title="Josh Brolin" label="Josh Brolin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15868" end="15902" title="Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell" label="Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q573354" start="16072" end="16128" title="I&amp;#x27;d Do Anything for Love (But I Won&amp;#x27;t Do That)" label="I&amp;#x27;d Do Anything for Love (But I Won&amp;#x27;t Do That)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542298" start="16193" end="16218" title="36th Annual Grammy Awards" label="36th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542199" start="16238" end="16288" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Vocal Performance, Solo" label="Grammy Award for Best Rock Vocal Performance, Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q666199" start="16527" end="16542" title="Lorraine Crosby" label="Lorraine Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q469753" start="16621" end="16632" title="Patti Russo" label="Patti Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="16738" end="16762" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="16776" end="16811" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="Major League Baseball All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354764" start="16842" end="16875" title="Rock and Roll Dreams Come Through" label="Rock and Roll Dreams Come Through"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807078" start="16987" end="17014" title="Welcome to the Neighbourhood (Meat Loaf album)" label="Welcome to the Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="17037" end="17045" title="platinum record" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965534" start="17154" end="17202" title="I&amp;#x27;d Lie for You (And That&amp;#x27;s the Truth)" label="I&amp;#x27;d Lie for You (And That&amp;#x27;s the Truth)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062258" start="17284" end="17310" title="Not a Dry Eye in the House" label="Not a Dry Eye in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q469753" start="17433" end="17444" title="Patti Russo" label="Patti Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q507007" start="17642" end="17660" title="Pandora&amp;#x27;s Box (band)" label="Pandora&amp;#x27;s Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279837" start="17827" end="17834" title="Emotion (Barbra Streisand album)" label="Emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="17844" end="17860" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q237354" start="18002" end="18014" title="Diane Warren" label="Diane Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q642860" start="18051" end="18077" title="The Very Best of Meat Loaf" label="The Very Best of Meat Loaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="18154" end="18173" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238931" start="18187" end="18196" title="Don Black (lyricist)" label="Don Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075472" start="18204" end="18221" title="Is Nothing Sacred" label="Is Nothing Sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136946" start="18424" end="18457" title="Couldn&amp;#x27;t Have Said It Better" label="Couldn&amp;#x27;t Have Said It Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="18908" end="18923" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601638" start="19083" end="19103" title="2003 NRL Grand Final" label="2003 NRL Grand Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="19107" end="19113" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q237354" start="19163" end="19175" title="Diane Warren" label="Diane Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333800" start="19180" end="19193" title="James Michael" label="James Michael"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19254" end="19295" title="Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose" label="Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose"/>
<link wikidata="Q513336" start="19375" end="19385" title="Pearl Aday" label="Pearl Aday"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="19448" end="19461" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q925092" start="19566" end="19596" title="Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome" label="Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q667360" start="20002" end="20030" title="Melbourne Symphony Orchestra" label="Melbourne Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20082" end="20141" title="Bat Out of Hell: Live with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra" label="Bat Out of Hell: Live with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823902" start="20179" end="20206" title="Australian Boys&amp;#x27; Choir" label="Australian Boys&amp;#x27; Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q733027" start="21067" end="21077" title="Dan Rather" label="Dan Rather"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21276" end="21317" title="Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose" label="Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose"/>
<link wikidata="Q453987" start="21378" end="21391" title="Desmond Child" label="Desmond Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560535" start="21431" end="21466" title="It&amp;#x27;s All Coming Back to Me Now" label="It&amp;#x27;s All Coming Back to Me Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q233393" start="21484" end="21496" title="Marion Raven" label="Marion Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q469753" start="21886" end="21897" title="Patti Russo" label="Patti Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192410" start="21902" end="21917" title="Jennifer Hudson" label="Jennifer Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982206" start="21996" end="22013" title="Neverland Express" label="Neverland Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="22173" end="22196" title="London Stansted Airport" label="London Stansted Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763247" start="22275" end="22299" title="The Seize the Night Tour" label="The Seize the Night Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q233393" start="22306" end="22318" title="Marion Raven" label="Marion Raven"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22426" end="22458" title="Meat Loaf: In Search of Paradise" label="Meat Loaf: In Search of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977350" start="22478" end="22495" title="Bruce David Klein" label="Bruce David Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q326220" start="22539" end="22567" title="Montreal World Film Festival" label="Montreal World Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647917" start="22678" end="22695" title="Metro Radio Arena" label="Metro Radio Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="22699" end="22718" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="22973" end="22983" title="fatigue" label="exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="22988" end="22994" title="Stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146481" start="23107" end="23110" title="National Exhibition Centre" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461465" start="23115" end="23144" title="Manchester Evening News Arena" label="Manchester Evening News Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194557" start="23182" end="23192" title="laryngitis" label="laryngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="23300" end="23313" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q193211" start="23415" end="23419" title="cyst" label="cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721471" start="23475" end="23497" title="The Casa de Carne Tour" label="The Casa de Carne Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="23501" end="23509" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575452" start="23907" end="23927" title="Hang Cool Teddy Bear" label="Hang Cool Teddy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="23953" end="23962" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="23976" end="23990" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q950350" start="24012" end="24023" title="Rob Cavallo" label="Rob Cavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q552608" start="24054" end="24068" title="Justin Hawkins" label="Justin Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819516" start="24098" end="24113" title="Tommy Henriksen" label="Tommy Henriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150916" start="24119" end="24131" title="Jon Bon Jovi" label="Jon Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="24370" end="24381" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="24386" end="24396" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="24616" end="24625" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="24629" end="24634" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193397" start="24665" end="24674" title="Steve Vai" label="Steve Vai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12019459" start="25077" end="25097" title="Hell in a Handbasket" label="Hell in a Handbasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150025" start="25235" end="25245" title="Paul Crook" label="Paul Crook"/>
<link wikidata="Q950350" start="25287" end="25298" title="Rob Cavallo" label="Rob Cavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620225" start="25513" end="25533" title="2011 AFL Grand Final" label="2011 AFL Grand Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q216288" start="26075" end="26087" title="Garth Brooks" label="Garth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q229430" start="26092" end="26105" title="Reba McEntire" label="Reba McEntire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890300" start="26167" end="26185" title="Braver Than We Are" label="Braver Than We Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910883" start="26421" end="26425" title="More (The Sisters of Mercy song)" label="More"/>
<link wikidata="Q751814" start="26456" end="26476" title="the Sisters of Mercy" label="the Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196673" start="27984" end="27997" title="Leap of Faith (film)" label="Leap Of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="28118" end="28136" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="28163" end="28174" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137856" start="28216" end="28227" title="Spice World (film)" label="Spice World"/>
<link wikidata="Q880226" start="28283" end="28292" title="Black Dog (1998 film)" label="Black Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="28309" end="28323" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q467519" start="28328" end="28340" title="Randy Travis" label="Randy Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="28345" end="28358" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="28382" end="28392" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="28508" end="28521" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545617" start="28618" end="28628" title="Gettysburg (The Outer Limits)" label="Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621450" start="28644" end="28660" title="The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="28702" end="28712" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q667799" start="28750" end="28784" title="Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny" label="Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006933" start="28847" end="28855" title="Kickapoo (song)" label="Kickapoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23558" start="28898" end="28915" title="House (TV Series)" label="House (TV Series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="29131" end="29134" title="Fox Broadcasting Network" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="29159" end="29163" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981329" start="29179" end="29205" title="The Rocky Horror Glee Show" label="The Rocky Horror Glee Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714050" start="29324" end="29333" title="The Apprentice (American season 11)" label="season 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002038" start="29343" end="29363" title="Celebrity Apprentice" label="Celebrity Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q312081" start="29511" end="29521" title="Gary Busey" label="Gary Busey"/>
<link wikidata="Q608293" start="29654" end="29673" title="Woodstock, New York" label="Woodstock, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876788" start="29747" end="29765" title="Bearsville Studios" label="Bearsville Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q513336" start="29854" end="29859" title="Pearl Aday" label="Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q109871" start="29879" end="29886" title="Anthrax (American band)" label="Anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q360485" start="29904" end="29913" title="Scott Ian" label="Scott Ian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49169" start="30054" end="30075" title="Stamford, Connecticut" label="Stamford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739544" start="30107" end="30118" title="Amanda Aday" label="Amanda Aday"/>
<link wikidata="Q586762" start="30206" end="30227" title="Westport, Connecticut" label="Westport, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213210" start="30368" end="30391" title="Joel Barlow High School" label="Joel Barlow High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018185" start="30422" end="30442" title="Redding, Connecticut" label="Redding, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q754635" start="30498" end="30520" title="Fairfield, Connecticut" label="Fairfield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="30572" end="30597" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q909975" start="30704" end="30721" title="Mandeville Canyon" label="Mandeville Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269869" start="30742" end="30754" title="Greg Kinnear" label="Greg Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="30786" end="30789" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q215752" start="30830" end="30840" title="Hartlepool" label="Hartlepool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592" start="30862" end="30884" title="Hartlepool United F.C." label="Hartlepool United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3327598" start="30954" end="30972" title="Mulholland Highway" label="Mulholland Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q629088" start="30976" end="30997" title="Calabasas, California" label="Calabasas, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="31125" end="31138" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096621" start="31264" end="31284" title="Brentwood, Tennessee" label="Brentwood, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962" start="31418" end="31440" title="Levi Strauss &amp;amp; Co." label="Levi Strauss &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="31582" end="31598" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030203" start="31607" end="31619" title="Phil Rizzuto" label="Phil Rizzuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="31634" end="31646" title="play-by-play" label="play-by-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364863" start="31762" end="31778" title="fantasy baseball" label="fantasy baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592" start="31869" end="31891" title="Hartlepool United F.C." label="Hartlepool United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3334022" start="31933" end="31949" title="penalty shootout" label="penalty shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="31999" end="32018" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830859" start="32229" end="32254" title="Toyota Pro/Celebrity Race" label="Toyota Pro/Celebrity Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557657" start="32364" end="32378" title="social anxiety" label="social anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="33459" end="33479" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q150916" start="33593" end="33605" title="Jon Bon Jovi" label="Jon Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q230454" start="33670" end="33679" title="k.d. lang" label="k.d. lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="33900" end="33908" title="veganism" label="veganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074850" start="33913" end="33922" title="Veganuary" label="Veganuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490892" start="33980" end="34006" title="Frankie &amp;amp; Benny&amp;#x27;s" label="Frankie &amp;amp; Benny&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893163" start="34510" end="34524" title="United States presidential inaugural balls" label="inaugural ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443711" start="34536" end="34571" title="second inauguration of Bill Clinton" label="second inauguration of Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454187" start="34590" end="34626" title="first inauguration of George W. Bush" label="first inauguration of George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q155985" start="34702" end="34715" title="Rick Santorum" label="Rick Santorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="34720" end="34731" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="34791" end="34831" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="34874" end="34885" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631417" start="34913" end="34943" title="Russia–United States relations" label="Russia–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q463167" start="35505" end="35526" title="America the Beautiful" label="America the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="35590" end="35599" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="35648" end="35660" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q239411" start="35662" end="35674" title="Ivanka Trump" label="Ivanka Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3713655" start="35680" end="35696" title="Donald Trump Jr." label="Donald Trump Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2002038" start="35732" end="35756" title="The Celebrity Apprentice" label="The Celebrity Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="36091" end="36101" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q56434717" start="36127" end="36141" title="Greta Thunberg" label="Greta Thunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q87866152" start="36500" end="36518" title="COVID-19 lockdowns" label="COVID-19 lockdowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="36530" end="36547" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063794" start="36567" end="36590" title="Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" label="Pittsburgh Post-Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q90416196" start="36782" end="36794" title="mask mandate" label="mask mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="36879" end="36883" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q925092" start="37061" end="37091" title="Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome" label="Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="37215" end="37221" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="37281" end="37291" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="37302" end="37315" title="asthma attack" label="asthma attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="37355" end="37363" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="37610" end="37618" title="lip sync" label="lip sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="37718" end="37729" title="acupuncture" label="acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="37731" end="37747" title="physical therapy" label="physical therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q770609" start="37883" end="37896" title="spinal fusion" label="spinal fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193211" start="37906" end="37910" title="cyst" label="cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707704" start="38015" end="38039" title="Texas Frightmare Weekend" label="Texas Frightmare Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425063" start="38047" end="38052" title="Hyatt" label="Hyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="38124" end="38132" title="clavicle" label="clavicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="38249" end="38269" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931388" start="38337" end="38351" title="cause of death" label="cause of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630118" start="38439" end="38442" title="TMZ" label="TMZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="38649" end="38658" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="38860" end="38872" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Bonnie Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="38874" end="38878" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="38880" end="38889" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="38891" end="38901" title="Boy George" label="Boy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q188235" start="38903" end="38915" title="Travis Tritt" label="Travis Tritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213287" start="38917" end="38930" title="Marlee Matlin" label="Marlee Matlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="38932" end="38943" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q273092" start="38986" end="38999" title="Nell Campbell" label="Nell Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179989" start="39005" end="39023" title="King&amp;#x27;s Guard" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q573354" start="39055" end="39111" title="I&amp;#x27;d Do Anything for Love (But I Won&amp;#x27;t Do That)" label="I&amp;#x27;d Do Anything for Love (But I Won&amp;#x27;t Do That)"/>
<link wikidata="Q776064" start="39146" end="39161" title="Bat Out of Hell" label="Bat Out of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180846" start="39183" end="39194" title="Dead Ringer (album)" label="Dead Ringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q922897" start="39216" end="39246" title="Midnight at the Lost and Found" label="Midnight at the Lost and Found"/>
<link wikidata="Q798627" start="39268" end="39280" title="Bad Attitude (album)" label="Bad Attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q884115" start="39302" end="39321" title="Blind Before I Stop" label="Blind Before I Stop"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39343" end="39377" title="Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell" label="Bat Out of Hell II: Back into Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807078" start="39399" end="39427" title="Welcome to the Neighbourhood (Meat Loaf album)" label="Welcome to the Neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136946" start="39449" end="39482" title="Couldn&amp;#x27;t Have Said It Better" label="Couldn&amp;#x27;t Have Said It Better"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39504" end="39545" title="Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose" label="Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575452" start="39567" end="39587" title="Hang Cool Teddy Bear" label="Hang Cool Teddy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q12019459" start="39609" end="39629" title="Hell in a Handbasket" label="Hell in a Handbasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890300" start="39651" end="39669" title="Braver Than We Are" label="Braver Than We Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425399" start="40291" end="40309" title="Night of the Proms" label="Night of the Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763247" start="40466" end="40490" title="The Seize the Night Tour" label="The Seize the Night Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721471" start="40500" end="40522" title="The Casa de Carne Tour" label="The Casa de Carne Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616389" start="40561" end="40581" title="Guilty Pleasure Tour" label="Guilty Pleasure Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725883" start="40591" end="40609" title="Mad Mad World Tour" label="Mad Mad World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494121" start="40619" end="40635" title="Last at Bat Tour" label="Last at Bat Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982206" start="40745" end="40762" title="Neverland Express" label="Neverland Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233888" start="40809" end="40822" title="Caleb Johnson" label="Caleb Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="40895" end="40928" title="List of bestselling music artists" label="List of bestselling music artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21027" wikidata="Q6628565" url="?curid=21027" title="List of military tactics">
<text>This article contains a list of military tactics.

The meaning of the phrase is context sensitive, and has varied over time, like the difference between &quot;strategy&quot; and &quot;tactics&quot;.

==General==
* Exploiting prevailing weather – the tactical use of weather as a force multiplier has influenced many important battles throughout history, such as the Battle of Waterloo.
* Fire attacks – reconnaissance by fire is used by apprehensive soldiers when they suspect the enemy is nearby.
* Force concentration – the practice of concentrating a military force against a portion of an enemy force.
* Night combat – combat that takes place at night. It often requires more preparation than combat during daylight and can provide significant tactical advantages and disadvantages to both the attacker and defender.
* Reconnaissance – a mission to obtain information by visual observation or other detection methods, about the activities and resources of the enemy or potential enemy, or about the meteorologic, hydrographic, or geographic characteristics of a particular area.
* Smoke screening – the practice of creating clouds of smoke positioned to provide concealment, allowing military forces to advance or retreat across open terrain without coming under direct fire from the enemy.

==Eight classic maneuvers of warfare==

# Penetration of the center: This involves exploiting a gap in the enemy line to drive directly to the enemy&#x27;s command or base. Two ways of accomplishing this are separating enemy forces then using a reserve to exploit the gap (e.g., Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)) or having fast, elite forces smash at a weak spot (or an area where your elites are at their best in striking power) and using reserves to hold the line while the elite forces continue forward, exploiting the gap immediately (i.e., blitzkrieg).
# Attack from a defensive position: Establishing a strong defensive position from which to defend and attack your opponent (e.g., Siege of Alesia and the Battle of the Granicus). However, the defensive can become too passive and result in ultimate defeat.
# Single envelopment: A consolidated prong (flank) beating its opponent opposite end, and with the aid of holding attacks, attack an opponent in the rear. Sometimes, the establishment of a strong, hidden force behind a weak flank will prevent your opponent from carrying out their own single envelopment. (e.g., Battle of Rocroi).
# Double envelopment: Both flanks defeat their opponent opposite and launch a rear attack on the enemy center. Its most famous use was Hannibal&#x27;s tactical masterpiece, the Battle of Cannae, and it was frequently used by the Wehrmacht on the Eastern Front of World War II. It was also executed to perfection by Khalid ibn al-Walid in the decisive Battle of Yarmuk in 636 AD.
# Attack in oblique order: This involves placing your flanks in a slanted fashion (refusing one&#x27;s flank) or giving a vast part of your force to a single flank (e.g., Battle of Leuthen). The latter can be disastrous, however, due to the imbalance of force.
# Feigned retreat: Having a frontal force fake a retreat, drawing the opponent in pursuit and then launching an assault with strong force held in reserve (such as the Battle of Maling and the Battle of Hastings). However, a feigned retreat may devolve into a real one, such as in the Battle of Grunwald.
# Indirect approach: Having a minority of your force demonstrate in front of your opponent while the majority of your force advance from a hidden area and attack the enemy in the rear or flank (e.g., Battle of Chancellorsville).
# Crossing the &quot;T&quot;: a classic naval maneuver which maximizes one side&#x27;s offensive firepower while minimizing that of the opposing force (e.g., Battle of Trafalgar).

==Tactics==
===Deception===

In the 4th century BCE, Sun Tzu said &quot;the Military is a Tao of deception&quot;. Diversionary attacks, feints, decoys; there are thousands of tricks that have been successfully used in warfare, and still have a role in the modern day.
* Perfidy: Combatants tend to have assumptions and ideas of rules and fair practices in combat. Those who raise surrender flags to lure their attackers in the open, or who act as stretcher bearers to deceive their targets, tend to get especially disliked.
* False flag: An ancient ruse de guerre – in the days of sail, it was permissible for a warship to fly the flag of an enemy power, so long as it properly hoisted its true colors before attacking. Wearing enemy uniforms and using enemy equipment to infiltrate or achieve surprise is also permissible though they can be punished as spies if caught behind enemy lines.
* Demoralization (warfare): A process in psychological warfare that can encourage them to retreat, surrender, or defect by deterioration of the opposite force&#x27;s morale rather than defeating them in a regular warfare.
* Disinformation
* Military camouflage
* Stealth technology
* Feint 
* Electronic countermeasures
** Electronic counter-countermeasures
** Radio silence – while traveling, a fleet will refrain from communicating by radio to avoid detection by enemy forces 
** Holding attack

===Defensive===
Electronic countermeasures

===Offensive===
Use of a Kill zone

===Small unit===

==See also==

* List of established military terms
* List of military operations
* List of military strategies and concepts
* Military strategy
* Tactical formation

==References==
===Works cited===

==External links==
* Tactical</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="32" end="48" title="military tactics" label="military tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467476" start="279" end="295" title="force multiplier" label="force multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="366" end="384" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q264352" start="388" end="400" title="Reconnaissance by fire" label="Fire attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467464" start="500" end="519" title="Force concentration" label="Force concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962707" start="608" end="620" title="Night combat" label="Night combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="823" end="837" title="Reconnaissance" label="Reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q909879" start="1085" end="1097" title="Smoke screen" label="Smoke screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096432" start="1233" end="1245" title="open terrain" label="open terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="1267" end="1278" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200716" start="1575" end="1603" title="Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)" label="Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="1837" end="1847" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131386" start="1980" end="1995" title="Siege of Alesia" label="Siege of Alesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192938" start="2004" end="2026" title="Battle of the Granicus" label="Battle of the Granicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380926" start="2115" end="2126" title="envelopment" label="envelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q728480" start="2418" end="2434" title="Battle of Rocroi" label="Battle of Rocroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380926" start="2446" end="2457" title="envelopment" label="envelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179591" start="2614" end="2630" title="Battle of Cannae" label="Battle of Cannae"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="2666" end="2675" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q26918" start="2752" end="2771" title="Khalid ibn al-Walid" label="Khalid ibn al-Walid"/>
<link wikidata="Q194226" start="2788" end="2804" title="Battle of Yarmuk" label="Battle of Yarmuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q917047" start="2828" end="2841" title="oblique order" label="oblique order"/>
<link wikidata="Q313435" start="2987" end="3004" title="Battle of Leuthen" label="Battle of Leuthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441540" start="3079" end="3094" title="Feigned retreat" label="Feigned retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005185" start="3244" end="3260" title="Battle of Maling" label="Battle of Maling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3269" end="3287" title="Battle of Hastings#Feigned flights" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q33570" start="3361" end="3379" title="Battle of Grunwald" label="Battle of Grunwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="3581" end="3607" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="Battle of Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141302" start="3612" end="3638" title="Crossing the T" label="Crossing the &amp;quot;T&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="3768" end="3787" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37151" start="3844" end="3851" title="Sun Tzu" label="Sun Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007759" start="4061" end="4068" title="Perfidy" label="Perfidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420474" start="4317" end="4327" title="False flag" label="False flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="4645" end="4650" title="espionage" label="spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q331793" start="4683" end="4707" title="Demoralization (warfare)" label="Demoralization (warfare)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189656" start="4905" end="4919" title="Disinformation" label="Disinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q196086" start="4922" end="4941" title="Military camouflage" label="Military camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q339042" start="4944" end="4962" title="Stealth technology" label="Stealth technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q125870673" start="4965" end="4970" title="Feint" label="Feint"/>
<link wikidata="Q849203" start="4974" end="5000" title="Electronic countermeasures" label="Electronic countermeasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q998627" start="5004" end="5037" title="Electronic counter-countermeasure" label="Electronic counter-countermeasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q374165" start="5042" end="5055" title="Radio silence" label="Radio silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832578" start="5163" end="5177" title="Holding attack" label="Holding attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q849203" start="5195" end="5221" title="Electronic countermeasure" label="Electronic countermeasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407239" start="5248" end="5257" title="Kill zone" label="Kill zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963751" start="5293" end="5327" title="List of established military terms" label="List of established military terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737816" start="5330" end="5357" title="List of military operations" label="List of military operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628556" start="5360" end="5400" title="List of military strategies and concepts" label="List of military strategies and concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="5403" end="5420" title="Military strategy" label="Military strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069238" start="5423" end="5441" title="Tactical formation" label="Tactical formation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21028" wikidata="Q14643" url="?curid=21028" title="Mach (kernel)">
<text>Mach () is an operating system kernel developed at Carnegie Mellon University by Richard Rashid and Avie Tevanian to support operating system research, primarily distributed and parallel computing. Mach is often considered one of the earliest examples of a microkernel. However, not all versions of Mach are microkernels. Mach&#x27;s derivatives are the basis of the operating system kernel in GNU Hurd and of Apple&#x27;s XNU kernel used in macOS, iOS, iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS.

The project at Carnegie Mellon ran from 1985 to 1994, ending with Mach 3.0, which is a true microkernel. Mach was developed as a replacement for the kernel in the BSD version of Unix, not requiring a new operating system to be designed around it. Mach and its derivatives exist within several commercial operating systems. These include all using the XNU operating system kernel which incorporates an earlier non-microkernel Mach as a major component. The Mach virtual memory management system was also adopted in 4.4BSD by the BSD developers at CSRG, and appears in modern BSD-derived Unix systems such as FreeBSD.

Mach is the logical successor to Carnegie Mellon&#x27;s Accent kernel. Mach&#x27;s lead developer Richard Rashid has been employed at Microsoft since 1991; he founded the Microsoft Research division. Co-founding Mach developer Avie Tevanian, was formerly head of software at NeXT, then Chief Software Technology Officer at Apple Inc. until March 2006.

==History==
===Name===
The developers rode bicycles to lunch through rainy Pittsburgh&#x27;s mud puddles, and Tevanian joked the word &quot;muck&quot; could form a backronym for their Multi-User (or Multiprocessor Universal) Communication Kernel. Italian CMU engineer Dario Giuse later asked project leader Rick Rashid about the project&#x27;s current title and received &quot;MUCK&quot; as the answer, though not spelled out but just pronounced . According to the Italian alphabet, he wrote &quot;Mach&quot;. Rashid liked Giuse&#x27;s spelling &quot;Mach&quot; so much that it prevailed.

===Unix pipes===
A key concept in the original Unix operating system is the idea of a pipe. A pipe is an abstraction allowing data to be moved as an unstructured stream of bytes between programs. Using pipes, users can link together multiple programs to complete tasks, feeding data through several consecutive small programs. This contrasts with typical operating systems of the era, which require a single large program that can handle the entire task, or alternately, used files to pass data, which was resource expensive and time-consuming.

Pipes were built on the underlying input/output system. This system is, in turn, based on a model where drivers are expected to periodically &quot;block&quot; while they wait for tasks to complete. For instance, a printer driver might send a line of text to a line printer and then have nothing to do until the printer completes printing that line. In this case, the driver indicates that it was blocked, and the operating system allows some other program to run until the printer indicates it is ready for more data. In the pipes system the limited resource was memory, and when one program filled the memory assigned to the pipe, it would naturally block. Normally this would cause the consuming program to run, emptying the pipe again. In contrast to a file, where the entire file has to be read or written before the next program can use it, pipes made the movement of data across multiple programs occur in a piecemeal fashion without any programmer intervention.

However, implementing pipes in memory buffers forced data to be copied from program to program, a time-consuming and resource intensive operation. This made the pipe concept unsuitable for tasks where quick turnaround or low latency was needed, such as in most device drivers. The operating system&#x27;s kernel and most core functionality was instead written in a single large program. When new functionality, such as computer networking, was added to the operating system, the size and complexity of the kernel grew, too.

===New concepts===
Unix pipes offered a conceptual system that could be used to build arbitrarily complex solutions out of small cooperating programs. These smaller programs were easier to develop and maintain, and had well-defined interfaces that simplified programming and debugging. These qualities are even more valuable for device drivers, where small size and bug-free performance was extremely important. There was a strong desire to model the kernel on the same basis of small cooperating programs.

One of the first systems to use a pipe-like system underpinning the operating system was the Aleph kernel developed at the University of Rochester. This introduced the concept of ports, which were essentially a shared memory implementation. In Aleph, the kernel was reduced to providing access to the hardware, including memory and the ports, while conventional programs using the ports system implemented all behavior, from device drivers to user programs. This concept greatly reduced the size of the kernel, and permitted users to experiment with different drivers simply by loading them and connecting them together at runtime. This greatly eased the problems when developing new operating system code, which would otherwise require the machine to be restarted. The overall concept of a small kernel and external drivers became known as a microkernel.

Aleph was implemented on Data General Eclipse minicomputers and was tightly bound to them. This machine was far from ideal, since it required memory to be copied between programs, which resulted in considerable performance overhead. It was also quite expensive. Nevertheless, Aleph proved that the basic system was sound, and went on to demonstrate computer clustering by copying the memory over an early Ethernet interface.

Around this time a new generation of central processors (CPUs) were coming to market, offering a 32-bit address space and (initially optional) support for a memory management unit (MMU). The MMU handled the instructions needed to implement a virtual memory system by keeping track of which &quot;pages&quot; of memory were in use by various programs. This offered a new solution to the port concept, using the copy-on-write (COW) mechanism provided by the virtual memory system. Instead of copying data between programs, all that was required was to instruct the MMU to provide access to that same memory. This system would implement the interprocess communications (IPC) system with dramatically higher performance.

This concept was picked up at Carnegie-Mellon, who adapted Aleph for the PERQ workstation and implemented it using copy-on-write. The port was successful, but the resulting Accent kernel was of limited practical use because it did not run existing software. Moreover, Accent was as tightly tied to PERQ as Aleph was to the Eclipse.

===Mach===
The major change between these experimental kernels and Mach was the decision to make a version of the existing 4.2BSD kernel re-implemented on the Accent message-passing concepts. Such a kernel would be binary compatible with existing BSD software, making the system immediately available for everyday use while still being a useful experimental platform. Additionally, the new kernel would be designed from the start to support multiple processor architectures, even allowing heterogeneous clusters to be constructed. In order to bring the system up as quickly as possible, the system would be implemented by starting with the existing BSD code, and gradually re-implementing it as inter-process communication-based (IPC-based) programs. Thus Mach would begin as a monolithic system similar to existing UNIX systems, and progress toward the microkernel concept over time.

Mach started largely being an effort to produce a clearly defined, UNIX-based, highly portable Accent. The result was a short list of generic concepts:
* a &quot;task&quot; is a set of system resources that produce &quot;threads&quot; to run
* a &quot;thread&quot; is a single unit of execution, existing within the context of a task and shares the task&#x27;s resources
* a &quot;port&quot; is a protected message queue for communication between tasks; tasks own send and receive rights (permissions) to each port.
* &quot;messages&quot; are collections of typed data, they can only be sent to ports—not specifically tasks or threads

Mach developed on Accent&#x27;s IPC concepts, but made the system much more UNIX-like in nature, making it possible to run UNIX programs with little or no modification. To do this, Mach introduced the port, representing each endpoint of a two-way IPC. Ports had a concept of permissions like files under UNIX, permitting a very UNIX-like model of protection to be applied to them. Additionally, Mach allowed any program to handle privileges that would normally be given to the operating system only, in order to permit user space programs to handle things such as controlling hardware.

Under Mach, and like UNIX, the operating system again becomes primarily a collection of utilities. As with UNIX, Mach keeps the concept of a driver for handling the hardware. Therefore, all the drivers for the present hardware have to be included in the microkernel. Other architectures based on hardware abstraction layer or exokernels could move the drivers out of the microkernel.

The main difference with UNIX is that instead of utilities handling files, they can handle any &quot;task&quot;. More operating system code was moved out of the kernel and into user space, resulting in a much smaller kernel and the rise of the term microkernel. Unlike traditional systems, under Mach a process, or &quot;task&quot;, can consist of a number of threads. While this is common in modern systems, Mach was the first system to define tasks and threads in this way. The kernel&#x27;s job was reduced from essentially being the operating system to running the &quot;utilities&quot; and providing them access to the hardware.

The existence of ports and the use of IPC is perhaps the most fundamental difference between Mach and traditional kernels. Under UNIX, calling the kernel consists of an operation named a &quot;system call&quot; or &quot;trap&quot;. The program uses a library to place data in a well known location in memory and then causes a &quot;fault&quot;, a type of error. When a system is first started, its kernel is set up to be the &quot;handler&quot; of all faults; thus, when a program causes a fault, the kernel takes over, examines the information passed to it, then carries out the instructions.

Under Mach, the IPC system was used for this role instead. To call system functionality, a program would ask the kernel for access to a port, then use the IPC system to send messages to that port. Although sending a message requires a system call, just as a request for system functionality on other systems requires a system call, under Mach sending the message is pretty much all the kernel does; handling the actual request would be up to some other program.

Thread and concurrency support benefited by message passing with IPC mechanisms since tasks now consist of multiple code threads which Mach could freeze and unfreeze during message handling. This permits the system to be distributed over multiple processors, either by using shared memory directly as in most Mach messages, or by adding code to copy the message to another processor if needed. In a traditional kernel this is difficult to implement; the system has to be sure that different programs do not try to write to the same region of memory from different processors. However, using Mach ports makes this well defined and easy to implement, so Mach ports were made first-class citizens in that system.

The IPC system initially had performance problems, so a few strategies were developed to improve performance. Like its predecessor, Accent, Mach used a single shared-memory mechanism for physically passing the message from one program to another. Physically copying the message would be too slow, so Mach relies on the machine&#x27;s memory management unit (MMU) to quickly map the data from one program to another. Only if the data is written to would it have to be physically copied, a process called &quot;copy-on-write&quot;.

Messages were also checked for validity by the kernel, to avoid bad data crashing one of the many programs making up the system. Ports were deliberately modeled on the UNIX file system concepts. This permits the user to find ports using existing file system navigation concepts, as well as assigning rights and permissions as they would on the file system.

Development under such a system would be easier. Not only would the code being worked on exist in a traditional program that could be built using existing tools, it could also be started, debugged and killed off using the same tools. With a monokernel a bug in new code would take down the entire machine and require a reboot, whereas under Mach this would require only that the program be restarted. Additionally the user could tailor the system to include, or exclude, whatever features they required. Since the operating system was simply a collection of programs, they could add or remove parts by simply running or killing them as they would any other program.

Finally, under Mach, all of these features were deliberately designed to be extremely platform neutral. To quote one text on Mach:
:Unlike UNIX, which was developed without regard for multiprocessing, Mach incorporates multiprocessing support throughout. Its multiprocessing support is also exceedingly flexible, ranging from shared memory systems to systems with no memory shared between processors. Mach is designed to run on computer systems ranging from one to thousands of processors. In addition, Mach is easily ported to many varied computer architectures. A key goal of Mach is to be a distributed system capable of functioning on heterogeneous hardware.

There are a number of disadvantages, however. A relatively mundane one is that it is not clear how to find ports. Under UNIX this problem was solved over time as programmers agreed on a number of &quot;well known&quot; locations in the file system to serve various duties. While this same approach worked for Mach&#x27;s ports as well, under Mach the operating system was assumed to be much more fluid, with ports appearing and disappearing all the time. Without some mechanism to find ports and the services they represented, much of this flexibility would be lost.

===Development===
Mach was initially hosted as additional code written directly into the existing 4.2BSD kernel, allowing the team to work on the system long before it was complete. Work started with the already functional Accent IPC/port system, and moved on to the other key portions of the OS: tasks, threads, and virtual memory. As portions were completed various parts of the BSD system were re-written to call into Mach, and a change to 4.3BSD was also made during this process.

By 1986 the system was complete to the point of being able to run on its own on the DEC VAX. Although doing little of any practical value, the goal of making a microkernel was realized. This was soon followed by versions on the IBM RT PC and for Sun Microsystems 68030-based workstations, proving the system&#x27;s portability. By 1987 the list included the Encore Multimax and Sequent Balance machines, testing Mach&#x27;s ability to run on multiprocessor systems. A public Release 1 was made that year, and Release 2 followed the next year.

Throughout this time the promise of a &quot;true&quot; microkernel had not yet been delivered. These early Mach versions included the majority of 4.3BSD in the kernel, a system known as a POE Server, resulting in a kernel that was actually larger than the UNIX it was based on. The idea, however, was to move the UNIX layer out of the kernel into user-space, where it could be more easily worked on and even replaced outright. Unfortunately performance proved to be a major problem, and a number of architectural changes were made in order to solve this problem. Unwieldy UNIX licensing issues also plagued researchers, so this early effort to provide a non-licensed UNIX-like system environment continued to find use, well into the further development of Mach.

The resulting Mach 3 was released in 1990, and generated intense interest. A small team had built Mach and ported it to a number of platforms, including complex multiprocessor systems which were causing serious problems for older-style kernels. This generated considerable interest in the commercial market, where a number of companies were considering changing hardware platforms. If the existing system could be ported to run on Mach, it seemed it would then be easy to change the platform underneath.

Mach received a major boost in visibility when the Open Software Foundation (OSF) announced they would be hosting future versions of OSF/1 on Mach 2.5, and were investigating Mach 3 as well. Mach 2.5 was also selected for the NeXTSTEP system and a number of commercial multiprocessor vendors. Mach 3 led to a number of efforts to port other operating systems parts for the microkernel, including IBM&#x27;s Workplace OS and several efforts by Apple to build a cross-platform version of the classic Mac OS. Support for running DOS applications in a Mach 3.0 environment was demonstrated by researchers, following on from earlier work running the classic Mac OS and MultiFinder under Mach 2.5.

===Performance issues===
Mach was originally intended to be a replacement for classical monolithic UNIX, and for this reason contained many UNIX-like ideas. For instance, Mach provided a permissions and security system similar to that used by UNIX&#x27;s file system. Since the kernel was privileged (running in &quot;kernel-space&quot;) over other OS servers and software, it was possible for malfunctioning or malicious programs to send it commands that would cause damage to the system, and for this reason the kernel checked every message for validity. Additionally most of the operating system functionality was to be located in user-space programs, so this meant there needed to be some way for the kernel to grant these programs additional privileges, e.g. to directly access hardware.

Some of Mach&#x27;s more esoteric features were also based on this same IPC mechanism. For instance, Mach was able to support multi-processor machines with ease. In a traditional kernel extensive work needs to be carried out to make it reentrant or &quot;interruptible&quot;, as programs running on different processors could call into the kernel at the same time. Under Mach, the bits of the operating system are isolated in servers, which are able to run, like any other program, on any processor. Although in theory the Mach kernel would also have to be reentrant, in practice this is not an issue because its response times are so fast it can simply wait and serve requests in turn. Mach also included a server that could forward messages not just between programs, but even over the network, which was an area of intense development in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

Unfortunately, the use of IPC for almost all tasks turned out to have serious performance impact. Benchmarks on 1997 hardware showed that Mach 3.0-based UNIX single-server implementations were about 50% slower than native UNIX.

Study of the exact nature of the performance problems turned up a number of interesting facts. One was that the IPC was not the problem: there was some overhead associated with the memory mapping needed to support it, but this added only a small amount of time to making a call. The rest, 80% of the time being spent, was due to additional tasks the kernel was running on the messages. Primary among these was the port rights checking and message validity. In benchmarks on an 486DX-50, a standard UNIX system call took an average of 21μs to complete, while the equivalent operation with Mach IPC averaged 114μs. Only 18μs of this was hardware related; the rest was the Mach kernel running various routines on the message. Given a syscall that does nothing, a full round-trip under BSD would require about 40μs, whereas on a user-space Mach system it would take just under 500μs.

When Mach was first being seriously used in the 2.x versions, performance was slower than traditional monolithic operating systems, perhaps as much as 25%. This cost was not considered particularly worrying, however, because the system was also offering multi-processor support and easy portability. Many felt this was an expected and acceptable cost to pay. When Mach 3 attempted to move most of the operating system into user-space, the overhead became higher still: benchmarks between Mach and Ultrix on a MIPS R3000 showed a performance hit as great as 67% on some workloads.

For example, getting the system time involves an IPC call to the user-space server maintaining system clock. The caller first traps into the kernel, causing a context switch and memory mapping. The kernel then checks that the caller has required access rights and that the message is valid. If it is, there is another context switch and memory mapping to complete the call into the user-space server. The process must then be repeated to return the results, adding up to a total of four context switches and memory mappings, plus two message verifications. This overhead rapidly compounds with more complex services, where there are often code paths passing through many servers.

This was not the only source of performance problems. Another centered on the problems of trying to handle memory properly when physical memory ran low and paging had to occur. In the traditional monolithic operating systems the authors had direct experience with which parts of the kernel called which others, allowing them to fine-tune their pager to avoid paging out code that was about to be used. Under Mach this was not possible because the kernel had no real idea what the operating system consisted of. Instead they had to use a single one-size-fits-all solution, which added to the performance problems. Mach 3 attempted to address this problem by providing a simple pager, relying on user-space pagers for better specialization. But this turned out to have little effect. In practice, any benefits it had were wiped out by the expensive IPC needed to call it in.

Other performance problems were related to Mach&#x27;s support for multiprocessor systems. From the mid-1980s to the early 1990s, commodity CPUs grew in performance at a rate of about 60% a year, but the speed of memory access grew at only 7% a year. This meant that the cost of accessing memory grew tremendously over this period, and since Mach was based on mapping memory around between programs, any &quot;cache miss&quot; made IPC calls slow.

===Potential solutions===
IPC overhead is a major issue for Mach 3 systems. However, the concept of a &quot;multi-server operating system&quot; is still promising, though it still requires some research. The developers have to be careful to isolate code into modules that do not call from server to server. For instance, the majority of the networking code would be placed in a single server, thereby minimizing IPC for normal networking tasks.

Most developers instead stuck with the original POE concept of a single large server providing the operating system functionality. In order to ease development, they allowed the operating system server to run either in user-space or kernel-space. This allowed them to develop in user-space and have all the advantages of the original Mach idea, and then move the debugged server into kernel-space in order to get better performance. Several operating systems have since been constructed using this method, known as &quot;co-location&quot;, among them Lites, MkLinux, OSF/1, and NeXTSTEP/OPENSTEP/macOS. The Chorus microkernel made this a feature of the basic system, allowing servers to be raised into the kernel space using built-in mechanisms.

Mach 4 attempted to address these problems with a more radical set of upgrades. In particular, it was found that program code was typically not writable, so potential hits due to copy-on-write were rare. Thus it made sense to not map the memory between programs for IPC, but instead migrate the program code being used into the local space of the program. This led to the concept of &quot;shuttles&quot; and it seemed performance had improved, but the developers moved on with the system in a semi-usable state. Mach 4 also introduced built-in co-location primitives, making it a part of the kernel.

By the mid-1990s, work on microkernel systems was largely stagnant, although the market had generally believed that all modern operating systems would be microkernel based by the 1990s. The primary remaining widespread uses of the Mach kernel are Apple&#x27;s macOS and its sibling iOS, which run atop a heavily modified hybrid Open Software Foundation Mach Kernel (OSFMK 7.3) called &quot;XNU&quot; also used in OSF/1. In XNU, the file systems, networking stacks, and process and memory management functions are implemented in the kernel; and file system, networking, and some process and memory management functions are invoked from user mode via ordinary system calls rather than message passing; XNU&#x27;s Mach messages are used for communication between user-mode processes, and for some requests from user-mode code to the kernel and from the kernel to user-mode servers.

===Second-generation microkernels===
Further analysis demonstrated that the IPC performance problem was not as obvious as it seemed. Recall that a single-side of a syscall took 20μs under BSD and 114μs on Mach running on the same system. Of the 114, 11 were due to the context switch, identical to BSD. An additional 18 were used by the MMU to map the message between user-space and kernel space. This adds up to only 29μs, longer than a traditional syscall, but not by much.

The rest, the majority of the actual problem, was due to the kernel performing tasks such as checking the message for port access rights. While it would seem this is an important security concern, in fact, it only makes sense in a UNIX-like system. For instance, a single-user operating system running a cell phone or robot might not need any of these features, and this is exactly the sort of system where Mach&#x27;s pick-and-choose operating system would be most valuable. Likewise Mach caused problems when memory had been moved by the operating system, another task that only really makes sense if the system has more than one address space. DOS and the early Mac OS have a single large address space shared by all programs, so under these systems the mapping did not provide any benefits.

These realizations led to a series of second generation microkernels, which further reduced the complexity of the system and placed almost all functionality in the user space. For instance, the L4 kernel (version 2) includes only seven system calls and uses 12k of memory, whereas Mach 3 includes about 140 functions and uses about 330k of memory. IPC calls under L4 on a 486DX-50 take only 5μs, faster than a UNIX syscall on the same system, and over 20 times as fast as Mach. Of course this ignores the fact that L4 is not handling permissioning or security; but by leaving this to the user-space programs, they can select as much or as little overhead as they require.

The potential performance gains of L4 are tempered by the fact that the user-space applications will often have to provide many of the functions formerly supported by the kernel. In order to test the end-to-end performance, MkLinux in co-located mode was compared with an L4 port running in user-space. L4 added about 5%–10% overhead, compared to Mach&#x27;s 29%.

==Software based on Mach==
The following is a list of operating system kernels derived from Mach and operating systems with kernels derived from Mach:

* GNU Hurd
* Lites
* MkLinux
* mtXinu&#x27;s Mach386
* MachTen
* MacMach
* NeXTSTEP
* OSF/1 (Digital UNIX/Tru64 UNIX)
* Workplace OS
* UNICOS MAX
* The XNU kernel for Darwin, the basis of macOS, iOS, iPadOS, watchOS, and tvOS
==See also==
* Microkernel
* L4 microkernel family
* EROS microkernel family
* MERT

==References==
==External links==
* , Carnegie Mellon University CS Project Mach Home Page
* The Mach System – Appendix to &quot;Operating System Concepts&quot; (8th ed) by Avi Silberschatz, Peter Baer Galvin and Greg Gagne
* A comparison of Mach, Amoeba, and Chorus
* Towards Real Microkernels – Contains numerous performance measurements, including those quoted in the article
* The Performance of µ-Kernel-Based Systems – Contains an excellent performance comparison of Linux running as a monokernel, on Mach 3 and on L4
* Mach kernel source code - Browsable version of the Mach Kernel source code on the FreeBSD/Linux kernel cross reference site
* Unraveling the Mac OS X Microkernel Myth</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="0" end="4" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="14" end="37" title="kernel (operating system)" label="operating system kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="51" end="77" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q129627" start="81" end="95" title="Richard Rashid" label="Richard Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705121" start="100" end="113" title="Avie Tevanian" label="Avie Tevanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="125" end="141" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="162" end="173" title="distributed computing" label="distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="178" end="196" title="parallel computing" label="parallel computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="257" end="268" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48464" start="394" end="402" title="GNU Hurd" label="GNU Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="410" end="415" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q14583" start="423" end="426" title="XNU" label="XNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="442" end="447" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="449" end="452" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q64350339" start="454" end="460" title="iPadOS" label="iPadOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965967" start="462" end="466" title="tvOS" label="tvOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18012472" start="472" end="479" title="watchOS" label="watchOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="574" end="585" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="645" end="648" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="660" end="664" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="943" end="957" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509567" start="1028" end="1032" title="Computer Systems Research Group" label="CSRG"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="1089" end="1096" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q655932" start="1155" end="1168" title="Accent kernel" label="Accent kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1233" end="1242" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144725" start="1270" end="1288" title="Microsoft Research" label="Microsoft Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q308993" start="1374" end="1378" title="NeXT" label="NeXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="1422" end="1432" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="1616" end="1625" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886299" start="1917" end="1933" title="Italian alphabet" label="Italian alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196672" start="2128" end="2132" title="pipeline (Unix)" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q224055" start="2147" end="2158" title="abstraction (computer science)" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="2623" end="2635" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q604227" start="2802" end="2816" title="printer driver" label="printer driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320033" start="2848" end="2860" title="line printer" label="line printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="3819" end="3832" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="3977" end="3993" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716177" start="4684" end="4696" title="Aleph kernel" label="Aleph kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="4714" end="4737" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q764810" start="4802" end="4815" title="shared memory" label="shared memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227175" start="5473" end="5493" title="Data General Eclipse" label="Data General Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="5797" end="5813" title="computer cluster" label="computer cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="5853" end="5861" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="5911" end="5929" title="Central processing unit" label="central processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="5978" end="5991" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="6031" end="6053" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="6116" end="6130" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131607" start="6284" end="6297" title="copy-on-write" label="copy-on-write"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="6512" end="6538" title="interprocess communication" label="interprocess communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359650" start="6665" end="6681" title="PERQ" label="PERQ workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="7048" end="7054" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="4.2BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="7172" end="7175" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="7620" end="7647" title="inter-process communication" label="inter-process communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365224" start="7973" end="7977" title="task (computing)" label="task"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="8063" end="8069" title="thread (computing)" label="thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q858321" start="8192" end="8196" title="port (computer networking)" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065525" start="8218" end="8231" title="message queue" label="message queue"/>
<link wikidata="Q628523" start="8335" end="8343" title="message (computer science)" label="messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="8966" end="8976" title="user space and kernel space" label="user space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046562" start="9330" end="9356" title="Hardware Abstraction Layer" label="hardware abstraction layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350261" start="9360" end="9369" title="exokernel" label="exokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="9668" end="9679" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q722192" start="10247" end="10258" title="system call" label="system call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412443" start="10274" end="10278" title="signal (IPC)" label="trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="10305" end="10312" title="library (computing)" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="10386" end="10391" title="fault (computing)" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q303462" start="11785" end="11804" title="first-class citizen" label="first-class citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="12157" end="12179" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131607" start="12332" end="12345" title="copy-on-write" label="copy-on-write"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="12953" end="12963" title="monolithic kernel" label="monokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="15181" end="15188" title="DEC VAX" label="DEC VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q502542" start="15325" end="15334" title="IBM RT PC" label="IBM RT PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="15343" end="15359" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="15360" end="15365" title="68030" label="68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452493" start="15475" end="15490" title="Sequent Computer Systems" label="Sequent Balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190931" start="16960" end="16984" title="Open Software Foundation" label="Open Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237594" start="17042" end="17047" title="OSF/1" label="OSF/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q831367" start="17135" end="17143" title="NeXTSTEP" label="NeXTSTEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="17305" end="17308" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969165" start="17316" end="17328" title="Workplace OS" label="Workplace OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="17352" end="17357" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="17399" end="17413" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088285" start="17573" end="17584" title="MultiFinder" label="MultiFinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q963635" start="18632" end="18641" title="reentrancy (computing)" label="reentrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="19423" end="19427" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="19976" end="19979" title="i486" label="486"/>
<link wikidata="Q842015" start="20035" end="20037" title="microsecond" label="μs"/>
<link wikidata="Q542726" start="20877" end="20883" title="Ultrix" label="Ultrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243971" start="20894" end="20899" title="R3000" label="R3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663751" start="21056" end="21068" title="system clock" label="system clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="22583" end="22597" title="multiprocessor" label="multiprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647805" start="23962" end="23967" title="Lites" label="Lites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348118" start="23969" end="23976" title="MkLinux" label="MkLinux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237594" start="23978" end="23983" title="OSF/1" label="OSF/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q670316" start="24018" end="24036" title="ChorusOS" label="Chorus microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576065" start="24847" end="24869" title="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate" label="had generally believed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141941" start="25080" end="25086" title="hybrid kernel" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14583" start="25149" end="25152" title="XNU" label="XNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q722192" start="25417" end="25428" title="system call" label="system call"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="26420" end="26430" title="cell phone" label="cell phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="26434" end="26439" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="26763" end="26766" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="26781" end="26787" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q290196" start="26795" end="26821" title="Single address space operating system" label="single large address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797819" start="27106" end="27115" title="L4 kernel" label="L4 kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48464" start="28104" end="28112" title="GNU Hurd" label="GNU Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647805" start="28115" end="28120" title="Lites" label="Lites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348118" start="28123" end="28130" title="MkLinux" label="MkLinux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930380" start="28133" end="28139" title="mtXinu" label="mtXinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723313" start="28157" end="28164" title="MachTen" label="MachTen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910329" start="28167" end="28174" title="MacMach" label="MacMach"/>
<link wikidata="Q831367" start="28177" end="28185" title="NeXTSTEP" label="NeXTSTEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237594" start="28188" end="28193" title="OSF/1" label="OSF/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q204214" start="28208" end="28218" title="Tru64 UNIX" label="Tru64 UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969165" start="28222" end="28234" title="Workplace OS" label="Workplace OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752081" start="28237" end="28247" title="UNICOS" label="UNICOS MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q14583" start="28254" end="28257" title="XNU" label="XNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q14581" start="28269" end="28275" title="Darwin (operating system)" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="28290" end="28295" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="28297" end="28300" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q64350339" start="28302" end="28308" title="iPadOS" label="iPadOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18012472" start="28310" end="28317" title="watchOS" label="watchOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965967" start="28323" end="28327" title="tvOS" label="tvOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="28343" end="28354" title="Microkernel" label="Microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797819" start="28357" end="28378" title="L4 microkernel family" label="L4 microkernel family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275806" start="28381" end="28404" title="EROS (microkernel)" label="EROS microkernel family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934384" start="28407" end="28411" title="Multi-Environment Real-Time" label="MERT"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21029" wikidata="Q303985" url="?curid=21029" title="Molokans">
<text>The Molokans ( or , &quot;dairy-eater&quot;) are a Russian Spiritual Christian sect that evolved from Eastern Orthodoxy in the East Slavic lands. Their traditions, especially dairy consumption during Christian fasts, did not conform to those of the Russian Orthodox Church, and they were regarded as heretics (). The term is an exonym used by their Orthodox neighbors. Members tend to identify themselves as Spiritual Christians (, ).

The specific beliefs and practices varied sharply between the various sects of Molokans. Some built chapels for worship, kept sacraments, and revered saints and icons, while others (like the Ikonobortsy, &quot;icon-wrestlers&quot;) discarded these practices in the pursuit of individual approaches to scripture. In general, they rejected the institutionalized formalism of Orthodoxy and denominations with similar doctrines in favor of more emphasis on &quot;Original Christianity&quot; as they understood it. They emphasized spirituality and spiritual practice; such sacramental practices as water baptism have been permitted only as tangible signs and symbols of more important spiritual truths.

Similar to Presbyterians among Protestants, and considered heretical by the Orthodox Church, they elect a council of dominant elders who preserve a sort of apostolic succession in their view. Molokans had some practices similar to the European Quakers and Mennonites, such as pacifism, communal organization, spiritual meetings, and sub-groupings, but they arose in Russia together with the Doukhobors and Sabbatarians (also known as Subbotniks) and similar Spiritual Christian movements of Duhovnye Kristyanye and Ikonobortsy. They migrated into central Russia and Ukraine around the same time. As such, the Molokans have been compared to certain kinds of Protestants (such as Anabaptists and Baptists) because they have multiple similar aspects since they reject the Orthodox priesthood and icons, have their own presbyters, hold the Bible as their main guide and interpret the sacraments &quot;spiritually&quot;. They are thus in many ways similar to Anabaptist and Quaker Christians.

==Formation and development==
===11th–14th centuries CE &amp; origins of milk-drinking during Lent===
There are approximately 200 fasting days —especially the Great Fast (Lent)— when drinking milk was prohibited by Christian Orthodox ecclesiastical authorities. The practice of milk-drinking during these fasts was first sanctioned by the Nestorian Church in the 11th century in order to accommodate the conversion of some 200,000 Turkic Christians, who lived on meat and milk, to Nestorian Christianity.

Two theories emerge regarding the formation of the milk-drinking practice during Lent:

The first one suggests that the Keraite Khan, Markus Buyruk Khan (formerly Sadiq Khan, prior to Christian conversion), had converted to Nestorian Christianity along with around 200,000 of his Turco-Mongolic nomadic tribespeople in 1007 CE. The Keraite people were one of the five dominant Turco-Mongol tribes of the Tatar confederation prior to Genghis Khan. Genghis Khan united the Tatar tribes into the Mongol Empire. The Keraite resided upon the Orkhon Steppes, south of Lake Baikal and north of the Gobi Desert, also referred to as the Altai-Sayan region. The Nestorian Metropolitan, upon the conversion of the Turco-mongolic people, asked the Patriarch John the VI, also known as Prester John, what the appropriate fast for lent should be for the new converts and it was decreed that the converts should abstain from meat eating and instead of drinking &quot;soured&quot; milk should consume &quot;sweet&quot; milk. Meat and fermented horse milk were staples of the Turco-Mongolic diet prior to the conversion to Christianity and instead of eliminating a long-held tradition of the nomadic people it was Christianized. Soured milk refers to fermented milk and sweet milk refers to fresh milk.

Arriving in the Rus&#x27; lands with the 13th century Tatar (Mongolian) invasion of Batu and Möngke, the practice was adopted by other Christian groups, who had pastoral communities on the Eurasian plains.

The second theory proposes that King David the IV of Georgia converted 40,000 Cuman-Kipchak tribal families to Christianity and resettled them in Georgia between 1118-1120 CE. King David the IV assimilated these northern Turkic tribes because he was at war with the Muslim Seljuk Turks to the South and desired to reform his army. Each Kipchak family was required to provide one soldier with a horse and weapons. Though David the IV is not reported as being a religious adherent he was a promoter of Christian culture.

The Cumans, Kipchaks, Tatars, Mongolians, and Bashkirs (who descend from Kipchaks) all have the tradition of making fermented milk products. The Cumans call it &quot;kumis,&quot; Mongolians call it &quot;airag,&quot; Tatars call it &quot;azegay&quot;, and the Baskir call it &quot;azekay&quot;. This lends itself to the possibility of the second theory, as well as the first.

100 families of the original Molokan Karaits were settled in Halychyna (specifically Lviv) by hostage arrangement between Daniel of Galicia and Batu Khan in 1246 CE.

===15th–16th centuries CE===
The Judaizers preceded the modern day Molokans. Although they are sometimes also called &quot;Molokans&quot;, they constitute an independent movement. Their leader Matvei Semyonovich Dalmatov (Матвей Семёнович Далматов) was tortured to death in a monastery prison by breaking wheel.

In 1428 Crimea became independent and supported the original Molokan-Subbotniks, the Crimean Karaites (Qara-Tatars / Karaylar), who had always played an important role in Mongol politics. The linguistically dominant Church of the East Karait-Tatars, who had similar origins to the Khavars, became “Karaimstvuiuschie” (or Molokan Karaits).

===17th–18th centuries AD===
The first recorded use of the term &quot;Molokan&quot; appears in the 1670s, in reference to a group of people who had the practice of not fasting as well as eating dairy products during the 200 fasting days stipulated by the Orthodox Church. In Russian, means &quot;milk&quot;, and thus this came to be the name for these particular Christians. Nonetheless, these were &quot;Spiritual Christians&quot; who were not directly related to the group later known as &quot;Molokans&quot;.

The &quot;Molokans&quot; that are known today by that name, split in 1779 and 1780 from the Doukhobors because they thought that the Doukhobors neglected the Bible; in their belief, God had placed the Word directly into their hearts. The Molokans, however, held the written Bible in the highest regard. The founder of the Molokans, Semyon Matveevich Uklein (1733-1809), was a son-in-law of the Doukhobor leader Ilarion Poberokhin (1720-1792) as explained by O. Beznosova: &quot;Soon (approximately in 1779-1780) a group broke away from Pobirohin&#x27;s disciples. It was led by his son-in-law Semyon Uklein, who did not share the mystical spirit and self-deification of the former leader and defended the need for reliance on the Gospel texts in the organization of church life (Margaritov, 1914). This group (called &quot;Molokans&quot;) became a &quot;rational&quot; direction of Spiritual Christianity, as opposed to the &quot;mystics&quot; - &quot;christoverchestvo&quot; adherents, &quot;Doukhobors&quot; and &quot;skoptsy&quot;.&quot;
Uklein&#x27;s Molokans from Tambov energetically proselytized in settlements along the Volga River and Russia&#x27;s south-eastern frontier, spreading the Molokan faith in the provinces of Orenburg, Saratov, and Astrakhan; Uklein would further continue organizing congregations until his death in 1809.

===19th–20th centuries CE===
From the intervention of Count Nikolay Zubov in 1795, Molokans (бесшапочники) were tolerated under Catherine the Great but constrained by strict rules imposed upon them intended to curb community growth. Those who ignored the restrictions were punished in Tsarist Russia as heretics. Molokan evangelists and missionaries suffered imprisonment, banishment and other forms of punishment. Prohibited from winning converts, the Molokans were forced into endogamy. The government&#x27;s policy was to send the Molokans away from the center of Russia into the Caucasus (1833), and other outlying areas to prevent their having influence on other peasants; they were sent to Armenia, Azerbaijan (1834), Ukraine (1830s), central Asia, and Siberia, where many communities have survived into the present.

It is said that in 1900, despite the persecutions by the Tsarist government and Orthodox Church, there could have been about a half-million Spiritual Christians in the Russian empire. These figures appear, however, to be vastly exaggerated. In 1912, there were only 133,935 &quot;Molokane&quot; and 4,844 &quot;Pryguny&quot; counted in Russia (census of the Department of Spiritual Affairs; see Glenn Dynner: &quot;Holy Dissent: Jewish and Christian Mystics in Eastern Europe&quot;, 2011).

Fewer than one thousand &quot;Molokane&quot; fled Russia in the early 1900s (mostly 1905-1912), many of whom settled near other non-Orthodox immigrants from Russia in an ethnic enclave on and near Potrero Hill, San Francisco, California, where they built a prayer hall in 1929. A second prayer hall was established near Sheridan, California to serve those scattered in Northern California. There has been a population of Molokans in Whittier, Southern California. As of 2022, there is still a church called ‘New United Molokan Church.’ Though some Spiritual Christian faith groups fled Russia in the early 1900s to avoid the military draft, all eligible &quot;Molokan&quot; boys registered for the Selective Service Act of 1917, but were disqualified as aliens who did not speak English. During World War II, 136 eligible American &quot;Molokan&quot; boys enlisted during World War II, and two were conscientious objectors.

Being prohibited from winning converts under the laws of the Russian Empire, they adopted endogamy and were classified as an ethnic group under the Bolsheviks.

==Groups of Molokans==
From 1904 through the 1920s, many different faith tribes in the Caucasus immigrated to North America under the guise of &quot;Molokan&quot;. In 1899, when about a third of all &quot;Dukhobortsty&quot; left the Caucasus to central Canada, the Canadian government also gave permission for &quot;Molokans&quot; to migrate and get the same privileges (land, communal, non-military). To take advantage of this generous privilege, many different faith tribes of spiritual Christians in the Caucasus all claimed to be &quot;Molokan&quot; while leaving Russia for Canada. Most all were diverted from Canada to Los Angeles by Peter Demens, where they clashed, never uniting. Many descendants of those different tribes still claim the coveted &quot;Molokan&quot; heritage label which perpetuates confusion.

===Constant Molokans and Molokan Jumpers===

The Russian term &quot;constant&quot; (invariable, steadfast, unchanged, original: : ) applied to the &quot;Molokans&quot; has been used with two different intentions. By original &quot;Molokans&quot; who either refused to be evangelized by Protestant denominations or insisted that they will retain their faith unchanged by the &quot;Jumper&quot; revivalist movement in the 1830s. They originally constituted the by far largest segment of Molokanism. In 1833, a schism took place within the Molokan faith. This event was framed by collective cataclysms of disease, famine, and persecution. A portion of the Molokans during this time began to experience a charismatic outpouring of the Holy Spirit, similar to later Pentecostal faiths. Eventually this sect evolved into what is known today as the &quot;Molokan Jumpers&quot;. The old Molokans were termed &quot;Constants&quot; (), and the newly evolved &quot;Molokans jumpers&quot; (), also called (leapers). The Molokan &quot;Jumpers&quot; believed they were visited by a manifestation of the Holy Spirit, and this new smaller Molokan sect began a revival with intense zeal, reporting miracles that purportedly rivaled those of Christ&#x27;s apostles.

=== Seeds of exodus ===
The &quot;Constant&quot; Molokan sect condemned the new sect to authorities, resulting in betrayals and imprisonment for many of the Molokan Jumpers. Some of these Molokan Jumpers called themselves &quot;New Israelites&quot;, when one leader Maxim Rudomyotkin in Nikitino, Erivan Guberniya was announced to be the &quot;King of the Spirits&quot; in 1853. The group, also known as Maximists&quot;, considered Efim Gerasimovich Klubnikin (1842-1915) in Romanovka, Kars oblast, a divinely inspired 12-year-old boy prophet. He prophesied a &quot;coming time that would be unbearable and that the time to leave Russia was now.&quot; During the early 20th century under his leadership, about 2,000 emigrated to the United States, first settling on the east side of Los Angeles. Most seeking rural isolation moved to Baja Mexico, then Arizona, Central California, and some other parts of the West Coast and Canada. Other Jumpers received a land grant from the Mexican government and settled in the Guadalupe Valley in Baja California, Mexico.

In Los Angeles, a small number of the Molokan Jumpers joined the development of the American Revival called &quot;the Pentecostal Azusa Street Revival.&quot; The founder of The Full Gospel Business Men&#x27;s Association associates this Pentecostal Revival to a child prophet of the Molokan Jumpers, E.G. Klubnikin.

=== Diaspora ===

About 20,000 people identify as Molokans, at least ethnically, in the former Soviet Union. There are approximately 200 Molokan churches, 150 of them in Russia and Azerbaijan. They also lived in the North Caucasus, Southern Ukraine, Armenia, and Central Asia, where their ancestors had been exiled long ago.

Approximately 25,000 Molokans reside in the United States, of whom about 5,000 &quot;ethnically&quot; identify as &quot;Molokans&quot;. The majority live in or near Los Angeles, particularly in East Los Angeles, Boyle Heights, and Commerce.

During the 1960s other Molokans settled in southern Alaska and Australia. Molokans are said to be numerous in Australia. The majority are in South Australia, with a number of families in Western Australia and a small group residing in Queensland. Over 1,000 reside in Canada in the province of British Columbia and hundreds more in Alberta, keeping their traditional communal lifestyle. A group of Molokan families are also living in Latin America in the Guadalupe Valley, Mexico and in the country of Uruguay.

A small Molokan community was located in the eastern province of Kars, Turkey. They are known as Kars Molokans. Most of the community returned to Russia years ago; in the 21st century only one family of Molokans is left in Kars.

==Spiritual practices==
The Molokans have been compared to the Anabaptists that originated through the Radical Reformation and to the Quakers. They have a protestant-like view of the authority of scripture, however interpreting the bible allegorically or &quot;spiritually&quot;, they see the sacraments &quot;spiritually&quot;, reject the use of icons, images of the cross and Church hierarchy along with venerating the saints. The Molokans advocate for pacifism, congregate in their own homes, do not drink or smoke, oppose contraception and modern technology.

The Molokans follow the Old Testament laws, refusing to eat Pork, shellfish or unclean foods, they additionally refused to obey Orthodox mandates on fasting.

== Racial, ethnic, and familial lineage ==

The Molokans from Tambov who proselytized in settlements along the Volga River and in the Orenburg, Saratov and Astrakhan provinces were mostly of Slavic descent. Tambov Oblast had been completely settled by Slavic people by the 17th century. The regions they proselytized in all had or still have high populations of Islamic adherents and people of &#x27;Tatar&#x27; or Turkic ancestry.

Between the 1600s and late 1800s, intermarriage between ethnic Russians and Tatars (Tatar at this point meaning anyone of Turkic background) was common. For a Tatar, marrying a Russian was a way to increase social status or class. Muslim Tatars who converted to Christianity were exempted from taxes and gained other privileges.

Molokans as partially an admixture of Slavic and Turkic genetics is also supported by other accounts. Molokans complicated the work of the Eastern Orthodox Church in the conversion of Tatar or Turkic Muslims, as Molokans taught that religious iconography was a sin. Molokans are well-known iconoclasts, which was heresy to the Orthodox Church. Muslims, also being iconoclasts, found a draw to the Molokan faith as it preserved some Islamic traditions. Muslim converts in Russia were also well known to convert to Christianity to receive the benefits of conversion, only to convert back to Islam later. Molokans, being constrained to endogamy and marrying within their religion, would marry converts indiscriminate of their genetic background.

==Notable people==
*Ivan Prokhanov, religious figure, engineer, poet, preacher,
*Lou Novikoff, professional baseball player
*Jim Loscutoff, professional basketball player
*Matvey Skobelev, marxist revolutionary and politician
*Shirley Babashoff, Olympic swimming champion

== Molokans in the United States ==

=== History ===
Roughly 3,500 Molokans left Russia between 1901 and 1911 in search of religious freedom, escaping the persecution inflicted upon them by the Russian Orthodox Church and state. Starting around the early 1900s, many Molokans settled in the Potrero Hill neighborhood of San Francisco, California. The Potrero Hill Neighborhood House was built in 1922 by the California Synodical Society of Home Mission, Inc. and the Presbyterian Church, in order to support this newfound community, provided adult education classes, a community center, and a kindergarten. By the time of the 1970s, the Potrero Hill community was still in existence, but other smaller groups of the Molokans had become assimilated into the more broad Russian-American community. 

Today, Molokans in the United States are largely assimilated into the general mainstay of American culture. They do however work to preserve the uniqueness of their own traditions and culture, such as through the usage of Russian in their church services, community dinners (referred to as &#x27;obed&#x27;), and a shared adherence to diet based upon their religious beliefs.

=== Perception of Molokans ===
Upon their arrival in the USA, the Molokans and their religious observances seemed very strange to Americans. The Molokan colonies and communities were labeled &quot;cults&quot; and Molokans were harassed by Americans with the creation of the derogatory term &quot;Molokan Slackers&quot;. The Molokans were given this moniker primarily because they did not want to serve in World War I, as they were conscientious objectors.

=== Legal issues ===
On June 8, 1917, the &quot;Arizona Republic&quot; reported that the Molokan community in Glendale, Arizona, refused to register under the selective service act of 1917. The likely result would be the arrest of Molokan men who refused to sign the order. Molokans claimed that their religious precepts forbade them from signing such an agreement. The Czars had forced them into the military, and that is why they fled Russia for the United States. The Molokans feared that history would repeat itself in America.

On August 9, 1917, &quot;The Daily Missoulian&quot; reported that 35 Molokans were arrested and given sentences of one year each for disobeying the Selective Service Act of 1917. Thirty-three other Molokans were arrested for creating a disturbance outside of the jail house; women struck police with their umbrellas and a knife-wielding man had to be overpowered. After the 35 men were sentenced, the Molokans in the courtroom broke out into ecstatic singing and dancing and some participants were slightly injured while being subdued.

=== Naming after immigration ===
Molokans are known for having different spellings of last names within the same immediate family for a few reasons. When Molokans arrived in the United States, some family names were horribly misspelled by immigration officials who could not read Cyrillic—for example, &quot;Сусоев&quot; became &quot;Sessoyeff,&quot; which is unpronounceable in English. Also, like members of other pacifist communities, some Molokans changed the spelling of their names to avoid deportation. Many chose to use American versions of their names. So &quot;Vasilli Bukroff&quot; becomes &quot;Bill&quot; or &quot;William Bukroff&quot; or &quot;Ivan Metchikoff&quot; will become &quot;John Mitchell&quot; and &quot;Dunya Tikunov&quot; will be &quot;Julie Tyler&quot;. They also sometimes use &quot;first names&quot; that are not their legal names and are based on nicknames from childhood within the church that stuck with people as adults. For example, &quot;Hazel Valov&quot; became known as &quot;Percy Valov&quot;, for being very &quot;persistent&quot;. Another naming custom that can confuse those who are unfamiliar with the community was practiced by Molokans who settled in the Guadalupe Valley, Mexico. Many settlers adopted the Mexican versions of their names, so Rodion Pavlov became &quot;Rodolfo Pabloff,&quot; and they named their children following the Mexican format. Accordingly, one will see what would have been a Russian name like &quot;Ivan Pavilovich Pabloff&quot; (Ivan son of Pavil (Paul) (Pavlov)), whose mother&#x27;s maiden name is &quot;Samarin,&quot; become &quot;Juan Pablo Pabloff de Samarin&quot; or &quot;Juan Samarin Pabloff&quot;. In all these instances, tracing family history can be very difficult. Otherwise, they adhere to the common naming practices. A lot can be learned from a Russian headstone which will commonly go back to the use of the Russian naming protocol regardless of what name the individual used while alive. If translated correctly, one should learn the names of an individual&#x27;s father and grandfather from a male&#x27;s headstone. If it is displayed in English at the bottom it most likely will not contain the information.

== Ecumenical relations ==
In Russia, the &quot;Molokane&quot; historically maintained close relations with Baptists.

== See also ==

*Spiritual Christianity
*Subbotniks
*Doukhobor
*Christian anarchism
*Peace church
*List of pacifist faiths
*Simple living

== References ==
== External links ==

*Molokane.org
*Origin and Meaning of Molokan Surnames
*Russian Molokan Church service, September 14, 1938
*The Guest - a 2007 film about Spiritual Christians in eastern Turkey
*Taxonomy of 3 Spiritual Christian groups: &quot;Molokane&quot;, &quot;Pryguny&quot; and &quot;Dukh-i-zhizniki&quot; — books, fellowship, holidays, prophets and songs, by Andrei Conovaloff, updated July 2019.
*The Economist - &quot;The last of the Molokans&quot;
*Iconobortsi Molokans in Azerbaijan
*Ivanovka.net (ru)
*pryguny.ru: site about molokans-jumpers (ru)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q303985" start="4" end="12" title="Molokans" label="Molokans"/>
<link wikidata="Q948515" start="59" end="78" title="Spiritual Christianity" label="Spiritual Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="102" end="119" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="127" end="138" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="175" end="180" title="dairy product" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="249" end="272" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="328" end="334" title="exonym" label="exonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="349" end="357" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q303985" start="408" end="428" title="Molokans" label="Spiritual Christians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="627" end="638" title="Ikonobortsy" label="Ikonobortsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310430" start="712" end="746" title="Sola scriptura" label="individual approaches to scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="889" end="922" title="Origins of Christianity" label="&amp;quot;Original Christianity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="962" end="974" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="1146" end="1158" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="1241" end="1248" title="presbyterian polity" label="council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155908" start="1261" end="1267" title="elder (Christianity)" label="elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="1291" end="1311" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1379" end="1386" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="1391" end="1401" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="1411" end="1419" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="1526" end="1536" title="Doukhobors" label="Doukhobors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395629" start="1569" end="1579" title="Subbotniks" label="Subbotniks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1626" end="1645" title="Duhovnye Kristyanye" label="Duhovnye Kristyanye"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="2089" end="2099" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2104" end="2110" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="2254" end="2261" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751046" start="2283" end="2293" title="Great Fast" label="Great Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="2463" end="2479" title="Nestorian Church" label="Nestorian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22689965" start="2555" end="2572" title="Turkic Christians" label="Turkic Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116691" start="2750" end="2757" title="Keraites" label="Keraite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55656492" start="2793" end="2803" title="Cyriacus Buyruk Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="3292" end="3304" title="Church of the East" label="Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q118192" start="3403" end="3415" title="Prester John" label="Prester John"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3929" end="3948" title="All-Russian nation#Background" label="the Rus&amp;#x27; lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q175138" start="4001" end="4005" title="Batu Khan" label="Batu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521" start="4010" end="4016" title="Möngke Khan" label="Möngke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36760" start="4156" end="4184" title="David IV of Georgia" label="King David the IV of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035516" start="4202" end="4207" title="Cumans" label="Cuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q682597" start="4208" end="4215" title="Kipchaks" label="Kipchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907236" start="4624" end="4641" title="Christian culture" label="Christian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="4666" end="4672" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q61081" start="4810" end="4815" title="kumis" label="kumis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622627" start="5221" end="5230" title="Heresy of the Judaizers" label="Judaizers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5381" end="5436" title="Matvei Dalmatov" label="Matvei Semyonovich Dalmatov (Матвей Семёнович Далматов)"/>
<link wikidata="Q692003" start="5484" end="5498" title="breaking wheel" label="breaking wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="5509" end="5515" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q720982" start="5586" end="5602" title="Crimean Karaites" label="Crimean Karaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="6446" end="6456" title="Doukhobors" label="Doukhobors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6686" end="6710" title="Semyon Matveevich Uklein" label="Semyon Matveevich Uklein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6765" end="6783" title="Ilarion Poberokhin" label="Ilarion Poberokhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q549628" start="7374" end="7381" title="skoptsy" label="skoptsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="7482" end="7493" title="Volga River" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337" start="7584" end="7592" title="Orenburg" label="Orenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332" start="7594" end="7601" title="Saratov" label="Saratov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927" start="7607" end="7616" title="Astrakhan" label="Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758434" start="7759" end="7772" title="Nikolay Alexandrovich Zubov" label="Nikolay Zubov"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="7827" end="7846" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="7984" end="7998" title="Imperial Russia" label="Tsarist Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="8002" end="8010" title="Christian heresy" label="heretics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212926" start="8178" end="8186" title="endogamy" label="endogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="8395" end="8402" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="8404" end="8414" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="8423" end="8430" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="8448" end="8452" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="8458" end="8465" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61739695" start="8918" end="8930" title="Glenn Dynner" label="Glenn Dynner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="9191" end="9198" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400108" start="9211" end="9223" title="Potrero Hill" label="Potrero Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="9225" end="9250" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494869" start="9334" end="9354" title="Sheridan, Placer County, California" label="Sheridan, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954727" start="9712" end="9741" title="Selective Service Act of 1917" label="Selective Service Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="9913" end="9936" title="conscientious objectors" label="conscientious objectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q212926" start="10029" end="10037" title="endogamy" label="endogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="10305" end="10317" title="Doukhobors" label="Dukhobortsty"/>
<link wikidata="Q948515" start="10579" end="10599" title="spiritual Christians" label="spiritual Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4157415" start="10740" end="10752" title="Peter Demens" label="Peter Demens"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="11429" end="11435" title="schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="11682" end="11693" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12436" end="12453" title="Maxim Rudomyotkin" label="Maxim Rudomyotkin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12602" end="12629" title="Efim Gerasimovich Klubnikin" label="Efim Gerasimovich Klubnikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="12903" end="12916" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="12953" end="12964" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440529" start="13147" end="13165" title="Mexican government" label="Mexican government"/>
<link wikidata="Q834310" start="13185" end="13201" title="Guadalupe, Baja California" label="Guadalupe Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="13205" end="13220" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="13222" end="13228" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="13349" end="13360" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q794392" start="13361" end="13381" title="Azusa Street Revival" label="Azusa Street Revival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13404" end="13451" title="The Full Gospel Business Men&amp;#x27;s Association" label="The Full Gospel Business Men&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="13468" end="13479" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146522" start="13480" end="13487" title="Christian revival" label="Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="13729" end="13739" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="13764" end="13778" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641546" start="13780" end="13796" title="Southern Ukraine" label="Southern Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="13798" end="13805" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="13811" end="13823" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="14039" end="14050" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q690991" start="14068" end="14084" title="East Los Angeles, California" label="East Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923029" start="14086" end="14099" title="Boyle Heights, Los Angeles" label="Boyle Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q917540" start="14105" end="14113" title="Commerce, California" label="Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="14168" end="14174" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="14179" end="14188" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="14226" end="14235" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="14257" end="14272" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="14303" end="14320" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="14351" end="14361" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="14410" end="14426" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="14448" end="14455" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="14550" end="14563" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="14589" end="14595" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="14618" end="14625" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q127063" start="14693" end="14697" title="Kars" label="Kars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="14699" end="14705" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14725" end="14738" title="Kars Molokans" label="Kars Molokans"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="14921" end="14932" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786655" start="14961" end="14980" title="Radical Reformation" label="Radical Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="14992" end="14999" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550" start="15788" end="15801" title="Tambov Oblast" label="Tambov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675999" start="17108" end="17122" title="Ivan Prokhanov" label="Ivan Prokhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006821" start="17169" end="17181" title="Lou Novikoff" label="Lou Novikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q719891" start="17213" end="17226" title="Jim Loscutoff" label="Jim Loscutoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q277112" start="17260" end="17275" title="Matvey Skobelev" label="Matvey Skobelev"/>
<link wikidata="Q253529" start="17315" end="17332" title="Shirley Babashoff" label="Shirley Babashoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400108" start="17652" end="17664" title="Potrero Hill" label="Potrero Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q105426889" start="17712" end="17743" title="Potrero Hill Neighborhood House" label="Potrero Hill Neighborhood House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149100" start="17828" end="17847" title="Presbyterian Church (USA)" label="Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18941" end="18952" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="18967" end="18990" title="Conscientious objector" label="conscientious objectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514991" start="19041" end="19057" title="The Arizona Republic" label="Arizona Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954727" start="19152" end="19181" title="Selective Service Act of 1917" label="selective service act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="22371" end="22378" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q948515" start="22399" end="22421" title="Spiritual Christianity" label="Spiritual Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395629" start="22423" end="22433" title="Subbotniks" label="Subbotniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="22435" end="22444" title="Doukhobor" label="Doukhobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q329659" start="22446" end="22465" title="Christian anarchism" label="Christian anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12371246" start="22467" end="22479" title="Peace church" label="Peace church"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="22481" end="22504" title="List of pacifist faiths" label="List of pacifist faiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q56092" start="22506" end="22519" title="Simple living" label="Simple living"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21030" wikidata="Q656850" url="?curid=21030" title="Musical chairs">
<text>Musical chairs, also known as Trip to Jerusalem, is a game of elimination involving players, chairs, and music. It is a staple of many parties worldwide.

== Gameplay ==
A set of chairs is arranged in a circle with one fewer chair than the number of players (i.e. nine players would use eight chairs). While music plays, the contestants walk around the set of chairs. When the music stops abruptly, all players must find their own individual chair to sit on. The player who fails to sit on a chair is eliminated. One chair is then removed for the next round, and the process repeats until only one player remains and is declared the winner.

== History of the name ==

The origins of the game&#x27;s name as &quot;Trip to Jerusalem&quot; is disputed. However, it is known to come from its German name &quot;Reise Nach Jerusalem&quot; (&quot;The Journey to Jerusalem&quot;). One theory suggests that the name was inspired by the Crusades, wherein several heavy losses were incurred. Another theory suggests that it was inspired by the Aliyah, the immigration of Jews from the diaspora to the Land of Israel, wherein it is stated that spaces on ships taking the Jews to the said land were limited. None of these theories have been officially confirmed.

==As metaphor==
The term &quot;playing musical chairs&quot; is also a metaphor for describing any activity where items or people are repeatedly and usually pointlessly shuffled among various locations or positions. It can also refer to a condition where people have to expend time searching for a resource, such as having to travel from one gasoline station to another when there is a shortage. It may also refer to political situations where one leader replaces another, only to be rapidly replaced due to the instability of the governing system (see cabinet reshuffle).

== In popular culture ==
The game is featured in the original incarnation of the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, &quot;Evita&quot;, during the number &quot;The Art of the Possible&quot;, wherein it serves as a symbolic metaphor of Juan Perón&#x27;s rise to power. In this sequence, Peron and a number of military officers play the game, which the former wins.

The game is used on the lenten special of &quot;Sunday PinaSaya&quot; entitled &quot;Trip to Jerusalem&quot; aired on GMA Network in April 9, 2017. It featured the young girl Jessie (played by Barbie Forteza).

==See also==
* Buggins&#x27; turn
* Chinese fire drill
* Hot desking
* Level-coil
* &quot;Oh Sit!&quot;, a game show based on musical chairs

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q656850" start="0" end="14" title="Musical chairs" label="Musical chairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q656850" start="30" end="47" title="Musical chairs" label="Trip to Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="722" end="731" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="924" end="936" title="the Crusades" label="the Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="1034" end="1040" title="Aliyah" label="Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="1075" end="1083" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="1322" end="1330" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254471" start="1804" end="1821" title="cabinet reshuffle" label="cabinet reshuffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q830549" start="1935" end="1952" title="Evita (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Evita&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="2053" end="2063" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899613" start="2231" end="2246" title="Sunday PinaSaya" label="Sunday PinaSaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q399643" start="2301" end="2312" title="GMA Network" label="GMA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q890315" start="2376" end="2390" title="Barbie Forteza" label="Barbie Forteza"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963964" start="2409" end="2427" title="Buggins&amp;#x27; turn" label="Buggins&amp;#x27; turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100783" start="2430" end="2448" title="Chinese fire drill" label="Chinese fire drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472398" start="2451" end="2462" title="Hot desking" label="Hot desking"/>
<link wikidata="Q22662565" start="2465" end="2475" title="Level-coil" label="Level-coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080544" start="2484" end="2491" title="Oh Sit!" label="Oh Sit!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21031" wikidata="Q558647" url="?curid=21031" title="Mike Moore (New Zealand politician)">
<text>Michael Kenneth Moore (28 January 1949 – 2 February 2020) was a New Zealand politician, union organiser, and author. In the Fourth Labour Government he served in several portfolios including minister of foreign affairs, and was the 34th prime minister of New Zealand for 59 days before the 1990 general election elected a new parliament. Following Labour&#x27;s defeat in that election, Moore served as Leader of the Opposition until the 1993 election, after which Helen Clark successfully challenged him for the Labour Party leadership.

Following his retirement from New Zealand politics, Moore was Director-General of the World Trade Organization from 1999 to 2002. He also held the post of New Zealand Ambassador to the United States from 2010 to 2015.

==Early life==
Moore was born in 1949 in Whakatāne, Bay of Plenty Region, New Zealand, the son of Audrey Evelyn (née Goodall) and Alan George Moore. 

He was raised in Moerewa and while aged only two his mother pushed him around town in a pram which concealed Labour Party leaflets, which had been made illegal under the emergency powers enacted during the 1951 waterfront dispute. His father died when he was five years old after which he moved to Dilworth School as a boarder. He was then educated at Bay of Islands College before leaving school at 14 to work as a labourer and then as a printer. 

He became an active trade unionist and at the age of 17 was elected to the Auckland Trades Council. He became the first youth representative on the Labour Party executive and was vice-president of the International Union of Socialist Youth for two consecutive terms. 

In 1975, he married Yvonne Dereany, a teacher and presenter of the children&#x27;s television programme &quot;Romper Room&quot;.

==Political career==
===Member of Parliament===




Moore began his parliamentary career when elected as the MP for Eden in 1972, becoming the youngest MP at 23 years of age, where he served for one term before being defeated in the . Following the announcement of Norman Douglas&#x27; retirement from the safe seat there was much speculation that Moore would seek the Auckland Central nomination. The media considered Moore one of the most able backbenchers in the Labour Party, however Moore decided to stand in the marginal Eden seat once again. Once again Moore was offered a safer seat when he was approached to replace cabinet minister Hugh Watt in , Watt encouraged him and even offered to campaign on Moore&#x27;s behalf. However Moore declined wishing to remain in Eden to show confidence in Labour and its new leader Bill Rowling&#x27;s ability to win the election.

After his election loss in Eden, the Moores visited Warren Freer, and were insistent that he resign from so that Moore could take his place. Freer (who retired in 1981) said he had no intention of resigning and further stated there was no guarantee that he would be selected to replace Freer. Moore also developed cancer and had to have surgery to remove cancerous growths. He concealed this from the public fearing he would never win nomination for a seat if his condition was revealed.

Moore was then elected Labour&#x27;s youth vice-president and proceeded to contest the Labour nomination in the 1977 Mangere by-election following the resignation of Colin Moyle. He was seen as a frontrunner but lost to local lawyer David Lange, who would go on to become Prime Minister in 1984. Several months later Moore then sought to be Labour&#x27;s candidate in the newly formed Papatoetoe electorate but again missed out on selection against Grey Lynn MP Eddie Isbey. By the time of his second rejection for a candidature in an Auckland seat he had received invitations from Labour Party organisers in 16 electorates elsewhere in New Zealand prompting him to consider moving from Auckland in order to gain re-election to Parliament.

In 1978 Moore moved to Christchurch and was selected as Labour&#x27;s candidate for the north Christchurch electorate of Papanui. Expecting to lose once again (due to interference from party head office) Moore told party president and vice-president Arthur Faulkner and Joe Walding he did not want to stand in the seat and had only accepted nomination there to test the lengths that the hierarchy would go to stop him. He also told them he was intending to use his acceptance speech to tell the members and media that the party hierarchy &#x27;could stick their nomination up their arses&#x27;. During his walk to the podium Moore changed his mind and accepted the candidature as the now relieved Faulkner and Walding looked on.

He defeated Bert Walker to win the seat at the . He held the electorate until his retirement in 1999: as Papanui until 1984, as Christchurch North until 1996, and as Waimakariri thereafter. Shortly after his re-election in 1978 he was elevated to Labour&#x27;s shadow cabinet by leader Bill Rowling. Initially he was passed over for a position, however after fellow MP Richard Prebble refused to join the shadow cabinet, in protest of being given portfolios he did not want, it resulted in Moore taking his place. Labour leader Bill Rowling gave Moore three associate shadow portfolios Social Welfare, Health and Education before being promoted to Shadow Minister of Housing in a reshuffle in 1980 caused by the sacking of Roger Douglas. In March 1981 Moore was promoted to the front bench and was designated Shadow Minister for the Environment and Housing. In a February 1982 reshuffle he retained Housing though lost Environment but was given Customs instead.

In 1983 Moore stood for the deputy leadership of the party. In a three-way contest, in which all candidates were from Christchurch to reflect geographical proportionality, Moore won the first ballot. Lyttelton MP Ann Hercus was eliminated and on the second ballot almost all of her supporters voted for Christchurch Central MP Geoffrey Palmer, who beat Moore by one vote. Leader David Lange later expressed relief at Palmer&#x27;s success thinking that Moore would have been an un-reassuring deputy due to his inherent ambition. Nevertheless, Lange saw fit to promote Moore to number 3 in the party rankings and appointed him shadow minister of overseas trade and tourism.

===Cabinet minister===
As a government minister in the Fourth Labour Government he held numerous portfolios, initially as Minister of Overseas Trade, Minister of Tourism and Minister for Sport and Recreation. He became best known in his role as Overseas Trade Minister from 1984 to 1990 with involvement in the GATT negotiations. He also advanced the Closer Economic Relations (CER) free trade agreement with Australia. In 1988 he became Minister of External Relations and Deputy Minister of Finance. Moore was privately critical of the government’s asset sales agenda, particularly concerned with the surge in unemployment that followed, he even dry-vomited in a toilet after the sale of the Tourist Hotel Corporation. He was also vehemently opposed to finance minister Roger Douglas&#x27; proposal for a flat tax rate.

In 1988 Lange recalled Palmer from overseas to be acting Prime Minister to prevent Moore (who was ranked third in cabinet) doing so. Lange later reflected saying &quot;But God alone knew what Moore might do.&quot; Moore later said he found the comments to be quite hurtful. When Lange resigned in 1989, Moore stood for the leadership of the party, but was defeated 41 votes to 19 by Palmer. Palmer did give Moore the coveted position of Minister of Foreign Affairs in early 1990. However, Palmer was unable to regain public popularity and resigned just over a year after becoming leader. Moore stood again for the leadership and this time won, defeating backbench MP Richard Northey 41 votes to 19, and consequently became New Zealand&#x27;s 34th Prime Minister.

===Prime Minister (1990)===

Moore became Prime Minister for 60 days, having convinced the Labour caucus that, while he could not win the election for Labour, he would help save more seats than had they remained led by Palmer. Moore energetically hit the campaign trail and made an impact immediately by handling hecklers and interjectors visibly better than Palmer had done. His performance closed the gap in the polls between Labour and National to 10%, better than it had been for over a year.

The Labour Government did not return to power in the next election, however. The circumstances of Moore&#x27;s installment as prime minister would later be compared to the return of Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister of Australia. In the , National won in a landslide, and Labour lost almost 13% of the popular vote, suffering its worst-ever electoral defeat since it first won power in the . Following the loss, Moore labelled Labour&#x27;s last cabinet meeting before the changeover of government &#x27;the last supper&#x27;. He left office on 2 November 1990.

===Leader of the Opposition===

He led the Official Opposition until 1993 and was spokesman on Foreign Affairs and Trade as well. He attempted a rejuvenation of Labour&#x27;s ranks with several important portfolio shifts, including giving the finance portfolio to Michael Cullen, designed to blunt the growth of the newly formed Alliance party (which was made up largely of Labour dissidents). He then led Labour in the where he managed to gain 16 seats, coming within two seats of clinching an unlikely victory just three years after the landslide 1990 defeat. On the night of the 1993 election he delivered a televised speech (dubbed the &quot;long, cold night&quot; speech) later described by political scientist Jack Vowles as &quot;damaging&quot; and &quot;more appropriate for a decisive Labour win than a narrow defeat.&quot;

Moore said he was pleased with the result, thinking Labour was back in striking distance of forming a government in the future, and believed the result might give him a chance to retain the leadership. However he was deposed as leader at the first post-election caucus meeting by his deputy Helen Clark. His replacement did not surprise him, but he felt begrudged that he was given little appreciation, thinking he would &quot;... have got thanks – then axed [but] the axe went before even &#x27;thank yous&#x27;.&quot; The irony was not lost on Moore that Clark&#x27;s allies had installed candidates in the seats Labour had picked up from his campaign who then voted to replace him, making his success the architect of his own downfall.

===Backbencher===
Moore declined any portfolios offered to him by Clark when she assembled her shadow cabinet, opting to sit on the backbench instead, frequently sniping at Clark in the house. After the 1993 referendum to adopt mixed-member proportional representation (MMP) Moore considered forming a break-away party, the New Zealand Democratic Coalition, for the 1996 MMP election, but then decided against it. He received countless letters in support of a new party, but despite his ousting as leader, he felt too much affinity to the Labour Party to ever leave it. He won his seat in the 1996 election, obtaining more than twice as many votes as the next-highest candidate, National&#x27;s Jim Gerard.

Also after losing the leadership, Moore defended the record Fourth Labour Government and was critical of subsequent leaders of the party denigrating its record. He thought that Clark and Cullen&#x27;s semi-repudiation of Rogernomics was conducted purely to make themselves look better and labelled their remembrances as &#x27;manufactured history&#x27;. Clark performed poorly in opinion polls after becoming leader and by early 1996 there was an active movement within Labour to replace her either with Moore or frontbencher Phil Goff. Clark stared down the challengers and remained leader when Cullen shifted his allegiance to Clark after becoming deputy leader. Moore, who still held leadership ambitions, refused to comment on the positional change, saying only that he did not contest the deputy leadership because he was &quot;a leader, not a deputy&quot; but was eventually promoted to the frontbench by Clark in a surprise move. In September 1996 Moore accepted Clark&#x27;s long-standing offer of the position of Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs and Overseas Trade, saying he could no longer stay &quot;on the sidelines&quot;.

In 1998, he ran for the post of Director-General of the World Trade Organization and was elected to this position on 22 July 1999, taking up the post on 1 September 1999 which was close enough to the to not trigger a by-election.

===Political positions held===
* Member of Parliament for Eden, 1972–75.
* Member of Parliament for Waimakariri (formerly Papanui and Christchurch North), 1978–99.
* Minister of Tourism, Sport and Recreation, 1984–87.
* Chairman of the Cabinet Economic Development and Employment Committee, 1984–90.
* Minister of External Relations and Trade, 1988–90.
* Minister for the America&#x27;s Cup, 1988–90.
* Deputy Minister of Finance, 1988–90.
* Minister of Overseas Trade and Marketing, 1984–90.
* Prime Minister of New Zealand, 1990.
* Leader of the New Zealand Labour Party, 1990–93.
* Leader of the Opposition, 1990–93.
* Opposition Spokesperson on Foreign Affairs and Overseas Trade, 1996–99.

==World Trade Organization==

Moore was Director-General of the World Trade Organization from 1999 to 2002. This was the highest ever ranking job in international bureaucracy held by a New Zealander. The deal with his rival and successor Supachai Panitchpakdi meant that he served only half of the usual six-year term in the post. Moore&#x27;s term coincided with momentous changes in the global economy and multilateral trading system. He attempted to restore confidence in the system following the setback of the 1999 WTO ministerial conference held in Seattle. Ministers at the 2001 ministerial conference in Doha, Qatar, regarded him as the driving force behind the decision to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations—the ill-fated Doha Development Round. That 2001 meeting also saw the successful accession to the WTO of China and Taiwan, which along with Estonia, Jordan, Georgia, Albania, Oman, Croatia, Lithuania and Moldova joined during Moore&#x27;s term, bringing the majority of the world&#x27;s population within the rules-based trading system. He gave particular attention to helping poor countries participate effectively in the multilateral trading system.

==Later life and death==

Moore became New Zealand Ambassador to the United States in 2010. He had a heart valve operation in 2014 and was admitted to hospital in Washington DC in April 2015 after a mild stroke. In November 2015, he announced that he would leave his post on 16 December and return to New Zealand due to his deteriorating health.

Moore was a supporter of the Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly.

Moore died at his home in Auckland on 2 February 2020, aged 71.

==International services and appointments==
* Commissioner, United Nations Commission on the Legal Empowerment of the Poor
* Commissioner, Global Commission on International Migration
* Director General of the World Trade Organization, 1999–2002
* Member, Global Leadership Foundation
* Senior Counsellor, Fonterra
* Member, Trilateral Commission
* Member, Economic Development Board, South Australia
* New Zealand Government Trade Envoy
* Special Advisor to the United Nations Global Compact for Business and Development
* Former Board Member to the Gottlieb Duttweiler Institute
* Member, Board of Governors for the Institute for International Business, Economics and Law, University of Adelaide
* Adjunct Professor, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
* Adjunct Professor, University of Adelaide, South Australia
* Chairperson, Advisory Board of Carnegie Mellon University, Adelaide
* Honorary Professor, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai
* Honorary Professor, Chinese University for Political Science and International Law, Beijing
* Honorary Professor, Shanghai Customs College
* Honorary President, Beijing Afforestation Foundation.
* Special Advisor, China Institute for Reform and Development&#x27;s World Trade Organization Reference Centre.
* CEO, The Moore Group International Ltd.

==Publications==
Moore is an author of a number of books, on subjects ranging from politics to the Pacific. His book &quot;A World Without Walls&quot; has been published in Chinese and Turkish. He had a regular newspaper column that appeared in five countries.

* &quot;On Balance: a Labour Look at Regional, Community and Town Development&quot; 
* &quot;Beyond Today&quot;
* &quot;A Pacific Parliament: A Pacific Idea—an Economic and Political Community for the South Pacific&quot; (Asia Pacific Books, 1982)
* &quot;Hard Labour&quot; (Penguin Books, 1987)
*&quot;Children of the Poor: How poverty could destroy New Zealand&#x27;s future&quot; (Canterbury University Press, 1996)
*&quot;A Brief History of the Future: Citizenship of the Millennium&quot; (Shoal Bay Press, 1998)
* &quot;A World Without Walls: Freedom, Development, Free Trade, and Global Governance&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2003)
* &quot;Saving Globalization&quot; (Wiley, 2009)
* &quot;The Added Value Economy&quot;
* &quot;Beyond Tomorrow&quot;
* &quot;Fighting for New Zealand&quot;
* &quot;Labour of Love, New Zealand: a Nation That Can Work Again&quot;

==Honours and awards==

===New Zealand honours===
*New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal (1990)
*Order of New Zealand (1999)

===Foreign honours===
* Commander of the Order of the Equatorial Star (2000) – Government of Gabon
* Chancellor&#x27;s Medal (Medalla Rectoral) – University of Chile
* National Order of the Ivory Coast (2002) – Government of the Ivory Coast
* Order of the Golden Heart of Kenya (2002) – Government of Kenya
* Order of Duke Branimir with Ribbon (June 2002) – Republic of Croatia
* National Honour of Georgia (July 2002) – Government of Georgia
* Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (August 2002) – Government of Uruguay – highest national honour
* Pope John Paul II Annual Medal (August 2002) – The Holy See
* Honorary Officer of the Order of Australia for service to the South Australian Government by developing initiatives in economic reform and for service to the education sector

===Honorary degrees===
* Honorary Doctorate in Commerce – Lincoln University, New Zealand
* Honorary Doctorate in Economics – People&#x27;s University of China, Beijing
* Honorary Doctorate in Commerce – Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
* Honorary Doctorate in Commerce – University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
* Honorary Doctorate in Law – La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*

==External links==
*A Talk With Mike Moore podcast interview from La Trobe University
* Photo of the &quot;Fish and Chip Brigade&quot; in 1980 in Douglas&#x27;s office; Bassett, Douglas, Lange and Moore





|-
|-





|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q558647" start="0" end="21" title="Mike Moore (New Zealand politician)" label="Michael Kenneth Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886765" start="88" end="103" title="union organiser" label="union organiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476119" start="124" end="148" title="Fourth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Fourth Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="191" end="218" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="minister of foreign affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="237" end="266" title="prime minister of New Zealand" label="prime minister of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="290" end="311" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="348" end="354" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508547" start="403" end="427" title="Leader of the Opposition (New Zealand)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016162" start="438" end="451" title="1993 New Zealand general election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="465" end="476" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="625" end="649" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605686" start="694" end="737" title="List of ambassadors of New Zealand to the United States" label="New Zealand Ambassador to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q974074" start="799" end="808" title="Whakatāne" label="Whakatāne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192924" start="810" end="830" title="Bay of Plenty Region" label="Bay of Plenty Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q952307" start="926" end="933" title="Moerewa" label="Moerewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567188" start="1115" end="1138" title="1951 New Zealand waterfront dispute" label="1951 waterfront dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277101" start="1207" end="1222" title="Dilworth School" label="Dilworth School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013579" start="1261" end="1283" title="Bay of Islands College" label="Bay of Islands College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1738" end="1749" title="Romper Room#New Zealand" label="Romper Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336807" start="1874" end="1878" title="Eden (New Zealand electorate)" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052163" start="2023" end="2037" title="Norman Douglas (politician)" label="Norman Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="2204" end="2215" title="backbencher" label="backbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476255" start="2400" end="2409" title="Hugh Watt" label="Hugh Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q862430" start="2585" end="2597" title="Bill Rowling" label="Bill Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970205" start="2687" end="2699" title="Warren Freer" label="Warren Freer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053537" start="3236" end="3260" title="1977 Mangere by-election" label="1977 Mangere by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145434" start="3290" end="3301" title="Colin Moyle" label="Colin Moyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q367589" start="3357" end="3368" title="David Lange" label="David Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132510" start="3509" end="3519" title="Papatoetoe (New Zealand electorate)" label="Papatoetoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608198" start="3573" end="3582" title="Grey Lynn (New Zealand electorate)" label="Grey Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336153" start="3586" end="3597" title="Eddie Isbey" label="Eddie Isbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132484" start="3986" end="3993" title="Papanui (New Zealand electorate)" label="Papanui"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798671" start="4115" end="4130" title="Arthur Faulkner" label="Arthur Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476097" start="4135" end="4146" title="Joe Walding" label="Joe Walding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895360" start="4607" end="4618" title="Bert Walker (politician)" label="Bert Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109083" start="4723" end="4741" title="Christchurch North (New Zealand electorate)" label="Christchurch North"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960087" start="4761" end="4772" title="Waimakariri (New Zealand electorate)" label="Waimakariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q862430" start="4881" end="4893" title="Bill Rowling" label="Bill Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138577" start="4964" end="4979" title="Richard Prebble" label="Richard Prebble"/>
<link wikidata="Q862430" start="5123" end="5135" title="Bill Rowling" label="Bill Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q352998" start="5318" end="5331" title="Roger Douglas" label="Roger Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24998573" start="5561" end="5565" title="1983 New Zealand Labour Party leadership election" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710381" start="5758" end="5767" title="Lyttelton (New Zealand electorate)" label="Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766449" start="5771" end="5781" title="Ann Hercus" label="Ann Hercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109061" start="5861" end="5881" title="Christchurch Central (New Zealand electorate)" label="Christchurch Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385100" start="5885" end="5900" title="Geoffrey Palmer (politician)" label="Geoffrey Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q367589" start="5937" end="5948" title="David Lange" label="David Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476119" start="6287" end="6311" title="Fourth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Fourth Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798568" start="6354" end="6380" title="Minister of Trade (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Overseas Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769875" start="6382" end="6401" title="Minister of Tourism (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785660" start="6406" end="6439" title="Minister for Sport and Recreation" label="Minister for Sport and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="6543" end="6547" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="GATT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102487" start="6583" end="6608" title="Closer Economic Relations" label="Closer Economic Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="6670" end="6700" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="Minister of External Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866129" start="6705" end="6731" title="Deputy Minister of Finance (New Zealand)" label="Deputy Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q352998" start="7003" end="7016" title="Roger Douglas" label="Roger Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q825846" start="7038" end="7051" title="Flat tax" label="flat tax rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47005951" start="7363" end="7400" title="1989 New Zealand Labour Party leadership election" label="stood for the leadership of the party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="7491" end="7518" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328091" start="7721" end="7736" title="Richard Northey" label="Richard Northey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43135" start="8498" end="8508" title="Kevin Rudd" label="Kevin Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="8568" end="8577" title="landslide victory" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="8819" end="8830" title="last supper" label="last supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622925" start="9138" end="9152" title="Michael Cullen (politician)" label="Michael Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732275" start="9203" end="9211" title="Alliance (New Zealand political party)" label="Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="9999" end="10010" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="10676" end="10716" title="mixed-member proportional representation" label="mixed-member proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015326" start="10772" end="10804" title="New Zealand Democratic Coalition" label="New Zealand Democratic Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="10814" end="10831" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 MMP election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195195" start="11143" end="11153" title="Jim Gerard" label="Jim Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q597909" start="11682" end="11691" title="Phil Goff" label="Phil Goff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592103" start="12512" end="12523" title="List of New Zealand by-elections" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280514" start="13261" end="13309" title="Director-General of the World Trade Organization" label="Director-General of the World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q473046" start="13459" end="13480" title="Supachai Panitchpakdi" label="Supachai Panitchpakdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q840160" start="13736" end="13767" title="World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 1999" label="1999 WTO ministerial conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118128" start="13802" end="13829" title="World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 2001" label="2001 ministerial conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="13833" end="13837" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q844845" start="13971" end="13993" title="Doha Development Round" label="Doha Development Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027831" start="14785" end="14858" title="Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly" label="Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="14986" end="15000" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="15136" end="15160" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570469" start="15182" end="15210" title="Global Leadership Foundation" label="Global Leadership Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q946370" start="15232" end="15240" title="Fonterra" label="Fonterra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387974" start="15389" end="15418" title="United Nations Global Compact" label="United Nations Global Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478723" start="15645" end="15664" title="La Trobe University" label="La Trobe University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15574" start="15708" end="15730" title="University of Adelaide" label="University of Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="15781" end="15817" title="Carnegie Mellon University, Adelaide" label="Carnegie Mellon University, Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604022" start="15840" end="15865" title="Beijing Normal University" label="Beijing Normal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933211" start="17413" end="17449" title="New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal" label="New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q973829" start="17458" end="17478" title="Order of New Zealand" label="Order of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885350" start="17528" end="17556" title="Order of the Equatorial Star" label="Order of the Equatorial Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q112269" start="17655" end="17688" title="National Order of the Ivory Coast" label="National Order of the Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206209" start="17730" end="17764" title="Order of the Golden Heart of Kenya" label="Order of the Golden Heart of Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q126011" start="17796" end="17818" title="Order of Duke Branimir" label="Order of Duke Branimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q96279182" start="17932" end="17973" title="Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay" label="Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="18091" end="18099" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="18111" end="18144" title="Officer of the Order of Australia" label="Officer of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048626" start="18336" end="18354" title="Lincoln University (New Zealand)" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074117" start="18404" end="18437" title="People&amp;#x27;s University of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s University of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q758659" start="18482" end="18515" title="Auckland University of Technology" label="Auckland University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="18574" end="18598" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478723" start="18656" end="18675" title="La Trobe University" label="La Trobe University"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="18774" end="18781" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478723" start="18797" end="18816" title="La Trobe University" label="La Trobe University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21032" wikidata="Q720866" url="?curid=21032" title="Mohism">
<text>Mohism or Moism (, ) was an ancient Chinese philosophy of ethics and logic, rational thought, and scientific technology developed by the scholars who studied under the ancient Chinese philosopher Mozi (c. 470 BC – c. 391 BC), embodied in an eponymous book: the &quot;Mozi&quot;. Among its major ethical tenets were altruism and a universal, unbiased respect and concern for all people, stressing the virtues of austerity and utilitarianism. Illuminating it&#x27;s original doctrine, later Mohist logicians were pivotal in the development of Chinese philosophy.

Mohism developed at about the same time as Confucianism, Taoism and Legalism, and was one of the four main philosophic schools from around 770–221 BC, during the Spring and Autumn and Warring States period. During that time, Mohism was seen as a major rival to Confucianism. While its influence endured, Mohism almost disappeared as an independent school of thought as it transformed and integrated into sects of Taoism in the wake of the cultural transformations of the Qin dynasty, after 221 BC.

==Paramilitaries==
The Mohists formed a highly structured political organization that tried to realize the ideas they preached, the writings of Mozi. This political structure consisted of a network of local units in all the major kingdoms of China at the time, made up of elements from both the scholarly and working classes. Each unit was led by a juzi (literally, &quot;chisel&quot;—an image from craft making). Within the unit, a frugal and ascetic lifestyle was enforced. Each juzi would appoint his own successor. Like Confucians, they hired out their services not only for gain, but also in order to realize their own ethical ideals. They were often hired by the many warring kingdoms as advisers to the state. In this way, they were similar to the other wandering philosophers and knights-errant of the period. 

Mohists believed in aiding the defensive warfare of smaller Chinese states against the hostile offensive warfare of larger domineering states. Mohists developed the sciences of fortification and statecraft, and wrote treatises on government, with topics ranging from efficient agricultural production to the laws of inheritance. One consequence of Mohist understanding of mathematics and the physical sciences, combined with their anti-militarist philosophy and skills as artisans, was that they became the pre-eminent siege-defense engineers prior to the Qin unification of China. Popular in early China, Mohist followers were employed for their ability as negotiators and as defense engineers.

This component of Mohism is dramatized in the story of Gongshu, recorded in the Mohist canon. Mozi travels 10 days and nights when he hears that Gongshu Pan has built machines for the king of Chu to use in an invasion of the smaller state of Song. Upon arriving in Chu, Mozi makes a wall out of his belt and sticks to represent machines, and shows Gongshu Pan that he can defend Song against any offensive strategy Chu might use. Mozi then announces that three hundred of his disciples are already on the walls of Song, ready to defend against Chu. The king cancels the invasion.

==Overview==

Mohism is best known for the concept popularly translated as &quot;universal love&quot; (). According to Edward Craig, a more accurate translation for is &quot;impartial care&quot; because Mozi was more concerned with ethics than morality, as the latter tends to be based on fear more than hope.

===Caring and impartiality===

Mohism promotes a philosophy of impartial caring; that is, a person should care equally for all other individuals, regardless of their actual relationship to them. The expression of this indiscriminate caring is what makes a person a righteous being in Mohist thought. This advocacy of impartiality was a target of attack by other Chinese philosophical schools, most notably the Confucians, who believed that while love should be unconditional, it should not be indiscriminate. For example, children should hold a greater love for their parents than for random strangers.

Mozi is known for his insistence that all people are equally deserving of receiving material benefit and being protected from physical harm. In Mohism, morality is defined not by tradition and ritual, but rather by a constant moral guide that parallels utilitarianism. Tradition varies from culture to culture, and human beings need an extra-traditional guide to identify which traditions are morally acceptable. The moral guide must then promote and encourage social behaviours that maximize the general utility of all the people in that society.

The concept of &quot;Ai&quot; () was developed by the Chinese philosopher Mozi in the 4th century BC in reaction to Confucianism&#x27;s benevolent love. Mozi tried to replace what he considered to be the long-entrenched Chinese over-attachment to family and clan structures with the concept of &quot;universal love&quot; (jiān&#x27;ài, ). In this, he argued directly against Confucians who believed that it was natural and correct for people to care about different people in different degrees. Mozi, by contrast, believed people in principle should care for all people equally. Mohism stressed that rather than adopting different attitudes towards different people, love should be unconditional and offered to everyone without regard to reciprocation, not just to friends, family and other Confucian relations. Later in Chinese Buddhism, the term &quot;Ai&quot; () was adopted to refer to a passionate caring love and was considered a fundamental desire. In Buddhism, &quot;Ai&quot; was seen as capable of being either selfish or selfless, the latter being a key element towards enlightenment.

===Consequentialism===

Unlike hedonistic utilitarianism, which views pleasure as a moral good, &quot;the basic goods in Mohist consequentialist thinking are... order, material wealth, and increase in population&quot;. During Mozi&#x27;s era, war and famines were common, and population growth was seen as a moral necessity for a harmonious society. The &quot;material wealth&quot; of Mohist consequentialism refers to basic needs like shelter and clothing. Stanford sinologist David Shepherd Nivison, in &quot;The Cambridge History of Ancient China&quot;, writes that the moral goods of Mohism &quot;are interrelated: An example of this would be, more basic wealth, then more reproduction; more people, then more production and wealth... if people have plenty, they would be good, filial, kind, and so on unproblematically&quot;. In contrast to Bentham&#x27;s views, state consequentialism is not utilitarian because it is not hedonistic. The importance of outcomes that are good for the state outweigh the importance of individual pleasure and pain.

===Society===
Mozi posited that, when society functions as an organized organism, the wastes and inefficiencies found in the natural state (without organization) are reduced. He believed that conflicts are born from the absence of moral uniformity found in human cultures in the natural state, i.e. the absence of the definition of what is right ( shì) and what is wrong ( fēi). According to Mozi, we must therefore choose leaders who will surround themselves with righteous followers, who will then create the hierarchy that harmonizes Shi/Fei. In that sense, the government becomes an authoritative and automated tool. Assuming that the leaders in the social hierarchy are perfectly conformed to the ruler, who is perfectly submissive to Heaven, conformity in speech and behaviour is expected of all people. There is no freedom of speech in this model. However, the potentially repressive element is countered by compulsory communication between the subjects and their leaders. Subjects are required to report all things good or bad to their rulers. Mohism is opposed to any form of aggression, especially war between states. It is, however, permissible for a state to use force in legitimate defense.

===Meritocratic government===

Mozi was opposed to nepotism that was a social norm of that time, this mindset allowed the assignment of important government responsibilities to one&#x27;s relatives, regardless of capabilities, as opposed to those who were best equipped to handle these responsibilities, restricting social mobility. Mozi taught that as long as a person was qualified for a task, he should keep his position, regardless of blood relations. If an officer was incapable, even if he was a close relative of the ruler, he ought to be demoted, even if it meant poverty.

A ruler should be in close proximity to talented people, treasuring talents and seeking their counsel frequently. Without discovering and understanding talents within the country, the country will be destroyed. History unfortunately saw many people who were murdered, not because of their frailties, but rather because of their strengths. A good bow is difficult to pull, but it shoots high. A good horse is difficult to ride, but it can carry weight and travel far. Talented people are difficult to manage, but they can bring respect to their rulers.

Law and order was an important aspect of Mozi&#x27;s philosophy. He compared the carpenter, who uses standard tools to do his work, with the ruler, who might not have &quot;any&quot; standards by which to rule at all. The carpenter is always better off when depending on his standard tools, rather than on his emotions. Ironically, as his decisions affect the fate of an entire nation, it is even more important that a ruler maintains a set of standards, and yet he has none. These standards cannot originate from man, since no man is perfect; the only standards that a ruler uses have to originate from Heaven, since only Heaven is perfect. That law of Heaven is Love.

In a perfect governmental structure where the ruler loves all people benevolently, and officials are selected according to meritocracy, the people should have unity in belief and in speech. His original purpose in this teaching was to unite people and avoid sectarianism. However, in a situation of corruption and tyranny, this teaching might be misused as a tool for oppression.

Should the ruler be unrighteous, seven disasters would result for that nation. These seven disasters are:
# Neglect of the country&#x27;s defense, yet there is much lavished on the palace.
# When pressured by foreigners, neighbouring countries are not willing to help.
# The people are engaged in unconstructive work while useless fools are rewarded.
# Law and regulations becomes too heavy such that there is repressive fear and people only look after their own good.
# The ruler lives in a mistaken illusion of his own ability and his country&#x27;s strength.
# Trusted people are not loyal while loyal people are not trusted.
# Lack of food. Ministers are not able to carry out their work. Punishment fails to bring fear and reward fails to bring happiness.
A country facing these seven disasters will be destroyed easily by the enemy.

The measure of a country&#x27;s wealth in Mohism is a matter of sufficient provision and a large population. Thriftiness is believed to be key to this end. With contentment with that which suffices, men will be free from excessive labour, long-term war and poverty from income gap disparity. This will enable birth rate to increase. Mozi also encourages early marriage.

===Supernatural forces===
Rulers of the period often ritually assigned punishments and rewards to their subjects in spiritually important places to garner the attention of these spirits and ensure that justice was done. The respect of these spirits was deemed so important that prehistoric Chinese ancestors had left their instructions on bamboo, plates and stones to ensure the continual obedience of their future descendants to the dictates of heaven. In Mozi&#x27;s teachings, sacrifices of bulls and rams were mentioned during appointed times during the spring and autumn seasons. Spirits were described to be the preexisting primal spirits of nature, or the souls of humans who had died.

The Mohists polemicized against elaborate funeral ceremonies and other wasteful rituals, and called for austerity in life and in governance, but did not deem spiritual sacrifices wasteful. Using historical records, Mohists argued that the spirits of innocent men wrongfully murdered had appeared before to enact their vengeance. Spirits had also been recorded to have appeared to carry out other acts of justice. Mohists believed in heaven as a divine force ( &quot;Tian&quot;), the celestial bureaucracy and spirits which knew about the immoral acts of man and punished them, encouraging moral righteousness, and were wary of some of the more atheistic thinkers of the time, such as Han Fei. Due to the vague nature of the records, there is a possibility that the Mohist scribes themselves may not have been clear about this subject.

===Against fatalism===
Mozi disagrees with the fatalistic mindset of people, accusing the mindset of bringing about poverty and suffering. To argue against this attitude, Mozi used three criteria (&quot;San Biao&quot;) to assess the correctness of views. These were:
#Assessing them based on history
#Assessing them based on the experiences of common, average people
#Assessing their usefulness by applying them in law or politics
In summary, fatalism, the belief that all outcomes are predestined or fated to occur, is an irresponsible belief espoused by those who refuse to acknowledge that their own lack of responsibility or the western view of sinfulness has caused the hardships of their lives. Prosperity or poverty are directly correlated with either virtue or vice, respectively, so realised by deductive thinking and by one&#x27;s own logic; not fate. Mozi calls fatalism that almost indefinitely ends in misanthroponic theory and behaviour, &quot;A social heresy which needs to be disarmed, dissolved and destroyed&quot;.

===Against ostentation===
By the time of Mozi, Chinese rulers and the wealthier citizens already had the practice of extravagant burial rituals. Much wealth was buried with the dead, and ritualistic mourning could be as extreme as walking on a stick hunchback for three years in a posture of mourning. During such lengthy funerals, people are not able to attend to agriculture or care for their families, leading to poverty. Mozi spoke against such long and lavish funerals and also argued that this would even create resentment among the living.

Mozi views aesthetics as nearly useless. Unlike Confucius, he holds a distinctive repulsion to any development in ritual music and the fine arts. Mozi takes some whole chapters named &quot;Against Music&quot; () to discuss this. Though he mentions that he does enjoy and recognize what is pleasant, he sees them of no utilization in terms of governing, or of the benefit of common people. Instead, since development of music involves man&#x27;s power, it reduces production of food; furthermore, appreciation of music results in less time for administrative works. This overdevelopment eventually results in shortage of food, as well as anarchy. This is because manpower will be diverted from agriculture and other fundamental works towards ostentations. Civilians will eventually imitate the ruler&#x27;s lusts, making the situation worse. Mozi probably advocated this idea in response to the fact that during the Warring States period, the Zhou king and the aristocrats spent countless time in the development of delicate music while ordinary peasants could hardly meet their subsistence needs. To Mozi, bare necessities are sufficient; resources should be directed to benefit man.

==School of Names==
One of the offshoots of Mohism that has received some attention is the School of Names, who were interested in resolving logical puzzles. Not much survives from the writings of this school, since problems of logic were deemed trivial by most subsequent Chinese philosophers. Historians such as Joseph Needham have seen this group as developing a precursor philosophy of science that was never fully developed, but others believe that recognizing these Logicians as proto-scientists reveals too much of a modern bias.

==Mathematics==
The Mohist canon (&quot;Mo Jing&quot;) described various aspects of many fields associated with physical science, and provided a small wealth of information on mathematics as well. It provided an &#x27;atomic&#x27; definition of the geometric point, stating that a line is separated into parts, and the part which has no remaining parts (i.e. cannot be divided into smaller parts) and thus the extreme end of a line is a point. Much like Euclid&#x27;s first and third definitions and Plato&#x27;s &#x27;beginning of a line&#x27;, the &quot;Mo Jing&quot; stated that &quot;a point may stand at the end (of a line) or at its beginning like a head-presentation in childbirth. (As to its invisibility) there is nothing similar to it.&quot; Similar to the atomists of Democritus, the &quot;Mo Jing&quot; stated that a point is the smallest unit, and cannot be cut in half, since &#x27;nothing&#x27; cannot be halved. It stated that two lines of equal length will always finish at the same place, while providing definitions for the &quot;comparison of lengths&quot; and for &quot;parallels&quot;, along with principles of space and bounded space. It also described the fact that planes without the quality of thickness cannot be piled up since they cannot mutually touch. The book provided definitions for circumference, diameter, and radius, along with the definition of volume.

==Decline==
With the unification of China under the Qin, China was no longer divided into various states constantly fighting each other: where previously the Mohists proved to be an asset when defending a city against an external threat, without wars, and in particular siege wars, there was no more need for their skills. The &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot; suggests, in addition to the decline of siege warfare, &quot;…the major factor is probably that as a social and philosophical movement, Mohism gradually collapsed into irrelevance. By the middle of the former Han dynasty, the more appealing aspects of Mohist thought were all shared with rival schools.

Their core ethical doctrines had largely been absorbed into Confucianism, though in a modified and unsystematic form. Key features of their political philosophy were probably shared with most other political thinkers, and their trademark opposition to warfare had been rendered effectively redundant by unification. The philosophy of language, epistemology, metaphysics, and science of the later Mohist Canons were recorded in difficult, dense texts that would have been nearly unintelligible to most readers (and that in any case quickly became corrupt). What remained as distinctively Mohist was a package of harsh, unappealing economic and cultural views, such as their obsession with parsimony and their rejection of music and ritual. Compared with the classical learning and rituals of the Confucians, the speculative metaphysics of Yin-Yang thinkers, and the romantic nature mysticism and literary sophistication of the Daoists, Mohism offered little to attract adherents, especially politically powerful ones.&quot;

==Modern perspectives==
Jin Guantao, a professor of the Institute of Chinese Studies at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Fan Hongye, a research fellow with the Chinese Academy of Sciences&#x27; Institute of Science Policy and Managerial Science, and Liu Qingfeng, a professor of the Institute of Chinese Culture at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, have argued that without the influence of proto-scientific precepts in the ancient philosophy of Mohism, Chinese science lacked a definitive structure:

From the middle and late Eastern Han to the early Wei and Jin dynasties, the net growth of ancient Chinese science and technology experienced a peak (second only to that of the Northern Song dynasty)... Han studies of the Confucian classics, which for a long time had hindered the socialization of science, were declining. If Mohism, rich in scientific thought, had rapidly grown and strengthened, the situation might have been very favorable to the development of a scientific structure. However, this did not happen because the seeds of the primitive structure of science were never formed. During the late Eastern Han, disastrous upheavals again occurred in the process of social transformation, leading to the greatest social disorder in Chinese history. One can imagine the effect of this calamity on science.

==See also==
* Asceticism
* Brahmavihara
* Buddhist ethics
* Consequentialism
* Effective altruism
* Logic in China
* Wu wei

==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* A general study of the man and his age, his works, and his teachings, with an extensive bibliography.
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Full text of the Mozi – Chinese Text Project
* Mohism at The Database of Religious History, University of British Columbia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="0" end="6" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="10" end="15" title="Mohism" label="Moism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="36" end="54" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="196" end="200" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835619" start="267" end="271" title="Mozi (book)" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="425" end="439" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="605" end="617" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="619" end="625" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="630" end="638" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="669" end="688" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="philosophic schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="724" end="741" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="746" end="767" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="1033" end="1044" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986801" start="2437" end="2461" title="Qin unification of China" label="Qin unification of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q574184" start="2633" end="2640" title="Gongshu Pan" label="Gongshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342442" start="3278" end="3290" title="Edward Craig (philosopher)" label="Edward Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="3880" end="3889" title="Confucian" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="4327" end="4341" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="5444" end="5460" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Chinese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213004" start="6197" end="6219" title="David S. Nivison" label="David Shepherd Nivison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634127" start="6230" end="6268" title="The Cambridge History of Ancient China" label="The Cambridge History of Ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="6565" end="6572" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="12535" end="12539" title="Tian" label="Tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28959" start="12753" end="12760" title="Han Fei" label="Han Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="13820" end="13834" title="Misanthropy" label="misanthroponic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14610280" start="14601" end="14613" title="Ritual and music system" label="ritual music"/>
<link wikidata="Q31895" start="15124" end="15131" title="anarchy" label="anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61906" start="15763" end="15778" title="School of Names" label="School of Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q318054" start="15986" end="16000" title="Joseph Needham" label="Joseph Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="16048" end="16069" title="philosophy of science" label="philosophy of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835619" start="16230" end="16242" title="Mohist canon" label="Mohist canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="16664" end="16670" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="16710" end="16715" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="16977" end="16984" title="atomist" label="atomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="16989" end="16999" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986801" start="17623" end="17643" title="Qin&amp;#x27;s wars of unification" label="unification of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="17654" end="17657" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="17935" end="17970" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="19104" end="19115" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="19119" end="19127" title="Yin-Yang" label="Yin-Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="19207" end="19214" title="Daoists" label="Daoists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8460498" start="19329" end="19340" title="Jin Guantao" label="Jin Guantao"/>
<link wikidata="Q15570" start="19397" end="19428" title="Chinese University of Hong Kong" label="Chinese University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="19469" end="19496" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="20423" end="20434" title="Eastern Han" label="Eastern Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="20524" end="20571" title="Three Kingdoms period" label="the greatest social disorder in Chinese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="20645" end="20655" title="Asceticism" label="Asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q897336" start="20658" end="20670" title="Brahmavihara" label="Brahmavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q550068" start="20673" end="20688" title="Buddhist ethics" label="Buddhist ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q646102" start="20691" end="20707" title="Consequentialism" label="Consequentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13489381" start="20710" end="20728" title="Effective altruism" label="Effective altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667459" start="20731" end="20745" title="Logic in China" label="Logic in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q878084" start="20748" end="20754" title="Wu wei" label="Wu wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100670" start="20995" end="21015" title="Chinese Text Project" label="Chinese Text Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21035" wikidata="Q133823" url="?curid=21035" title="Migraine">
<text>Migraine (, ) is a genetically-influenced complex neurological disorder characterized by episodes of moderate-to-severe headache, most often unilateral and generally associated with nausea and light and sound sensitivity. Other characterizing symptoms may include vomiting, cognitive dysfunction, allodynia, and dizziness. Exacerbation or worsening of headache symptoms during physical activity is another distinguishing feature.

Up to one-third of people with migraine experience aura, a premonitory period of sensory disturbance widely accepted to be caused by cortical spreading depression at the onset of a migraine attack. Although primarily considered to be a headache disorder, migraine is highly heterogenous in its clinical presentation and is better thought of as a spectrum disease rather than a distinct clinical entity. Disease burden can range from episodic discrete attacks to chronic disease.

Migraine is believed to be caused by a mixture of environmental and genetic factors that influence the excitation and inhibition of nerve cells in the brain. An incomplete &quot;vascular hypothesis&quot; postulated that the aura of migraine is produced by vasoconstriction and the headache of migraine is produced by vasodilation. However, the vasoconstrictive mechanism has been disproven, and the role of vasodilation in migraine pathophysiology is uncertain. The accepted hypothesis suggests that multiple primary neuronal impairments lead to a series of intracranial and extracranial changes, triggering a physiological cascade that leads to migraine symptomatology.
Initial recommended treatment for acute attacks is with over-the-counter analgesics (pain medication) such as ibuprofen and paracetamol (acetaminophen) for headache, antiemetics (anti-nausea medication) for nausea, and the avoidance of migraine triggers. Specific medications such as triptans, ergotamines, or calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist (CGRP) inhibitors may be used in those experiencing headaches that do not respond to the over-the-counter pain medications. For people who experience four or more attacks per month, or could otherwise benefit from prevention, prophylactic medication is recommended. Commonly prescribed prophylactic medications include beta blockers like propranolol, anticonvulsants like sodium valproate, antidepressants like amitriptyline, and other off-label classes of medications. Preventive medications inhibit migraine pathophysiology through various mechanisms, such as blocking calcium and sodium channels, blocking gap junctions, and inhibiting matrix metalloproteinases, among other mechanisms. Non-pharmacological preventive therapies include nutritional supplementation, dietary interventions, sleep improvement, and aerobic exercise. In 2018, the first medication (Erenumab) of a new class of drugs specifically designed for migraine prevention called calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonists (CGRPs) was approved by the FDA. As of July 2023, the FDA has approved eight drugs that act on the CGRP system for use in the treatment of migraine.
Globally, approximately 15% of people are affected by migraine. In the Global Burden of Disease Study, conducted in 2010, migraine ranked as the third-most prevalent disorder in the world. It most often starts at puberty and is worst during middle age. , it is one of the most common causes of disability.

==Signs and symptoms==
Migraine typically presents with self-limited, recurrent severe headache associated with autonomic symptoms. About 15–30% of people living with migraine experience episodes with aura, and they also frequently experience episodes without aura. The severity of the pain, duration of the headache, and frequency of attacks are variable. A migraine attack lasting longer than 72 hours is termed status migrainosus. There are four possible phases to a migraine attack, although not all the phases are necessarily experienced:
* The prodrome, which occurs hours or days before the headache
* The aura, which immediately precedes the headache
* The pain phase, also known as headache phase
* The postdrome, the effects experienced following the end of a migraine attack

Migraine is associated with major depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety disorders, and obsessive–compulsive disorder. These psychiatric disorders are approximately 2–5 times more common in people without aura, and 3–10 times more common in people with aura.

===Prodrome phase===
Prodromal or premonitory symptoms occur in about 60% of those with migraine, with an onset that can range from two hours to two days before the start of pain or the aura. These symptoms may include a wide variety of phenomena, including altered mood, irritability, depression or euphoria, fatigue, craving for certain food(s), stiff muscles (especially in the neck), constipation or diarrhea, and sensitivity to smells or noise. This may occur in those with either migraine with aura or migraine without aura. Neuroimaging indicates the limbic system and hypothalamus as the origin of prodromal symptoms in migraine.

===Aura phase===
Aura is a transient focal neurological phenomenon that occurs before or during the headache. Aura appears gradually over a number of minutes (usually occurring over 5–60 minutes) and generally lasts less than 60 minutes. Symptoms can be visual, sensory or motoric in nature, and many people experience more than one. Visual effects occur most frequently: they occur in up to 99% of cases and in more than 50% of cases are not accompanied by sensory or motor effects. If any symptom remains after 60 minutes, the state is known as persistent aura.

Visual disturbances often consist of a scintillating scotoma (an area of partial alteration in the field of vision which flickers and may interfere with a person&#x27;s ability to read or drive). These typically start near the center of vision and then spread out to the sides with zigzagging lines which have been described as looking like fortifications or walls of a castle. Usually the lines are in black and white but some people also see colored lines. Some people lose part of their field of vision known as hemianopsia while others experience blurring.

Sensory aura are the second most common type; they occur in 30–40% of people with auras. Often a feeling of pins-and-needles begins on one side in the hand and arm and spreads to the nose–mouth area on the same side. Numbness usually occurs after the tingling has passed with a loss of position sense. Other symptoms of the aura phase can include speech or language disturbances, world spinning, and less commonly motor problems. Motor symptoms indicate that this is a hemiplegic migraine, and weakness often lasts longer than one hour unlike other auras. Auditory hallucinations or delusions have also been described.

===Pain phase===
Classically the headache is unilateral, throbbing, and moderate to severe in intensity. It usually comes on gradually and is aggravated by physical activity during a migraine attack. However, the effects of physical activity on migraine are complex, and some researchers have concluded that, while exercise can trigger migraine attacks, regular exercise may have a prophylactic effect and decrease frequency of attacks. The feeling of pulsating pain is not in phase with the pulse. In more than 40% of cases, however, the pain may be bilateral (both sides of the head), and neck pain is commonly associated with it. Bilateral pain is particularly common in those who have migraine without aura. Less commonly pain may occur primarily in the back or top of the head. The pain usually lasts 4 to 72 hours in adults; however, in young children frequently lasts less than 1 hour. The frequency of attacks is variable, from a few in a lifetime to several a week, with the average being about one a month.

The pain is frequently accompanied by nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, sensitivity to smells, fatigue, and irritability. Many thus seek a dark and quiet room. In a basilar migraine, a migraine with neurological symptoms related to the brain stem or with neurological symptoms on both sides of the body, common effects include a sense of the world spinning, light-headedness, and confusion. Nausea occurs in almost 90% of people, and vomiting occurs in about one-third. Other symptoms may include blurred vision, nasal stuffiness, diarrhea, frequent urination, pallor, or sweating. Swelling or tenderness of the scalp may occur as can neck stiffness. Associated symptoms are less common in the elderly.

====Silent migraine====
Sometimes, aura occurs without a subsequent headache. This is known in modern classification as a typical aura without headache, or acephalgic migraine in previous classification, or commonly as a silent migraine.&lt;ref name=&quot;jmedicalcaserep-Yusheng-2015-aura-w/o-headache&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; However, silent migraine can still produce debilitating symptoms, with visual disturbance, vision loss in half of both eyes, alterations in color perception, and other sensory problems, like sensitivity to light, sound, and odors. It can last from 15 to 30 minutes, usually no longer than 60 minutes, and it can recur or appear as an isolated event.

===Postdrome===
The migraine postdrome could be defined as that constellation of symptoms occurring once the acute headache has settled. Many report a sore feeling in the area where the migraine was, and some report impaired thinking for a few days after the headache has passed. The person may feel tired or &quot;hung over&quot; and have head pain, cognitive difficulties, gastrointestinal symptoms, mood changes, and weakness. According to one summary, &quot;Some people feel unusually refreshed or euphoric after an attack, whereas others note depression and malaise.&quot;

==Cause==
The underlying cause of migraine is unknown. However, it is believed to be related to a mix of environmental and genetic factors. Migraine runs in families in about two-thirds of cases and rarely occur due to a single gene defect. While migraine attacks were once believed to be more common in those of high intelligence, this does not appear to be true. A number of psychological conditions are associated, including depression, anxiety, and bipolar disorder.

Success of the surgical migraine treatment by decompression of extracranial sensory nerves adjacent to vessels suggests that people with migraine may have anatomical predisposition for neurovascular compression that may be caused by both intracranial and extracranial vasodilation due to migraine triggers. This, along with the existence of numerous cranial neural interconnections, may explain the multiple cranial nerve involvement and consequent diversity of migraine symptoms.

===Genetics===
Studies of twins indicate a 34–51% genetic influence on the likelihood of developing migraine. This genetic relationship is stronger for migraine with aura than for migraine without aura. It is clear from family and populations studies that migraine is a complex disorder, where numerous genetic risk variants exist, and where each variant increases the risk of migraine marginally. It is also known that having several of these risk variants increases the risk by a small to moderate amount.

Single gene disorders that result in migraine are rare. One of these is known as familial hemiplegic migraine, a type of migraine with aura, which is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Four genes have been shown to be involved in familial hemiplegic migraine. Three of these genes are involved in ion transport. The fourth is the axonal protein PRRT2, associated with the exocytosis complex. Another genetic disorder associated with migraine is CADASIL syndrome or cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy. One meta-analysis found a protective effect from angiotensin converting enzyme polymorphisms on migraine. The &quot;TRPM8&quot; gene, which codes for a cation channel, has been linked to migraine.

The common forms migraine are polygenetic, where common variants of numerous genes contributes to the predisposition for migraine. These genes can be placed in three categories increasing the risk of migraine in general, specifically migraine with aura, or migraine without aura. Three of these genes, &quot;CALCA&quot;, &quot;CALCB&quot;, and &quot;HTR1F&quot; are already target for migraine specific treatments. Five genes are specific risk to migraine with aura, &quot;PALMD&quot;, &quot;ABO&quot;, &quot;LRRK2, CACNA1A&quot; and &quot;PRRT2&quot;, and 13 genes are specific to migraine without aura. Using the accumulated genetic risk of the common variations, into a so-called polygenetic risk, it is possible to assess e.g. the treatment response to triptans.

===Triggers===
Migraine may be induced by triggers, with some reporting it as an influence in a minority of cases and others the majority. Many things such as fatigue, certain foods, alcohol, and weather have been labeled as triggers; however, the strength and significance of these relationships are uncertain. Most people with migraine report experiencing triggers. Symptoms may start up to 24 hours after a trigger.

Also, evidence shows here is a strong association between migrane and the quality of sleep, particularly poor subjective quality of sleep. The relationship seems to be bidirectional, as the frequency of migrane increases with poor quality of sleep but it is still not very well understood how low quality of sleep triggers migrane. 

====Physiological aspects====
Common triggers quoted are stress, hunger, and fatigue (these equally contribute to tension headaches). Psychological stress has been reported as a factor by 50–80% of people. Migraine has also been associated with post-traumatic stress disorder and abuse. Migraine episodes are more likely to occur around menstruation. Other hormonal influences, such as menarche, oral contraceptive use, pregnancy, perimenopause, and menopause, also play a role. These hormonal influences seem to play a greater role in migraine without aura. Migraine episodes typically do not occur during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy, or following menopause.

====Dietary aspects====
Between 12% and 60% of people report foods as triggers.

There are many reports that tyramine – which is naturally present in chocolate, alcoholic beverages, most cheeses, processed meats, and other foods – can trigger migraine symptoms in some individuals. Monosodium glutamate (MSG) has been reported as a trigger for migraine, but a systematic review concluded that &quot;a causal relationship between MSG and headache has not been proven... It would seem premature to conclude that the MSG present in food causes headache&quot;.

====Environmental aspects====
A 2009 review on potential triggers in the indoor and outdoor environment concluded that while there were insufficient studies to confirm environmental factors as causing migraine, &quot;migraineurs worldwide consistently report similar environmental triggers ... such as barometric pressure change, bright sunlight, flickering lights, air quality and odors&quot;.

==Pathophysiology==

Migraine is believed to be primarily a neurological disorder, while others believe it to be a neurovascular disorder with blood vessels playing the key role, although evidence does not support this completely. Others believe both are likely important. One theory is related to increased excitability of the cerebral cortex and abnormal control of pain neurons in the trigeminal nucleus of the brainstem.

Sensitization of trigeminal pathways is a key pathophysiological phenomenon in migraine. It is debatable whether sensitization starts in the periphery or in the brain.

===Aura===
Cortical spreading depression, or &quot;spreading depression&quot; according to Leão, is a burst of neuronal activity followed by a period of inactivity, which is seen in those with migraine with aura. There are a number of explanations for its occurrence, including activation of NMDA receptors leading to calcium entering the cell. After the burst of activity, the blood flow to the cerebral cortex in the area affected is decreased for two to six hours. It is believed that when depolarization travels down the underside of the brain, nerves that sense pain in the head and neck are triggered.

===Pain===
The exact mechanism of the head pain which occurs during a migraine episode is unknown. Some evidence supports a primary role for central nervous system structures (such as the brainstem and diencephalon), while other data support the role of peripheral activation (such as via the sensory nerves that surround blood vessels of the head and neck). The potential candidate vessels include dural arteries, pial arteries and extracranial arteries such as those of the scalp. The role of vasodilatation of the extracranial arteries, in particular, is believed to be significant.

===Neuromodulators===
Adenosine, a neuromodulator, may be involved. Released after the progressive cleavage of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), adenosine acts on adenosine receptors to put the body and brain in a low activity state by dilating blood vessels and slowing the heart rate, such as before and during the early stages of sleep. Adenosine levels have been found to be high during migraine attacks. Caffeine&#x27;s role as an inhibitor of adenosine may explain its effect in reducing migraine. Low levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin, also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), are also believed to be involved.

Calcitonin gene-related peptides (CGRPs) have been found to play a role in the pathogenesis of the pain associated with migraine, as levels of it become elevated during an attack.

==Diagnosis==
The diagnosis of a migraine is based on signs and symptoms. Neuroimaging tests are not necessary to diagnose migraine, but may be used to find other causes of headaches in those whose examination and history do not confirm a migraine diagnosis. It is believed that a substantial number of people with the condition remain undiagnosed.

The diagnosis of migraine without aura, according to the International Headache Society, can be made according the &quot;5, 4, 3, 2, 1 criteria&quot;, which is as follows:
* Five or more attacks – for migraine &quot;with&quot; aura, two attacks are sufficient for diagnosis.
* Four hours to three days in duration
* Two or more of the following:
** Unilateral (affecting one side of the head)
** Pulsating
** Moderate or severe pain intensity
** Worsened by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity
* One or more of the following:
** Nausea and/or vomiting
** Sensitivity to both light (photophobia) and sound (phonophobia)

If someone experiences two of the following: photophobia, nausea, or inability to work or study for a day, the diagnosis is more likely. In those with four out of five of the following: pulsating headache, duration of 4–72 hours, pain on one side of the head, nausea, or symptoms that interfere with the person&#x27;s life, the probability that this is a migraine attack is 92%. In those with fewer than three of these symptoms, the probability is 17%.

===Classification===
Migraine was first comprehensively classified in 1988.

The International Headache Society updated their classification of headaches in 2004. A third version was published in 2018. According to this classification, migraine is a primary headache disorder along with tension-type headaches and cluster headaches, among others.

Migraine is divided into six subclasses (some of which include further subdivisions):
* &quot;Migraine without aura&quot;, or &quot;common migraine&quot;, involves migraine headaches that are not accompanied by aura.
* &quot;Migraine with aura&quot;, or &quot;classic migraine&quot;, usually involves migraine headaches accompanied by aura. Less commonly, aura can occur without a headache, or with a nonmigraine headache. Two other varieties are familial hemiplegic migraine and sporadic hemiplegic migraine, in which a person has migraine with aura and with accompanying motor weakness. If a close relative has had the same condition, it is called &quot;familial&quot;, otherwise it is called &quot;sporadic&quot;. Another variety is basilar-type migraine, where a headache and aura are accompanied by difficulty speaking, world spinning, ringing in ears, or a number of other brainstem-related symptoms, but not motor weakness. This type was initially believed to be due to spasms of the basilar artery, the artery that supplies the brainstem. Now that this mechanism is not believed to be primary, the symptomatic term migraine with brainstem aura (MBA) is preferred. Retinal migraine (which is distinct from visual or optical migraine) involves migraine headaches accompanied by visual disturbances or even temporary blindness in one eye.
* Childhood periodic syndromes that are commonly precursors of migraine include cyclical vomiting (occasional intense periods of vomiting), abdominal migraine (abdominal pain, usually accompanied by nausea), and benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood (occasional attacks of vertigo).
* &quot;Complications of migraine&quot; describe migraine headaches and/or auras that are unusually long or unusually frequent, or associated with a seizure or brain lesion.
* &quot;Probable migraine&quot; describes conditions that have some characteristics of migraine, but where there is not enough evidence to diagnose it as migraine with certainty (in the presence of concurrent medication overuse).
* &quot;Chronic migraine&quot; is a complication of migraine, and is a headache that fulfills diagnostic criteria for &quot;migraine headache&quot; and occurs for a greater time interval. Specifically, greater or equal to 15 days/month for longer than 3 months.

===Abdominal migraine===
The diagnosis of abdominal migraine is controversial. Some evidence indicates that recurrent episodes of abdominal pain in the absence of a headache may be a type of migraine or are at least a precursor to migraine attacks. These episodes of pain may or may not follow a migraine-like prodrome and typically last minutes to hours. They often occur in those with either a personal or family history of typical migraine. Other syndromes that are believed to be precursors include cyclical vomiting syndrome and benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood.

===Differential diagnosis===
Other conditions that can cause similar symptoms to a migraine headache include temporal arteritis, cluster headaches, acute glaucoma, meningitis and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Temporal arteritis typically occurs in people over 50 years old and presents with tenderness over the temple, cluster headache presents with one-sided nose stuffiness, tears and severe pain around the orbits, acute glaucoma is associated with vision problems, meningitis with fevers, and subarachnoid hemorrhage with a very fast onset. Tension headaches typically occur on both sides, are not pounding, and are less disabling.

Those with stable headaches that meet criteria for migraine should not receive neuroimaging to look for other intracranial disease. This requires that other concerning findings such as papilledema (swelling of the optic disc) are not present. People with migraine are not at an increased risk of having another cause for severe headaches.

==Management==
Management of migraine includes prevention of migraine attacks and rescue treatment. There are three main aspects of treatment: trigger avoidance, acute (abortive), and preventive (prophylactic) control.

Modern approaches to migraine management emphasize personalized care that considers individual patient needs. Lifestyle modifications, such as managing triggers and addressing comorbidities, form the foundation of treatment. Behavioral techniques and supplements like magnesium and riboflavin can serve as supportive options for some individuals. Behavioral techniques that have been utilized in the treatment of migraines include Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), relaxation training, biofeedback, Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), as well as mindfulness-based therapies. A 2024 systematic literature review and meta analysis found evidence that treatments such as CBT, relaxation training, ACT, and mindfulness-based therapies can reduce migraine frequency both on their own and in combination with other treatment options. In addition, it was found that relaxation therapy aided in the lessening of migraine frequency when compared to education by itself. Similarly for children and adolescents, CBT and biofeedback strategies have shown effective in a decrease of frequency and intensity of migraines. These techniques often include relaxation methods and promotion of long-term management without medication side effects which is emphasized for younger individuals. Acute treatments, including NSAIDs and triptans, are most effective when administered early in an attack, while preventive medications are recommended for those experiencing frequent or severe migraines. Proven preventive options include beta blockers, topiramate, and CGRP inhibitors like erenumab and galcanezumab, which have demonstrated significant efficacy in clinical studies. The European Consensus Statement provides a framework for diagnosis and management, emphasizing the importance of accurate assessment, patient education, and consistent adherence to prescribed treatments. Innovative therapies of oral medications used to treat migraine symptoms, such as gepants and ditans, are emerging as alternatives for patients who cannot use traditional options.
==Prognosis==
&quot;Migraine exists on a continuum of different attack frequencies and associated levels of disability.&quot; For those with occasional, episodic migraine, a &quot;proper combination of drugs for prevention and treatment of migraine attacks&quot; can limit the disease&#x27;s impact on patients&#x27; personal and professional lives. But fewer than half of people with migraine seek medical care and more than half go undiagnosed and undertreated. &quot;Responsive prevention and treatment of migraine is incredibly important&quot; because evidence shows &quot;an increased sensitivity after each successive attack, eventually leading to chronic daily migraine in some individuals.&quot; Repeated migraine results in &quot;reorganization of brain circuitry&quot;, causing &quot;profound functional as well as structural changes in the brain.&quot; &quot;One of the most important problems in clinical migraine is the progression from an intermittent, self-limited inconvenience to a life-changing disorder of chronic pain, sensory amplification, and autonomic and affective disruption. This progression, sometimes termed chronification in the migraine literature, is common, affecting 3% of migraineurs in a given year, such that 8% of migraineurs have chronic migraine in any given year.&quot; Brain imagery reveals that the electrophysiological changes seen during an attack become permanent in people with chronic migraine; &quot;thus, from an electrophysiological point of view, chronic migraine indeed resembles a never-ending migraine attack.&quot; Severe migraine ranks in the highest category of disability, according to the World Health Organization, which uses objective metrics to determine disability burden for the authoritative annual &quot;Global Burden of Disease&quot; report. The report classifies severe migraine alongside severe depression, active psychosis, quadriplegia, and terminal-stage cancer.

Migraine with aura appears to be a risk factor for ischemic stroke doubling the risk. Being a young adult, being female, using hormonal birth control, and smoking further increases this risk. There also appears to be an association with cervical artery dissection. Migraine without aura does not appear to be a factor. The relationship with heart problems is inconclusive with a single study supporting an association. Migraine does not appear to increase the risk of death from stroke or heart disease. Preventative therapy of migraine in those with migraine with aura may prevent associated strokes. People with migraine, particularly women, may develop higher than average numbers of white matter brain lesions of unclear significance.

==Epidemiology==

Migraine is common, with around 33% of women and 18% of men affected at some point in their lifetime. Onset can be at any age, but prevalence rises sharply around puberty, and remains high until declining after age 50. Before puberty, boys and girls are equally impacted, with around 5% of children experiencing migraine attacks. From puberty onwards, women experience migraine attacks at greater rates than men. From age 30 to 50, up to 4 times as many women experience migraine attacks as men., this is most pronounced in migraine without aura.

Worldwide, migraine affects nearly 15% or approximately one billion people. In the United States, about 6% of men and 18% of women experience a migraine attack in a given year, with a lifetime risk of about 18% and 43% respectively. In Europe, migraine affects 12–28% of people at some point in their lives with about 6–15% of adult men and 14–35% of adult women getting at least one attack yearly. Rates of migraine are slightly lower in Asia and Africa than in Western countries. Chronic migraine occurs in approximately 1.4–2.2% of the population.

During perimenopause symptoms often get worse before decreasing in severity. While symptoms resolve in about two-thirds of the elderly, in 3–10% they persist.

==History==

An early description consistent with migraine is contained in the Ebers Papyrus, written around 1500 BCE in ancient Egypt.

The word &quot;migraine&quot; is from the Greek ἡμικρᾱνίᾱ (&quot;hēmikrāníā&quot;), &#x27;pain in half of the head&#x27;, from ἡμι- (&quot;hēmi-&quot;), &#x27;half&#x27; and κρᾱνίον (&quot;krāníon&quot;), &#x27;skull&#x27;.
In 200 BCE, writings from the Hippocratic school of medicine described the visual aura that can precede the headache and a partial relief occurring through vomiting.

A second-century description by Aretaeus of Cappadocia divided headaches into three types: cephalalgia, cephalea, and heterocrania. Galen of Pergamon used the term hemicrania (half-head), from which the word migraine was eventually derived. He also proposed that the pain arose from the meninges and blood vessels of the head. Migraine was first divided into the two now used types – migraine with aura (&quot;migraine ophthalmique&quot;) and migraine without aura (&quot;migraine vulgaire&quot;) in 1887 by Louis Hyacinthe Thomas, a French librarian. The mystical visions of Hildegard von Bingen, which she described as &quot;reflections of the living light&quot;, are consistent with the visual aura experienced during migraine attacks.
Trepanation, the deliberate drilling of holes into a skull, was practiced as early as 7,000 BCE. While sometimes people survived, many would have died from the procedure due to infection. It was believed to work via &quot;letting evil spirits escape&quot;. William Harvey recommended trepanation as a treatment for migraine in the 17th century. The association between trepanation and headaches in ancient history may simply be a myth or unfounded speculation that originated several centuries later. In 1913, the world-famous American physician William Osler misinterpreted the French anthropologist and physician Paul Broca&#x27;s words about a set of children&#x27;s skulls from the Neolithic age that he found during the 1870s. These skulls presented no evident signs of fractures that could justify this complex surgery for mere medical reasons. Trepanation was probably born of superstitions, to remove &quot;confined demons&quot; inside the head, or to create healing or fortune talismans with the bone fragments removed from the skulls of the patients. However, Osler wanted to make Broca&#x27;s theory more palatable to his modern audiences, and explained that trepanation procedures were used for mild conditions such as &quot;infantile convulsions headache and various cerebral diseases believed to be caused by confined demons.&quot;

While many treatments for migraine have been attempted, it was not until 1868 that use of a substance which eventually turned out to be effective began. This substance was the fungus ergot from which ergotamine was isolated in 1918 and first used to treat migraine in 1925. Methysergide was developed in 1959 and the first triptan, sumatriptan, was developed in 1988. During the 20th century with better study-design, effective preventive measures were found and confirmed.

==Society and culture==
Migraine is a significant source of both medical costs and lost productivity. It has been estimated that migraine is the most costly neurological disorder in the European Community, costing more than €27 billion per year. In the United States, direct costs have been estimated at $17 billion, while indirect costs – such as missed or decreased ability to work – is estimated at $15 billion. Nearly a tenth of the direct cost is due to the cost of triptans. In those who do attend work during a migraine attack, effectiveness is decreased by around a third. Negative impacts also frequently occur for a person&#x27;s family.

==Research==
===Prevention mechanisms===
Transcranial magnetic stimulation shows promise, as does transcutaneous supraorbital nerve stimulation. There is preliminary evidence that a ketogenic diet may help prevent episodic and long-term migraine.

===Sex dependency===
Statistical data indicates that women may be more prone to having migraine, showing migraine incidence three times higher among women than men. The Society for Women&#x27;s Health Research has also mentioned hormonal influences, mainly estrogen, as having a considerable role in provoking migraine pain. Studies and research related to the sex dependencies of migraine are still ongoing, and conclusions have yet to be achieved.
== See also ==
* Cluster headache
* Tension headache
* Trigeminal neuralgia

==References==
==Further reading==
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="0" end="8" title="Migraine" label="Migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="50" end="71" title="neurological disorder" label="neurological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="120" end="128" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="182" end="188" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q281289" start="193" end="198" title="Photophobia" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421356" start="203" end="220" title="Hyperacusis" label="sound sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="264" end="272" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065932" start="274" end="295" title="cognitive dysfunction" label="cognitive dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888634" start="297" end="306" title="allodynia" label="allodynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="312" end="321" title="dizziness" label="dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q739481" start="482" end="486" title="Aura (symptom)" label="aura"/>
<link wikidata="Q461576" start="564" end="593" title="cortical spreading depression" label="cortical spreading depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282120" start="834" end="848" title="Disease burden" label="Disease burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="1043" end="1053" title="nerve cell" label="nerve cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="1167" end="1183" title="vasoconstriction" label="vasoconstriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="1228" end="1240" title="vasodilation" label="vasodilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844299" start="1602" end="1611" title="Migraine treatment" label="treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="1655" end="1664" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186969" start="1692" end="1701" title="ibuprofen" label="ibuprofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57055" start="1706" end="1717" title="paracetamol" label="paracetamol"/>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="1748" end="1758" title="antiemetic" label="antiemetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q423866" start="1866" end="1873" title="triptan" label="triptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q419186" start="1876" end="1886" title="ergotamine" label="ergotamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026329" start="1892" end="1961" title="Gepant" label="calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist (CGRP) inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242393" start="2170" end="2193" title="Prevention of migraine attacks" label="prophylactic medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q816759" start="2263" end="2275" title="beta blocker" label="beta blocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q423364" start="2282" end="2293" title="propranolol" label="propranolol"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="2295" end="2309" title="anticonvulsant" label="anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q240642" start="2316" end="2332" title="Valproate" label="sodium valproate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58397" start="2355" end="2368" title="amitriptyline" label="amitriptyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q119697" start="2380" end="2389" title="Off-label use" label="off-label"/>
<link wikidata="Q15322916" start="2515" end="2522" title="Calcium channel" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q424960" start="2527" end="2541" title="sodium channel" label="sodium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q232438" start="2553" end="2565" title="gap junction" label="gap junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q424216" start="2583" end="2607" title="matrix metalloproteinase" label="matrix metalloproteinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209017" start="2807" end="2815" title="Erenumab" label="Erenumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026329" start="2894" end="2945" title="calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist" label="calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="2975" end="2978" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q499419" start="3167" end="3197" title="Global Burden of Disease Study" label="Global Burden of Disease Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="3390" end="3400" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="3515" end="3524" title="Autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q739481" start="3604" end="3608" title="aura (symptom)" label="aura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140331" start="3953" end="3961" title="prodrome" label="prodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="4068" end="4072" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234134" start="4115" end="4124" title="postdrome" label="postdrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="4218" end="4234" title="major depression" label="major depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="4236" end="4252" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="4254" end="4270" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="4277" end="4306" title="obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="obsessive–compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140331" start="4470" end="4479" title="Prodromal" label="Prodromal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="4735" end="4745" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="4749" end="4757" title="euphoria (emotion)" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="4759" end="4766" title="fatigue (physical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="4853" end="4861" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192560" start="5007" end="5020" title="limbic system" label="limbic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="5025" end="5037" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q739481" start="5105" end="5109" title="aura (symptom)" label="Aura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170403" start="5635" end="5650" title="Persistent aura without infarction" label="persistent aura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637106" start="5692" end="5713" title="scintillating scotoma" label="scintillating scotoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364768" start="5752" end="5767" title="field of vision" label="field of vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q363342" start="6168" end="6179" title="hemianopsia" label="hemianopsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="6501" end="6515" title="proprioceptive" label="position sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="6595" end="6609" title="vertigo" label="world spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587719" start="6684" end="6703" title="hemiplegic migraine" label="hemiplegic migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054088" start="6771" end="6793" title="Auditory hallucination" label="Auditory hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="6798" end="6806" title="delusion" label="delusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="7217" end="7229" title="prophylactic" label="prophylactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191733" start="7327" end="7332" title="pulse" label="pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q281289" start="7909" end="7929" title="photophobia" label="sensitivity to light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421356" start="7931" end="7951" title="Hyperacusis" label="sensitivity to sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772026" start="7953" end="7974" title="osmophobia" label="sensitivity to smells"/>
<link wikidata="Q500339" start="8046" end="8062" title="basilar artery" label="basilar migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="8117" end="8127" title="brain stem" label="brain stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="8208" end="8237" title="vertigo (medical)" label="a sense of the world spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="8272" end="8278" title="Nausea" label="Nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930803" start="8378" end="8392" title="blurred vision" label="blurred vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336398" start="8442" end="8448" title="pallor" label="pallor"/>
<link wikidata="Q372236" start="8707" end="8736" title="acephalgic migraine" label="typical aura without headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="9824" end="9831" title="malaise" label="malaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="10217" end="10241" title="mental disorder" label="psychological conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="10268" end="10278" title="major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="10280" end="10287" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="10293" end="10309" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q124040440" start="10358" end="10371" title="Nerve decompression" label="decompression"/>
<link wikidata="Q244775" start="10809" end="10825" title="Twin study" label="Studies of twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229825" start="11025" end="11044" title="Population studies" label="populations studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="11064" end="11080" title="disease" label="complex disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q501128" start="11097" end="11118" title="single-nucleotide polymorphism" label="genetic risk variants"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="11303" end="11323" title="Single gene disorder" label="Single gene disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312899" start="11384" end="11412" title="familial hemiplegic migraine" label="familial hemiplegic migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="11469" end="11487" title="autosomal dominant" label="autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q911011" start="11609" end="11622" title="ion transport" label="ion transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="11642" end="11646" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18048847" start="11657" end="11662" title="PRRT2" label="PRRT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q323426" start="11684" end="11694" title="exocytosis" label="exocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022718" start="11757" end="11773" title="CADASIL syndrome" label="CADASIL syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q128861" start="11918" end="11947" title="angiotensin converting enzyme" label="angiotensin converting enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15324395" start="11985" end="11990" title="TRPM8" label="TRPM8"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="12021" end="12035" title="Ion channel" label="cation channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q550479" start="12097" end="12108" title="Polygenic trait" label="polygenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q315860" start="12375" end="12380" title="CALCA" label="CALCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q419432" start="12394" end="12399" title="CALCB" label="CALCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027431" start="12417" end="12422" title="HTR1F" label="HTR1F"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030344" start="12540" end="12545" title="PALM" label="PALMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q188010" start="12559" end="12562" title="ABO blood group system" label="ABO"/>
<link wikidata="Q409961" start="12576" end="12581" title="LRRK2" label="LRRK2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17854605" start="12583" end="12590" title="CACNA1A" label="CACNA1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135712" start="12750" end="12766" title="Polygenic score" label="polygenetic risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338684" start="13703" end="13720" title="tension headaches" label="tension headaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="13834" end="13864" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="13926" end="13938" title="menstruation" label="menstruation"/>
<link wikidata="Q492514" start="13975" end="13983" title="menarche" label="menarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344800" start="13985" end="14003" title="oral contraceptive" label="oral contraceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="14009" end="14018" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177708" start="14039" end="14048" title="menopause" label="menopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="14200" end="14206" title="second trimester" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="14211" end="14226" title="third trimester" label="third trimester"/>
<link wikidata="Q165930" start="14376" end="14384" title="tyramine" label="tyramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179678" start="14549" end="14569" title="Monosodium glutamate" label="Monosodium glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="15549" end="15564" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="15594" end="15601" title="neurons" label="neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841674" start="15609" end="15627" title="trigeminal nucleus" label="trigeminal nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="15635" end="15644" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q461576" start="15827" end="15856" title="Cortical spreading depression" label="Cortical spreading depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q680627" start="15907" end="15911" title="Aristides Leão" label="Leão"/>
<link wikidata="Q414896" start="16108" end="16121" title="NMDA receptor" label="NMDA receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="16566" end="16588" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="16613" end="16622" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="16627" end="16639" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635510" start="16718" end="16731" title="sensory nerve" label="sensory nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="16747" end="16759" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394389" start="16824" end="16838" title="dura mater" label="dural arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647118" start="16840" end="16853" title="Pia mater" label="pial arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9622" start="16901" end="16906" title="scalp" label="scalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190012" start="17034" end="17043" title="Adenosine" label="Adenosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q905905" start="17047" end="17061" title="neuromodulator" label="neuromodulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="17123" end="17145" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q356147" start="17171" end="17190" title="adenosine receptors" label="adenosine receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="17547" end="17556" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419432" start="17635" end="17666" title="Calcitonin gene-related peptide" label="Calcitonin gene-related peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="17890" end="17902" title="Neuroimaging" label="Neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349792" start="18223" end="18253" title="International Headache Society" label="International Headache Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q281289" start="18762" end="18773" title="photophobia" label="photophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421356" start="18786" end="18797" title="Hyperacusis" label="phonophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349792" start="19335" end="19365" title="International Headache Society" label="International Headache Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338684" start="19541" end="19562" title="tension-type headache" label="tension-type headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q166907" start="19568" end="19584" title="cluster headache" label="cluster headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312899" start="20049" end="20077" title="familial hemiplegic migraine" label="familial hemiplegic migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587718" start="20082" end="20110" title="sporadic hemiplegic migraine" label="sporadic hemiplegic migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="20406" end="20425" title="dysarthria" label="difficulty speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="20427" end="20441" title="Vertigo (medical)" label="world spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="20443" end="20458" title="tinnitus" label="ringing in ears"/>
<link wikidata="Q500339" start="20593" end="20607" title="basilar artery" label="basilar artery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20725" end="20759" title="ICHD classification and diagnosis of migraine#Migraine with brainstem aura" label="migraine with brainstem aura (MBA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736368" start="20774" end="20790" title="Retinal migraine" label="Retinal migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857905" start="21026" end="21043" title="cyclical vomiting syndrome" label="cyclical vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665125" start="21086" end="21104" title="abdominal migraine" label="abdominal migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887972" start="21158" end="21196" title="benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood" label="benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665125" start="21939" end="21957" title="abdominal migraine" label="abdominal migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857905" start="22400" end="22426" title="cyclical vomiting syndrome" label="cyclical vomiting syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887972" start="22431" end="22469" title="benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood" label="benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="22581" end="22599" title="temporal arteritis" label="temporal arteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166907" start="22601" end="22617" title="cluster headache" label="cluster headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="22620" end="22634" title="acute glaucoma" label="acute glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="22636" end="22646" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q693442" start="22651" end="22674" title="subarachnoid hemorrhage" label="subarachnoid hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q243999" start="22778" end="22784" title="Temple (anatomy)" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q156075" start="22877" end="22883" title="Orbit (anatomy)" label="orbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="22952" end="22957" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338684" start="23012" end="23029" title="Tension headaches" label="Tension headaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="23183" end="23195" title="neuroimaging" label="neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q953049" start="23289" end="23300" title="papilledema" label="papilledema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242393" start="23491" end="23521" title="prevention of migraine attacks" label="prevention of migraine attacks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23526" end="23542" title="Management of migraine#Rescue treatment" label="rescue treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="27700" end="27715" title="ischemic stroke" label="ischemic stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292449" start="27776" end="27798" title="hormonal birth control" label="hormonal birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922751" start="27886" end="27912" title="Vertebral artery dissection" label="cervical artery dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="28336" end="28348" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101065" start="28570" end="28577" title="puberty" label="puberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q177708" start="29514" end="29527" title="perimenopause" label="perimenopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q310301" start="29746" end="29759" title="Ebers Papyrus" label="Ebers Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="29846" end="29851" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="30058" end="30088" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocratic school of medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q505931" start="30227" end="30249" title="Aretaeus of Cappadocia" label="Aretaeus of Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="30327" end="30344" title="Galen" label="Galen of Pergamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q70991" start="30771" end="30791" title="Hildegard von Bingen" label="Hildegard von Bingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q472953" start="30934" end="30945" title="Trepanation" label="Trepanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93128" start="31191" end="31205" title="William Harvey" label="William Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445454" start="32464" end="32469" title="ergot" label="ergot"/>
<link wikidata="Q424442" start="32555" end="32567" title="Methysergide" label="Methysergide"/>
<link wikidata="Q416978" start="32613" end="32624" title="sumatriptan" label="sumatriptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q423866" start="33227" end="33235" title="triptans" label="triptans"/>
<link wikidata="Q263962" start="33446" end="33479" title="Transcranial magnetic stimulation" label="Transcranial magnetic stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724687" start="33503" end="33548" title="transcutaneous supraorbital nerve stimulation" label="transcutaneous supraorbital nerve stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070684" start="33587" end="33601" title="ketogenic diet" label="ketogenic diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552267" start="33822" end="33862" title="Society for Women&amp;#x27;s Health Research" label="Society for Women&amp;#x27;s Health Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q166907" start="34120" end="34136" title="Cluster headache" label="Cluster headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338684" start="34139" end="34155" title="Tension headache" label="Tension headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132120" start="34158" end="34178" title="Trigeminal neuralgia" label="Trigeminal neuralgia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21037" wikidata="Q1319155" url="?curid=21037" title="Meet the Feebles">
<text>Meet the Feebles (also known as Frogs of War in New Zealand as the film&#x27;s English fake working title) is a 1989 New Zealand adult puppet musical black comedy film directed by Peter Jackson, and written by Jackson, Fran Walsh, Stephen Sinclair, and Danny Mulheron (who also performed the body of lead character Heidi the Hippo). The plot follows a stage troupe of puppet animals in a perverse comic satire, in contrast to the positive innocence and naïve folly of The Muppets, the Feebles largely present negativity, vice, and other misanthropic characteristics.

The film is the first Jackson co-wrote with his future partner Fran Walsh, with the two collaborating on all his subsequent films. The film also marked the beginning of Jackson&#x27;s collaborations with Richard Taylor and Wētā Workshop, as created by Taylor and Tania Rodger, who all worked on Jackson&#x27;s subsequent films.

==Plot==

The Feeble Variety Hour theatre troupe is rehearsing with hopes of finding success through being picked up for a syndicated television show. Star singer Heidi is insulted by pornographic director Trevor and complains to her boss and lover Bletch, who is having an affair with Samantha. Robert, the troupe&#x27;s newest member, arrives at the theatre and immediately falls in love with fellow newcomer Lucille. Arthur, the show&#x27;s manager, helps Robert serenade Lucille; and the two become engaged. Samantha scornfully reveals to Heidi her relationship with Bletch. Animal tamer Sid is visited by his ex-girlfriend Sandy who reveals he has a son named Seymour and is preparing a paternity case. Bletch and his henchman Barry consummate a drug deal with dealer Cedric.

Star Harry is suffering from an unknown illness, diagnosed as terminal, and is harassed by reporter F.W. Fly, who ultimately reports his illness to the tabloids. Robert is reassigned to assist drug-addicted knife-thrower Wynyard, who reveals he is a Vietnam veteran and convinces Robert to give him money for drugs under the pretext of charity. Bletch expresses dissatisfaction with Trevor&#x27;s latest porn film, and Trevor sets his sights on Lucille as his new porn star. Trevor drugs and tries to rape Lucille, but is caught by Robert; believing that Lucille had made a move on Trevor, Robert disowns her. After a poor rehearsal and lambasted by director Sebastian, Heidi rushes to Bletch for emotional affirmation, but walks in on him with Samantha. Heidi refuses to perform, but relents after Bletch feigns attraction to her.

Cedric&#x27;s drugs are delivered but turn out to be borax. Travelling to the docks to retrieve the actual drugs, Bletch, Trevor, and Barry kill Cedric and his associates, but Barry is killed in the process. After seeing a newspaper article about Harry&#x27;s illness, Bletch retaliates by killing Fly. Lucille tries to convince Robert of her love for him, but he tells her he never wants to see her again. Heidi&#x27;s successful performance grants the Feebles approval for a syndicated television show. Heidi attempts to seduce Bletch, but Bletch confesses to Heidi that he hates her and wants to give her role to Samantha. Heidi mentally breaks down.

Things go awry during the performances. An ailing Harry vomits, Sid is accosted by Sandy with Seymour on stage, and a high Wynyard accidentally kills himself with one of his knives. After a failed attempt at hanging herself, Heidi prepares to commit suicide with an M60 machine gun. Samantha walks in and taunts Heidi, causing Heidi to snap and shoot Samantha dead. In a desperate attempt to save the show, Sebastian puts on a failed musical number about sodomy.

Heidi goes on a shooting spree throughout the theater, killing many of the troupe. Harry is killed after finding out his illness is not terminal, Sid is shot in the kneecaps while saving Seymour after Sandy is killed, and Sebastian hides in Harry&#x27;s giant carrot-rocket which crashes in the chaos. Robert rescues Lucille from being shot and professes that he still loves her as Lucille tells him the truth about Trevor. Bletch attempts to talk Heidi into surrendering, but she opens fire on him. An injured Bletch proclaims that he loves Heidi before Trevor incapacitates her with a shotgun. Bletch orders Trevor to kill Heidi, but Robert intervenes by colliding with Trevor, allowing Heidi to shoot him dead. Bletch lunges at Heidi, but is killed too. Arthur tells Heidi that he has regrettably informed the police. Heidi accepts this and makes a last request for her musical number to be played.

A photographic postscript reveals that Sid had surgery on his kneecaps and works in an orchard as a struggling horticulturist with his son Seymour. Arthur received an OBE for his lifelong service to theater and retired to the country. Sebastian achieved worldwide fame for his best-seller &quot;The Feeble Variety Massacre: One Man&#x27;s Act of Heroism!&quot; and is currently negotiating the film rights. Robert and Lucille are married with two children, with Robert now an award-winning fashion photographer for a women&#x27;s magazine. After serving 10 years in a female penitentiary, Heidi has been rehabilitated into the community and works under a new identity on the check-out of a supermarket.

==Cast==
===Puppeteers===
* Danny Mulheron as Heidi the Hippo (in-suit performer)
* Jonathon Acorn - Supervising puppeteer
* Ramon Aguilar - Supervising puppeteer
* Eleanor Aitken
* Terri Anderton
* Sean Ashton-Peach
* Carl Buckley
* Sarah Glensor
* George Port
* Ian Williamson
* Justine Wright

===Voices===
* Donna Akersten as:
** Lucille the Dog
** Samantha the Cat
** Dorothy the Sheep
** Female Rabbit #1
** Chorus Girl #2
** Fitness Tape Voice
* Stuart Devenie as:
** Sebastian the Fox
** Daisy the Cow (Madame Bovine)
** Sandy the Chicken
** Cedric the Warthog
** Eight Ball the Frog
** Seymour the Elechicken (elephant/chicken hybrid)
** Female Rabbit #2
** Chorus Girl #1
* Mark Hadlow as:
** Robert the Hedgehog
** Heidi the Hippo
** Barry the Bulldog
** Chorus Girl #3
* Ross Jolly as:
** Harry the Rabbit (doing a Mel Blanc impression)
** Dennis the Aardvark
** Abi Bargwan the Contortionist
** Mr. Big the Whale
** Pekingese
** Crab 2
** Vietnamese Gophers 2
* Brian Sergent as:
** Wynyard the Frog (doing a Jim Ignatowski impression)
** Trevor the Rat (doing a Peter Lorre impression)
** F. W. Fly the Fly
** Dr. Quack the Duck (doing a Paul Lynde impression)
** Jim the Frog
** Chuck the Frog
** The Spider
** Vietnamese Gophers
* Peter Vere-Jones as:
** Bletch the Walrus
** Arthur the Worm
** The Baker
** Newspaper Mouse (Paperboy)
** The Announcer
* Mark Wright as:
** Sid the Elephant
** The Masked Masochist (The Weta)
** Louie the Dog
** Guppy the Fish
** Poodle
** Snake bartender
** Crab 1
** Chorus Girl #4
* Fane Flaws as Musician Frog (uncredited)

==Production==
The film was originally conceived as part of a television series, and only belatedly became a feature after Japanese investors proposed expanding it; as such, the script was hastily re-written. The dialogue was recorded before shooting began. Made on an extremely low budget considering the time-consuming process of working with puppets, the film went over budget and schedule. The feature was filmed in Wellington, with the majority of the scenes being filmed on multiple constructed sets places, in an abandoned railway shed (Shed No. 12 to be exact) at the dockyards. Some scenes were filmed outside the goods shed, such as a few external and internal scenes that were filmed at The St. James Theatre. During filming, some scenes, including the Vietnam flashback, were funded by members of the film crew, and filmed secretly under the title &quot;Frogs of War&quot;. The Vietnam flashback includes a game of Russian roulette as a parody of &quot;The Deer Hunter&quot;. An initial application for Film Commission money was rejected by executive director Jim Booth, who a short time later became Jackson&#x27;s producer. The Commission eventually granted the production two-thirds of its $750,000 budget, though relationships between the funders and the production soured and the Film Commission removed its credit from the film.

It is often mistakenly stated that there are no human characters in the film; the character Abi is a human. However, there are no &quot;real-life&quot; human characters in the film. Director Jackson has a cameo as an audience member dressed as an alien from &quot;Bad Taste&quot;. Every vehicle seen in the film is a variation on the Morris Minor, including a specially constructed limousine. Morris Minors also appear in Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Bad Taste&quot; and &quot;Braindead&quot;. By presumed coincidence, one of the characters, Harry the Hare, shares a name with the title character of James B. Hemesath&#x27;s short story &quot;Harry the Hare&quot; (himself a Bugs Bunny pastiche), written for Harlan Ellison&#x27;s anthology &quot;Again, Dangerous Visions&quot; in 1972.

==Soundtrack==

The film&#x27;s music was composed by Peter Dasent. The soundtrack was released in 1991 by Q.D.K. Media.

;Track listing

==Release==
The film was marketed in some countries with the tagline: &quot;From the director of &quot;Bad Taste&quot;, comes a movie with no taste at all!&quot;

&quot;Meet the Feebles&quot; was given its public premiere at a fantasy film festival in Hamburg, in April 1990.

From then on, the film was released theatrically in Japan (7 December 1990); Portugal (February 1991); Australia (March 1991); Sweden (April 1991); Germany (May 1991); France (July 1991); United Kingdom (April 1992); and the United States (February 1995 in New York and September 1995 nationwide).

The film was banned in Ireland and remains banned as of 2023.

==Reception==
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 72% based on reviews from 25 critics, with an average rating of 6.5/10. The site&#x27;s consensus reads &quot;Dark and vulgar, &quot;Meet the Feebles&quot; is a backstage comedy featuring puppets that offers proof of Peter Jackson&#x27;s taste for sheer outrageousness, even if it often lapses into pure juvenilia.&quot;

During a limited theatrical release in North America in 2002, critic James Berardinelli touched on aspects of the film which likely helped ensure it limited release in cinemas. &quot;The stories of these ... characters are told in a disgustingly graphic, obscenely offbeat, and caustically funny manner. &quot;Meet the Feebles&quot; is for those with a strong stomach and a seriously warped sense of humor. The film is so off the beaten track that it makes Monty Python seem mainstream.&quot; Janet Maslin of the &quot;New York Times&quot; gave it 2 out of 5 and wrote that it was &quot;Destined to stand as an unfortunate footnote to Mr. Jackson&#x27;s career.&quot;

==Legacy==
Despite being a commercial failure on release (grossing only 80,000), the film went on to develop a cult following, gaining new fans after the success of Jackson&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; trilogy. During his acceptance speech at the 2004 Academy Awards, Jackson joked that both &quot;Meet the Feebles&quot; and &quot;Bad Taste&quot; had been &quot;wisely overlooked by the Academy.&quot;

The titular Feebles are briefly mentioned in the seventh episode of the 2023 television series &quot;The Muppets Mayhem&quot; during a cameo by Jackson. Floyd Pepper notes the Electric Mayhem hadn&#x27;t crossed paths with Jackson &quot;since that night in Wellington...when we met the Feebles,&quot; with Jackson remarking that two Feebles were now in witness protection, and the remainder in prison.

==See also==
* New Zealand humour
* Adult puppeteering
* Midnight movie
* &quot;Avenue Q&quot; - An adult-themed musical play featuring human and puppet actors.
* &quot;The Happytime Murders&quot; - Henson Alternative&#x27;s first film.
* &quot;The Deer Hunter&quot;
* &quot;The Exorcist&quot;

==References==
==External links==

* Trailer on YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4685933" start="129" end="141" title="adult puppeteering" label="adult puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="142" end="149" title="Musical film" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="150" end="162" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="180" end="193" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q116861" start="219" end="229" title="Fran Walsh" label="Fran Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498652" start="231" end="247" title="Stephen Sinclair" label="Stephen Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220654" start="253" end="267" title="Danny Mulheron" label="Danny Mulheron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953422" start="468" end="479" title="The Muppets" label="The Muppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="537" end="549" title="Misanthropy" label="misanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116861" start="631" end="641" title="Fran Walsh" label="Fran Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q630767" start="772" end="786" title="Richard Taylor (filmmaker)" label="Richard Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236009" start="791" end="804" title="Wētā Workshop" label="Wētā Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="1020" end="1030" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="1081" end="1093" title="pornographic" label="pornographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772698" start="1171" end="1177" title="affair" label="affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526635" start="1261" end="1286" title="Love at first sight" label="immediately falls in love"/>
<link wikidata="Q215911" start="1363" end="1371" title="serenade" label="serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540608" start="1589" end="1603" title="Paternity lawsuit" label="paternity case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="1770" end="1778" title="reporter" label="reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="1831" end="1839" title="Tabloid journalism" label="tabloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="1872" end="1885" title="drug-addicted" label="drug-addicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928606" start="1929" end="1944" title="Vietnam veteran" label="Vietnam veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="2083" end="2092" title="porn film" label="porn film"/>
<link wikidata="Q488111" start="2143" end="2152" title="porn star" label="porn star"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="2180" end="2184" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319" start="2565" end="2570" title="borax" label="borax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="2735" end="2744" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="3223" end="3229" title="vomits" label="vomits"/>
<link wikidata="Q865968" start="3285" end="3289" title="Substance intoxication" label="high"/>
<link wikidata="Q494361" start="3433" end="3448" title="M60 machine gun" label="M60 machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="3622" end="3628" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="4645" end="4659" title="horticulturist" label="horticulturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="4701" end="4704" title="OBE" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709045" start="4928" end="4939" title="film rights" label="film rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146354" start="5024" end="5044" title="fashion photographer" label="fashion photographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q386147" start="5209" end="5218" title="Point of sale" label="check-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220654" start="5266" end="5280" title="Danny Mulheron" label="Danny Mulheron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626466" start="5691" end="5705" title="Stuart Devenie" label="Stuart Devenie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900087" start="5922" end="5933" title="Mark Hadlow" label="Mark Hadlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q349690" start="6065" end="6074" title="Mel Blanc" label="Mel Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965252" start="6213" end="6226" title="Brian Sergent" label="Brian Sergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195824" start="6260" end="6274" title="Jim Ignatowski" label="Jim Ignatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q78505" start="6314" end="6325" title="Peter Lorre" label="Peter Lorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972958" start="6390" end="6400" title="Paul Lynde" label="Paul Lynde"/>
<link wikidata="Q55275424" start="6485" end="6501" title="Peter Vere-Jones" label="Peter Vere-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021251" start="6608" end="6619" title="Mark Wright (actor)" label="Mark Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065917" start="6673" end="6677" title="Wētā" label="Weta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433739" start="6773" end="6783" title="Fane Flaws" label="Fane Flaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="7235" end="7245" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q565497" start="7513" end="7534" title="St. James Theatre, Wellington" label="The St. James Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7579" end="7586" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q201045" start="7742" end="7758" title="Russian roulette" label="Russian roulette"/>
<link wikidata="Q201674" start="7780" end="7795" title="The Deer Hunter" label="The Deer Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548674" start="8497" end="8509" title="Morris Minor" label="Morris Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188475" start="8545" end="8554" title="limousine" label="limousine"/>
<link wikidata="Q605204" start="8606" end="8615" title="Bad Taste" label="Bad Taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q897429" start="8632" end="8641" title="Braindead (film)" label="Braindead"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="8830" end="8840" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="8864" end="8885" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690992" start="8902" end="8926" title="Again, Dangerous Visions" label="Again, Dangerous Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173553" start="8997" end="9009" title="Peter Dasent" label="Peter Dasent"/>
<link wikidata="Q605204" start="9184" end="9193" title="Bad Taste" label="Bad Taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q204854" start="9287" end="9302" title="Film premiere" label="public premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="9737" end="9752" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832895" start="10092" end="10101" title="juvenilia" label="juvenilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491297" start="10119" end="10145" title="Limited release" label="limited theatrical release"/>
<link wikidata="Q711909" start="10179" end="10197" title="James Berardinelli" label="James Berardinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="10567" end="10579" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="10603" end="10615" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10629" end="10643" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="10806" end="10824" title="Box-office bomb" label="commercial failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="10959" end="11000" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="&amp;quot;The Lord of the Rings&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458646" start="11038" end="11057" title="76th Academy Awards" label="2004 Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q605204" start="11122" end="11131" title="Bad Taste" label="Bad Taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944399" start="11295" end="11313" title="The Muppets Mayhem" label="The Muppets Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="11329" end="11334" title="Cameo appearance" label="cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051612" start="11612" end="11630" title="New Zealand humour" label="New Zealand humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685933" start="11633" end="11651" title="Adult puppeteering" label="Adult puppeteering"/>
<link wikidata="Q638364" start="11654" end="11668" title="Midnight movie" label="Midnight movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q790583" start="11677" end="11685" title="Avenue Q" label="Avenue Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086870" start="11766" end="11787" title="The Happytime Murders" label="The Happytime Murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914692" start="11796" end="11814" title="The Jim Henson Company" label="Henson Alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q201674" start="11842" end="11857" title="The Deer Hunter" label="The Deer Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q274167" start="11872" end="11884" title="The Exorcist (film)" label="The Exorcist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21040" wikidata="Q764372" url="?curid=21040" title="Mafic">
<text>A mafic mineral or rock is a silicate mineral or igneous rock rich in magnesium and iron. Most mafic minerals are dark in color, and common rock-forming mafic minerals include olivine, pyroxene, amphibole, and biotite. Common mafic rocks include basalt, diabase and gabbro. Mafic rocks often also contain calcium-rich varieties of plagioclase feldspar. Mafic materials can also be described as ferromagnesian.

==History==
The term &quot;mafic&quot; is a portmanteau of &quot;magnesium&quot; and &quot;ferric&quot; and was coined by Charles Whitman Cross, Joseph P. Iddings, Louis V. Pirsson, and Henry Stephens Washington in 1912. Cross&#x27; group had previously divided the major rock-forming minerals found in igneous rocks into &quot;salic&quot; minerals, such as quartz, feldspars, or feldspathoids, and &quot;femic&quot; minerals, such as olivine and pyroxene. However, micas and aluminium-rich amphiboles were excluded, while some calcium minerals containing little iron or magnesium, such as wollastonite or apatite, were included in the femic minerals. Cross and his coinvestigators later clarified that micas and aluminium amphiboles belonged to a separate category of &quot;alferric&quot; minerals. They then introduced the term &quot;mafic&quot; for ferromagnesian minerals of all types, in preference to the term &quot;femag&quot; coined by A. Johannsen in 1911, whose sound they disliked.

==Minerals==
The term &quot;mafic&quot; is still widely used for dark-colored ferromagnesian minerals. Modern classification schemes, such as the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) classification of igneous rocks, include some light-colored ferromagnesian minerals, such as melilite, in the mafic mineral fraction. Accessory minerals, such as zircon or apatite, may also be included in the mafic mineral fraction for purposes of precise classification.

==Rocks==
When applied to rocks, the term &quot;mafic&quot; is used primarily as a field term to describe dark-colored igneous rocks. The term is not used as a rock classification in the IUGS classification scheme. Mafic rocks are sometimes more precisely defined as igneous rocks with a high proportion of pyroxene and olivine, so that their color index (the volume fraction of dark mafic minerals) is between 50 and 90. Most mafic volcanic rocks are more precisely classified as basalts.

Chemically, mafic rocks are sometimes defined as rocks with a silica content between 45 and 55 wt%, corresponding to the silica content of basalt in the TAS classification. Such rocks are enriched in iron, magnesium and calcium and typically dark in color. In contrast, the felsic rocks are typically light in color and enriched in aluminium and silicon along with potassium and sodium. The mafic rocks also typically have a higher density than felsic rocks. The term roughly corresponds to the older &quot;basic rock&quot; class.

Mafic lava, before cooling, has a low viscosity, in comparison with felsic lava, due to the lower silica content in mafic magma. Water and other volatiles can more easily and gradually escape from mafic lava. As a result, eruptions of volcanoes made of mafic lavas are less explosively violent than felsic-lava eruptions.

== See also ==

*QAPF diagram
*List of minerals
*List of rock types
*Bowen&#x27;s reaction series

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="2" end="7" title="Mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="29" end="45" title="silicate mineral" label="silicate mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="49" end="61" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="70" end="79" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="84" end="88" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="176" end="183" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="185" end="193" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="195" end="204" title="amphibole" label="amphibole"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="210" end="217" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="246" end="252" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q753016" start="254" end="261" title="diabase" label="diabase"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="266" end="272" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="305" end="312" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="331" end="342" title="plagioclase" label="plagioclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="394" end="408" title="Mafic" label="ferromagnesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="455" end="466" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308920" start="533" end="554" title="Charles Whitman Cross" label="Charles Whitman Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707794" start="556" end="573" title="Joseph P. Iddings" label="Joseph P. Iddings"/>
<link wikidata="Q28949143" start="575" end="591" title="Louis V. Pirsson" label="Louis V. Pirsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785006" start="597" end="622" title="Henry Stephens Washington" label="Henry Stephens Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="769" end="775" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="777" end="785" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006122" start="791" end="803" title="feldspathoid" label="feldspathoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="846" end="853" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="858" end="866" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="877" end="881" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="902" end="911" title="amphibole" label="amphibole"/>
<link wikidata="Q423018" start="1001" end="1013" title="wollastonite" label="wollastonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178397" start="1017" end="1024" title="apatite" label="apatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q579663" start="1551" end="1593" title="International Union of Geological Sciences" label="International Union of Geological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q414123" start="1694" end="1702" title="melilite" label="melilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="1735" end="1752" title="Accessory mineral" label="Accessory mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q178928" start="1763" end="1769" title="zircon" label="zircon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="1957" end="1967" title="Field work" label="field term"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396371" start="2217" end="2228" title="Color index (geology)" label="color index"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="2355" end="2361" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q899138" start="2460" end="2463" title="wt%" label="wt%"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753363" start="2518" end="2536" title="TAS classification" label="TAS classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="2585" end="2592" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q847257" start="2639" end="2645" title="felsic" label="felsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="2697" end="2706" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="2711" end="2718" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="2730" end="2739" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="2744" end="2750" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="2797" end="2804" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="2903" end="2907" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="2935" end="2944" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="2995" end="3001" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="3019" end="3024" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247570" start="3237" end="3249" title="QAPF diagram" label="QAPF diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q243479" start="3251" end="3267" title="List of minerals" label="List of minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q918774" start="3269" end="3287" title="List of rock types" label="List of rock types"/>
<link wikidata="Q848628" start="3289" end="3317" title="Bowen&amp;#x27;s reaction series" label="Bowen&amp;#x27;s reaction series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21047" wikidata="Q1531518" url="?curid=21047" title="Military ordinariate">
<text>A military ordinariate is an ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Catholic Church, of the Latin or an Eastern church, responsible for the pastoral care of Catholics serving in the armed forces of a nation.

Until 1986, they were called &quot;military vicariates&quot; and had a status similar to that of apostolic vicariates, which are headed by a bishop who receives his authority by delegation from the Pope. The apostolic constitution &quot;Spirituali militum curae&quot; of 21 April 1986 raised their status, declaring that the bishop who heads one of them is an &quot;ordinary&quot;, holding authority by virtue of his office, and not by delegation from another person in authority. It likened the military vicariates to dioceses. Each of them is headed by a bishop, who may have the personal rank of archbishop. If the bishop is a diocesan, he is likely to delegate the daily functions to an auxiliary bishop or a lower cleric.

Some nations have military ordinariates of the Anglican Communion, Lutheranism, and Eastern Orthodoxy.

The personal ordinariates for Anglicans entering the Catholic Church announced on 20 October 2009 are similar in some ways to the existing military ordinariates. But the jurisdiction of military ordinariates is cumulative to that of the diocesan bishops.

==List of Catholic military ordinariates==
==See also==
*
*Military chaplain
*Patron saints of the military
* Blue Mass

==References==
==External links==
*Military Ordinariates in the world by GCatholic.org
*Catholic Hierarchy.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1531518" start="2" end="22" title="Military ordinariate" label="military ordinariate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="64" end="79" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="88" end="93" title="Latin Church" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="100" end="107" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="178" end="190" title="military" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q620225" start="302" end="321" title="apostolic vicariate" label="apostolic vicariate"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="346" end="352" title="Bishop (Catholic Church)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="403" end="407" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q620035" start="413" end="435" title="apostolic constitution" label="apostolic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="724" end="731" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="762" end="768" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="804" end="814" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144278" start="835" end="843" title="diocesan bishop" label="diocesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q75178" start="896" end="912" title="auxiliary bishop" label="auxiliary bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="980" end="998" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1000" end="1011" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="1017" end="1034" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15150553" start="1041" end="1061" title="personal ordinariate" label="personal ordinariate"/>
<link wikidata="Q918824" start="1352" end="1369" title="Military chaplain" label="Military chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147768" start="1371" end="1400" title="Patron saints of the military" label="Patron saints of the military"/>
<link wikidata="Q18669741" start="1403" end="1412" title="Blue Mass" label="Blue Mass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21049" wikidata="Q220317" url="?curid=21049" title="Maxis">
<text>Maxis is an American video game developer and a division of Electronic Arts (EA). The studio was founded in 1987 by Will Wright and Jeff Braun, and acquired by Electronic Arts in 1997. Maxis is best known for its simulation games, including &quot;The Sims&quot;, &quot;Spore&quot; and &quot;SimCity&quot;.

== History ==
=== Independent studio (1987–1997) ===
Maxis was founded in 1987 by Will Wright and Jeff Braun to help publish &quot;SimCity&quot; on home computers. Before then, the game was only available on a limited basis on the Commodore 64 due to few publishers showing any interest in porting a non-traditional game without definite &quot;win&quot; and &quot;lose&quot; conditions. The title went on to become one of the most popular and successful video games of all time. The &quot;SimCity&quot; series became a staple for the company and spawned multiple sequels and spin-offs. To name the company, Braun required that the name was &quot;from 5-7 letters, mean nothing, be easy to remember and contain an x, z, or q&quot;; the name &quot;Maxis&quot; was presented by Braun&#x27;s father. Following the broad success of &quot;SimCity 2000&quot;, Maxis moved from Orinda, California, to Walnut Creek in 1994.

One of the unintended successes of &quot;SimCity&quot; was recognition of the means to gamify the intersection of multiple real-world systems that could be used for planning and development, such as using &quot;SimCity&quot;-type simulations for urban planning. Around 1992, Maxis was approached by corporations and government agencies who wanted the company to use the same system simulation principles of &quot;SimCity&quot; to develop non-game simulations that they could manipulate for similar planning purposes. To support this, Maxis bought a small company, Delta Logic, and its owner John Hiles, who had been focused on more immediate business simulation software, and rebranded it as Maxis Business Simulations (MBS) for this work. Among works developed under this included &quot;SimRefinery&quot; for the Chevron Corporation, and &quot;SimHealth&quot; for the Markle Foundation. In 1994, Maxis decided to let this division go on its own; MBS rebranded itself as Thinking Tools Inc. and continued to produce similar simulation tools, but eventually closed down in 1998. Most of the information on MBS and Thinking Tools has been lost as upon being told of the company&#x27;s closure, the few remaining employees burned most of the company&#x27;s archives and only remnants of MBS&#x27; output exists.

In what &quot;Kotaku&quot; later referred to as the &quot;era of scattergun experimentation&quot;, Maxis released numerous titles throughout the 1990s, including &quot;sim&quot; titles as well as some non-simulation titles, such as &quot;RoboSport&quot; (1991) and &quot;3D Pinball for Windows&quot; (1995), which was included as one of the standard system games in several Windows releases; however, these newer games were not successful. On June 1, 1995, Maxis became a public company. Heavy losses and lack of direction led Maxis to begin considering acquisition offers.

=== Early years under Electronic Arts (1997–2006) ===
In 1997, Maxis agreed to be acquired by Electronic Arts by means of a stock swap which valued Maxis at $125 million. In a press release, Maxis stated it agreed to the acquisition in order to take advantage of Electronic Arts&#x27; strong distribution channel. The transaction was complete on July 28, 1997, and triggered major changes at the company. Jeff Braun left, having received a sizeable amount of money during the purchase, and nearly half of the Maxis staff were laid off.

Over 1998, Maxis was allowed to finish &quot;SimCity 3000&quot; on its own time; following this, Wright&#x27;s efforts were thrown into &quot;The Sims&quot;, at the time seen as a major gamble for the company, as the dollhouse game was not seen as a match for the video game market&#x27;s demographics. EA backed the title on the basis of the economic potential for expansion releases. In 2000, Maxis South (Austin, Texas) was closed. &quot;The Sims&quot; was released in February 2000 to widespread success, and would become one of Maxis&#x27; core focuses until a 2006 reorganisation shifted it away from their core team. &quot;SimCity 4&quot; was released in 2003, the first title in the series to implement true 3D, as well as the first where Wright was not directly involved with work. In 2004, Maxis&#x27; longtime studios in Walnut Creek were closed, and the staff moved to EA offices in Redwood City and Emeryville.

=== &quot;Spore&quot; and &quot;SimCity&quot; reboot (2006–2014) ===

As &quot;The Sims&quot; became a steady success, Will Wright began to focus on &quot;Spore&quot;. The three years between its public announcement and its release were protracted enough to attract use of the term &quot;vaporware&quot; by some, and upon its 2008 release, found itself subject to harsh criticism and the target of a consumer protest against Electronic Arts. Despite the poor launch publicity, &quot;Spore&quot; sold 1 million units in its first month.

Will Wright left Maxis in 2009, with Maxis going on to produce the poorly received spinoff &quot;Darkspore&quot; in 2011. During this time, Maxis.com redirected to the &quot;Spore&quot; website, then later once more to the website for &quot;The Sims&quot;. At the 2012 Game Developers Conference, EA announced a new &quot;SimCity&quot; along with a new logo for the Maxis brand. Maxis became one of four primary labels at EA, replacing the &quot;EA Play&quot; brand. A Mobile focused Maxis studio was opened in Helsinki by EA in 2012. Development of &quot;The Sims&quot; continued, and Maxis branding returned in 2013 with the launch of &quot;The Sims 3: University Life&quot;, and &quot;SimCity&quot;. While Maxis were focusing on graphical improvements with the &quot;SimCity&quot; reboot, EA wanted to make the game multiplayer and always-online, in part to combat piracy. The game was subject to &quot;one of the most disastrous launches in history&quot;, as the game was released in a highly buggy state, with server failures plaguing players, and the open regions swiftly filling with abandoned cities. Maxis would continue to support the game with patches, but it remained buggy even a year after launch. The reboot effectively ended the &quot;SimCity&quot; franchise, and was the last game to be developed by Maxis&#x27; core location in Emeryville.

=== Studio closures and layoffs (2014–2019) ===
In the wake of the &quot;SimCity&quot; launch, Maxis went through a series of layoffs and studio closures, which continued throughout the late 2010s. This began with the 2014 restructure of EA Salt Lake, dissolving the Maxis group that had been headquartered there. A number of Maxis devs were migrated to the Redwood Shores studio. Maxis&#x27; principal studio in Emeryville was closed in 2015, leaving only the smaller Redwood Shores team and a newly opened mobile developer in Helsinki under the Maxis name.

In September 2015, EA announced that the consolidated Maxis team would work alongside the EA Mobile division under Samantha Ryan. EA indicated that the &quot;collaboration&quot; would still see most of Maxis&#x27; future products available for personal computers. The group was then reorganised under EA Worldwide Studios in 2016, with the rest of Salt Lake shut down in 2017. Redwood Shores faced further layoffs in 2018, which included 15-20 Maxis staff. Development of &quot;The Sims Mobile&quot; was relocated away from the remaining Maxis developers in 2019, with Firemonkeys taking over. This left continued support for &quot;The Sims 4&quot; as the sole Maxis-fronted project at EA.

The closure of Emeryville in particular—as Maxis&#x27; long-lived core location—was described by commentators as the end of Maxis as it had been known in the past, with only the brand name persisting.

=== New studios under the &quot;Maxis&quot; brand (2019–present) ===
EA announced two new studios that would bear the Maxis name over the following years – Maxis Texas in 2019 and Maxis Europe in 2021. The announcements only came in the form of job postings on the EA careers website. The Texas team was set up at the existing EA offices in Austin to work on a new IP, while the Europe studio was created specifically to support &quot;The Sims 4&quot;. Unlike the Texas office, Maxis Europe is a &quot;distributed development team&quot;, composed of staff working remotely.

The move came amid a number of job postings at the Redwood Shores studio for a new &quot;The Sims&quot; title, as well as EA CEO Andrew Wilson hinting at an online multiplayer-focused iteration of the franchise. In 2021, EA reaffirmed their commitment to long term support for &quot;The Sims 4&quot;, citing a &quot;shift across the entire games industry to support and nurture our communities long-term&quot;.

== Notable games ==
Maxis is regarded for its innovative simulation games, in which there is no specific goal to the player, making its games almost endless.

=== &quot;SimCity&quot; series ===

&quot;SimCity&quot;, released in 1989, was Maxis&#x27; first release. The player is a mayor that may, at their leisure, take a city from a single village to a successful metropolis, laying down zones, taking care of the public services and stimulating the city&#x27;s economy. The series includes six main games (&quot;SimCity&quot;, &quot;SimCity 2000&quot;, &quot;SimCity 3000&quot;, &quot;SimCity 4&quot;, &quot;SimCity Societies&quot; and &quot;SimCity&quot;) and three spin-offs, &quot;Sim City: The Card Game&quot;, &quot;SimCopter&quot; and &quot;Streets of SimCity&quot;. &quot;SimCity Societies&quot;, the fifth main release, was not produced by Maxis, but by Tilted Mill Entertainment, being described as a &#x27;social engineering simulator&#x27; and criticized for the lack of &quot;SimCity&quot;″s traditional formula. In 2013, Maxis Emeryville released a reboot, simply titled &quot;SimCity&quot;, to mixed reviews, due to technical issues at launch surrounding its mandatory online connectivity. TrackTwenty (formerly Maxis Helsinki) developed &quot;&quot; in 2014.

=== &quot;The Sims&quot; ===

Maxis&#x27; most successful series to date and one of the best-selling PC games of all time is &quot;The Sims&quot; (2000). Maxis has developed seven expansion packs for the game, as well as an online spin-off titled &quot;The Sims Online&quot;. Maxis released &quot;The Sims 2&quot; in 2004, a sequel title that features a full 3D environment, as opposed to the original&#x27;s dimetric engine. From 2006 to 2013, all &quot;The Sims&quot; games and expansion packs were developed by The Sims Studio, and the Maxis logo was not included on &quot;The Sims&quot; game covers until 2013, with the release of &quot;The Sims 3: University Life&quot;. On May 6, 2013, it was announced that Maxis would be developing &quot;The Sims 4&quot;, and the game was released internationally in September 2014. Maxis also developed &quot;The Sims Mobile&quot;, until development was transferred to Firemonkeys in February 2019.

=== &quot;Spore&quot; ===

&quot;Spore&quot; was released in September 2008. Players create species starting at the single cell level, and develop them into sentient life. The goal is for them to eventually gain the intelligence to create spaceships. The &quot;Spore Creature Creator&quot; allows users to create species for later use in the game. This is one of few Maxis&#x27; games to feature goals on its plot as the player must complete five different phases and reach the space-traveling technology. There is also an ultimate goal, which is entering the galactic core, a massive black hole surrounded by a powerful and hostile cyborg species called the Grox; however, the player can stay in a single phase as long as they wish, even after completing it. The game received a critic score of 84% on Metacritic, indicating generally positive reviews from critics. Electronic Arts confirmed the production of expansion packs due to &quot;Spore&quot;″s financial success, later releasing &quot;Spore Galactic Adventures&quot; in 2009, as well as several spin-offs such as &quot;Darkspore&quot;.

== See also ==
* List of Sim video games
* List of Maxis games

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q220317" start="0" end="5" title="Maxis" label="Maxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="21" end="41" title="video game developer" label="video game developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q334453" start="48" end="56" title="Division (business)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="60" end="75" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q309493" start="116" end="127" title="Will Wright (game designer)" label="Will Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610017" start="213" end="228" title="simulation game" label="simulation game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897444" start="247" end="255" title="The Sims" label="The Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q210844" start="269" end="274" title="Spore (2008 video game)" label="Spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q249854" start="291" end="298" title="SimCity" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q309493" start="389" end="400" title="Will Wright (game designer)" label="Will Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798922" start="438" end="445" title="SimCity (1989 video game)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="538" end="550" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137109" start="562" end="572" title="video game publisher" label="publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="597" end="604" title="porting" label="porting"/>
<link wikidata="Q249854" start="790" end="816" title="SimCity" label="&amp;quot;SimCity&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767176" start="1140" end="1152" title="SimCity 2000" label="SimCity 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q206464" start="1177" end="1195" title="Orinda, California" label="Orinda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q493261" start="1200" end="1212" title="Walnut Creek, California" label="Walnut Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="1469" end="1483" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517236" start="2011" end="2022" title="SimRefinery" label="SimRefinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="2037" end="2056" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529609" start="2068" end="2077" title="SimHealth" label="SimHealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771093" start="2092" end="2109" title="Markle Foundation" label="Markle Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083295" start="2547" end="2553" title="Kotaku" label="Kotaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353247" start="2771" end="2780" title="RoboSport" label="RoboSport"/>
<link wikidata="Q674213" start="2804" end="2826" title="Full Tilt! Pinball" label="3D Pinball for Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="3005" end="3019" title="public company" label="public company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604906" start="3190" end="3198" title="List of acquisitions by Electronic Arts" label="acquired"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091455" start="3232" end="3242" title="stock swap" label="stock swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q207184" start="3284" end="3297" title="press release" label="press release"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750905" start="3690" end="3702" title="SimCity 3000" label="SimCity 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q184816" start="3787" end="3795" title="The Sims (video game)" label="The Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q719670" start="4275" end="4284" title="SimCity 4" label="SimCity 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q493261" start="4477" end="4489" title="Walnut Creek, California" label="Walnut Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q505549" start="4540" end="4552" title="Redwood City, California" label="Redwood City"/>
<link wikidata="Q499178" start="4557" end="4567" title="Emeryville, California" label="Emeryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q309493" start="4689" end="4700" title="Will Wright (game designer)" label="Will Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q210844" start="4725" end="4730" title="Spore (2008 video game)" label="Spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q281066" start="4858" end="4867" title="vaporware" label="vaporware"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="4995" end="5010" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q309493" start="5107" end="5118" title="Will Wright (game designer)" label="Will Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662088" start="5204" end="5213" title="Darkspore" label="Darkspore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154933" start="5376" end="5402" title="Game Developers Conference" label="Game Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q917647" start="5429" end="5436" title="SimCity (2013 video game)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897444" start="5663" end="5671" title="The Sims" label="The Sims"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5750" end="5777" title="The Sims 3: University Life" label="The Sims 3: University Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q917647" start="5795" end="5802" title="SimCity (2013 video game)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117953" start="6704" end="6716" title="EA Salt Lake" label="EA Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q250426" start="7116" end="7125" title="EA Mobile" label="EA Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="7270" end="7288" title="personal computers" label="personal computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30092983" start="7504" end="7519" title="The Sims Mobile" label="The Sims Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745969" start="7595" end="7606" title="Firemonkeys Studios" label="Firemonkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="8963" end="8973" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798922" start="9107" end="9114" title="SimCity (1989 video game)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="9271" end="9281" title="metropolis" label="metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798922" start="9420" end="9427" title="SimCity (1989 video game)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767176" start="9441" end="9453" title="SimCity 2000" label="SimCity 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750905" start="9467" end="9479" title="SimCity 3000" label="SimCity 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q719670" start="9493" end="9502" title="SimCity 4" label="SimCity 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750895" start="9516" end="9533" title="SimCity Societies" label="SimCity Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q917647" start="9550" end="9557" title="SimCity (2013 video game)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9592" end="9615" title="Sim City: The Card Game" label="Sim City: The Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142212" start="9629" end="9638" title="SimCopter" label="SimCopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265268" start="9655" end="9673" title="Streets of SimCity" label="Streets of SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750895" start="9687" end="9704" title="SimCity Societies" label="SimCity Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052248" start="9770" end="9795" title="Tilted Mill Entertainment" label="Tilted Mill Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q917647" start="9998" end="10005" title="SimCity (2013)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184816" start="10314" end="10322" title="The Sims (video game)" label="The Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q107466928" start="10363" end="10377" title="expansion pack" label="expansion pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279868" start="10436" end="10451" title="The Sims Online" label="The Sims Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q182771" start="10480" end="10490" title="The Sims 2" label="The Sims 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="10542" end="10544" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q29901740" start="10592" end="10600" title="Axonometric projection" label="dimetric"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10824" end="10851" title="The Sims 3: University Life" label="The Sims 3: University Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q12579896" start="10929" end="10939" title="The Sims 4" label="The Sims 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q30092983" start="11035" end="11050" title="The Sims Mobile" label="The Sims Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q210844" start="11159" end="11164" title="Spore (2008 video game)" label="Spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="11218" end="11225" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="11249" end="11253" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="11292" end="11296" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="11365" end="11375" title="spacecraft" label="spaceships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659345" start="11387" end="11409" title="Spore Creature Creator" label="Spore Creature Creator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="11604" end="11619" title="Spaceflight" label="space-traveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="11711" end="11721" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="11759" end="11765" title="cyborg" label="cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="11929" end="11939" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q641801" start="12121" end="12146" title="Spore Galactic Adventures" label="Spore Galactic Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662088" start="12205" end="12214" title="Darkspore" label="Darkspore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347815" start="12240" end="12263" title="List of Sim video games" label="List of Sim video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042470" start="12266" end="12285" title="List of Maxis games" label="List of Maxis games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21051" wikidata="Q313061" url="?curid=21051" title="Aurel Stein">
<text>Sir Marc Aurel Stein, 
(; 26 November 1862 – 26 October 1943) was a Hungarian-born British archaeologist, primarily known for his explorations and archaeological discoveries in Central Asia. He was also a professor at Indian universities.

Stein was also an ethnographer, geographer, linguist and surveyor. His collection of books and manuscripts bought from Dunhuang caves is important for the study of the history of Central Asia and the art and literature of Buddhism. He wrote several volumes on his expeditions and discoveries which include &quot;Ancient Khotan&quot;, &quot;Serindia&quot; and &quot;Innermost Asia&quot;.

==Early life==

Stein was born to Náthán Stein and Anna Hirschler, a Jewish couple residing in Budapest in the Kingdom of Hungary, Austrian Empire. His parents and his sister retained their Jewish faith but Stein and his brother, Ernst Eduard, were baptised as Lutherans. At home the family spoke German and Hungarian, Stein graduated from a secondary school in Budapest before going on for advanced study at Universities of Vienna, Leipzig and Tübingen. He graduated in Sanskrit and Persian and received his PhD from Tübingen in 1883.

In 1884, he went to England to study oriental languages and archaeology. In 1886, Stein met the Indologist and philologist Rudolf Hoernlé in Vienna at a conference of Orientalists, learning about an ancient mathematical manuscript discovered in Bakhshali (Peshawar). In 1887 Stein went to India, where he joined the University of the Punjab as Registrar. Later, between 1888 and 1899, he was the Principal of Oriental College, Lahore. During this time, under his supervision Raghunath Temple Sanskrit Manuscript Library at Jammu was established which treasures 5000 rare manuscripts.

==Expeditions==

=== Genesis ===

Stein was influenced by Sven Hedin&#x27;s 1898 work &quot;Through Asia&quot;. In June 1898, he sought the help of Hoernle and a collaboration to find and study Central Asian antiquities. Hoernle was enthusiastic as he had already deciphered the Bower Manuscript and Weber Manuscript by then, found these to be respectively the oldest known birch bark and paper manuscripts of ancient India at the time, had received more artefacts and manuscripts but was concerned about the circumstances of their discovery and their authenticity. He recommended that Stein prepare an expedition proposal and submit it to the Governments of Punjab and India. Stein sent a draft proposal to Hoernle within a month. Hoernle discussed it with Lt Governor of Punjab (British India), who expressed enthusiasm. Stein then submitted a full proposal to explore, map and study the antiquities of Central Asia as per the recommendations of Hoernle, who personally petitioned both the Government of Punjab and Government of India, lobbying for a quick approval. Within weeks, Stein&#x27;s proposal was informally approved. In January 1899, Stein received the formal approval and funds for his first expedition. Stein thereafter received approval and support for additional expeditions to Chinese Turkestan, other parts of Tibet and Central Asia where the Russians and Germans were already taking interest. He made his famous expeditions with the financial support of Punjab government and the British India government.

=== The four expeditions ===

Stein made four major expeditions to Central Asia—in 1900–1901, 1906–1908, 1913–1916 and 1930. He brought to light the hidden treasure of a great civilization which by then was practically lost to the world. One of his significant finds during his first journey during 1900–1901 was the Taklamakan Desert oasis of Dandan Oilik where he was able to uncover a number of relics. During his third expedition in 1913–1916, he excavated at Khara-Khoto. Later he explored in the Pamirs, seeking the site of the now-lost Stone Tower which the 2nd century polymath Claudius Ptolemy had noted as the half-way mark of the Silk Road in his famous treatise &quot;Geography&quot;.

The British Library&#x27;s Stein collection of Chinese, Tibetan and Tangut manuscripts, Prakrit wooden tablets, and documents in Khotanese, Uyghur, Sogdian and Eastern Turkic is the result of his travels through central Asia during the 1920s and 1930s. Stein discovered manuscripts in the previously lost Tocharian languages of the Tarim Basin at Miran and other oasis towns, and recorded numerous archaeological sites, especially in Iran and Balochistan.

When Stein visited Khotan he was able to render in Persian a portion of the Shahnama after he came across a local reading the Shahnama in Turki.

During 1901, Stein was responsible for exposing forgeries of Islam Akhun, as well as establishing the details and the authenticity of manuscripts that had been discovered before 1896 in northwest China.

Stein&#x27;s greatest discovery was made at the Mogao Caves, also known as &quot;Caves of the Thousand Buddhas&quot;, near Dunhuang in 1907. It was there that he discovered a printed copy of the &quot;Diamond Sutra&quot;, the world&#x27;s oldest printed text, dating to AD 868, along with 40,000 other scrolls (all removed by gradually winning the confidence and bribing the Taoist caretaker). He took 24 cases of manuscripts and 4 cases of paintings and relics. He was knighted for his efforts, but Chinese nationalists dubbed him a burglar and staged protests against him, although others have seen his actions as at least advancing scholarship. His discovery inspired other French, Russian, Japanese, and Chinese treasure hunters and explorers who also took their toll on the collection. Aurel Stein discovered 5 letters written in Sogdian known as the &quot;Ancient Letters&quot; in an abandoned watchtower near Dunhuang in 1907, dating to the end of the Western Jin dynasty.

During his expedition of 1906–1908 while surveying south of the Johnson Line in the Kunlun Mountains, Stein suffered frostbite and lost several toes on his right foot.

When he was resting from his extended journeys into Central Asia, he spent most of his time living in a tent in the alpine meadow called Mohand Marg which lies at the mouth atop the Sind Valley. Years earlier, working from this idyllic spot he translated &quot;Rajatarangini &quot; from Sanskrit into English, which had then been published in 1900. A memorial stone was erected in Mohand Marg on 14 September 2017 where Stein used to pitch his tent.

The fourth expedition to Central Asia, however, ended in failure. Stein did not publish any account, but others have written of the frustrations and rivalries between British and American interests in China, between Harvard&#x27;s Fogg Museum and the British Museum, and finally, between Paul J. Sachs and Langdon Warner, the two Harvard sponsors of the expedition.

Between 1940 and 1943, Aurel Stein undertook 2 expeditions to along the Ghaggar-Hakra River to find physical evidence of the Saraswati River described in the Rig Veda. While he didn&#x27;t definitively establish the region&#x27;s chronological archaeological sequence, his work significantly advanced Indian archaeology. Surveying from Hanumangarh to Bahawalpur, he identified approximately 100 prehistoric and historical sites, conducting exploratory excavations at some. His observations on the geographical spread of these sites proved valuable to later researchers, including Amalananda Ghosh (3 March 1910 – 1981) and Katy Dalal. Notably, he documented sites such as Munda, Bhadrakali Temple, and Derwar.

== Personal life ==

Stein was a lifelong bachelor, but was always accompanied by a dog named &quot;Dash&quot; (of which there were seven). He became a British citizen in 1904. He died in Kabul on 26 October 1943 and is buried there in the Sherpur Cantonment.

==Great Game==

Stein, as well as his rivals Sven Hedin, Sir Francis Younghusband and Nikolai Przhevalsky, were active players in the British-Russian struggle for influence in Central Asia, the so-called Great Game. Their explorations were supported by the British and Russian Empires as they filled in the remaining &quot;blank spots&quot; on the maps, providing valuable information and creating &quot;spheres of influence&quot; for archaeological exploration as they did for political influence.
The art objects he collected are divided between the British Museum, the British Library, the Srinagar Museum, and the National Museum, New Delhi.

==Honours==

Stein received a number of honours during his career. In 1909, he was awarded the Founder&#x27;s Medal by the Royal Geographical Society &#x27;for his extensive explorations in Central Asia, and in particular his archaeological work&#x27;. In 1909, he was awarded the first Campbell Memorial Gold Medal by the Royal Asiatic Society of Bombay. He was awarded a number of other gold medals: the Gold Medal of the Société de Géographie in 1923; the &quot;Grande Médaille d&#x27;or&quot; of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland in 1932; and the Gold Medal of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1935. In 1934, he was awarded the Huxley Memorial Medal of Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland.

In the 1910 King&#x27;s Birthday Honours, he was appointed Companion of the Order of the Indian Empire (CIE) for his service as Inspector-General of Education and Archaeological Surveyor in the North-West Frontier Province. Two years later, in the 1912 Birthday Honours, he was promoted to Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire (KCIE) for his service as Superintendent of the Archaeological Department, North-West Frontier Circle.

He was made an honorary Doctor of Letters (DLitt) by the University of Oxford in 1909. He was made an honorary Doctor of Science (DSc) by the University of Cambridge in 1910. He was made an honorary Doctor of Laws (LLD) by the University of St Andrews in 1939.

In 1919, Stein became a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1921, he was elected Fellow of the British Academy (FBA). He was elected an International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1930 and an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1939.

==Publications==

* 1896. &quot;Notes on the Ancient Topography of the Pīr Pantsāl Route.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal&quot;, Vol. LXIV, Part I, No. 4, 1895. Calcutta 1896. 
* 1896. &quot;Notes on Ou-k&#x27;ong&#x27;s account of Kaçmir.&quot; Wien: Gerold, 1896. Published in both English and German in Vienna.
* 1898. &quot;Detailed Report on an Archaeological Tour with the Buner Field Force&quot;, Lahore, Punjab Government Press.
* 1900. &quot; – A Chronicle of the Kings of &quot;, 2 vols. London, A. Constable &amp; Co. Ltd. Reprint, Delhi, Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.
* 1904 &quot;Sand-Buried Ruins of Khotan&quot;, London, Hurst and Blackett, Ltd. Reprint Asian Educational Services, New Delhi, Madras, 2000 Sand-Buried Ruins of Khotan: vol.1 
* 1905. &quot;Report of Archaeological Survey Work in the North-West Frontier Province and Baluchistan&quot;, Peshawar, Government Press, N.W. Frontier Province.
* 1907. &quot;Ancient Khotan: Detailed report of archaeological explorations in Chinese Turkestan&quot;, 2 vols. Clarendon Press. Oxford. Ancient Khotan: vol.1 Ancient Khotan: vol.2 
* 1912. &quot;Ruins of Desert Cathay: Personal Narrative of Explorations in Central Asia and Westernmost China&quot;, 2 vols. London, Macmillan &amp; Co. Reprint: Delhi. Low Price Publications. 1990. Ruins of Desert Cathay: vol.1 Ruins of Desert Cathay: vol.2 
* 1918. &quot;Routes from the Panjab to Turkestan and China Recorded by William Finch (1611).&quot; &quot;The Geographical Journal&quot;, Vol. 51, No. 3 (Mar., 1918), pp. 172–175.
* 1921a. &quot;Serindia: Detailed report of explorations in Central Asia and westernmost China&quot;, 5 vols. London &amp; Oxford, Clarendon Press. Reprint: Delhi. Motilal Banarsidass. 1980. Serindia: vol.1 Serindia: vol.2 Serindia: vol.3 Serindia: vol.4 Serindia: vol.5 
* 1921b. &quot;The Thousand Buddhas: ancient Buddhist paintings from the cave-temples of Tung-huang on the western frontier of China.&quot; The Thousand Buddhas: vol.1 
* 1921c. &quot;A Chinese expedition across the Pamirs and Hindukush, A.D. 747&quot;. &quot;Indian Antiquary&quot; 1923.
* 1923 Memoir On Maps Of Chinese Turkistan
* 1923 &quot;Memoir on Maps of Chinese Turkistan and Kansu: vol.1 &quot;
* 1925 &quot;Innermost Asia: its geography as a factor in history&quot;. London: Royal Geographical Society. Geographical Journal, Vol. 65, nos. 5–6 (May- June 1925)
* 1927 &quot;Alexander&#x27;s Campaign On The Indian North-west Frontier&quot;. The Geographic Journal, (Nov/Dec 1927)
* 1928. &quot;Innermost Asia: Detailed Report of Explorations in Central Asia, Kan-su and Eastern Iran&quot;, 5 vols. Oxford, Clarendon Press. Reprint: New Delhi. Cosmo Publications. 1981. Innermost Asia: vol.1 Innermost Asia: vol.2 Innermost Asia: vol.3 Innermost Asia: vol.4 
* 1929. &quot;On Alexander&#x27;s Track to the Indus: Personal Narrative of Explorations on the North-West Frontier of India&quot;. London, Macmillan &amp; Co. Reprint: New York, Benjamin Blom, 1972.
* 1932 &quot;On Ancient Central Asian Tracks: Brief Narrative of Three Expeditions in Innermost Asia and Northwestern China&quot;. Reprinted with Introduction by Jeannette Mirsky. Book Faith India, Delhi. 1999.
* 1933 &quot;On Ancient Central-Asian Tracks: vol.1 &quot;
* 1937 &quot;Archaeological Reconnaissances in North-Western India and South-Eastern Īrān: vol.1 &quot;
* 1940 &quot;Old Routes of Western Iran: Narrative of an Archaeological Journey Carried out and Recorded&quot;, MacMillan and co., limited. St. Martin&#x27;s Street, London.
* 1944. &quot;Archaeological Notes from the Hindukush Region&quot;. &quot;J.R.A.S.&quot;, pp. 1–24 + fold-out.

A more detailed list of Stein&#x27;s publications is available in &quot;Handbook to the Stein Collections in the UK&quot;, pp. 49–61.

==See also==

* Three hares
* Sándor Kőrösi Csoma
* Ármin Vámbéry
* Amluk-Dara stupa
* Silk Road

==Footnotes==
==References and further reading==

* Baumer, Christoph. 2000. &quot;Southern Silk Road: In the Footsteps of Sir Aurel Stein and Sven Hedin&quot;. White Orchid Books. Bangkok.
* Brysac, Shareen. &quot;Sir Aurel Stein&#x27;s Fourth &#x27;American&#x27; Expedition.&quot; Archeology Archive Viewed 21 December 2014.
* Deuel, Leo. 1965. &quot;Testaments of Time; the Search for Lost Manuscripts and Records&quot;. Knopf, New York, 1965. paperback reprint: Pelican, Baltimore, 1970.
* Falconer, John et al. 2002. &quot;Catalogue of the Collections of Sir Aurel Stein in the Library of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences&quot;. Budapest, LHAS and British Museum. .
* Falconer, John et al. 2007. &quot;Supplement to the Catalogue of the Collections of Sir Aurel Stein in the Library of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Budapest, LHAS. .
* Hansen, Valerie. 2012. &quot;The Silk Road: A New History&quot;, Oxford University Press .
* Hopkirk, Peter. 1980. &quot;Foreign Devils on the Silk Road&quot;. John Murray (Publishers). Paperback edition, University of Massachusetts Press 1984. .
* Ikle, Frank W. &quot;Sir Aurel Stein. A Victorian Geographer in the Tracks of Alexander&quot;, &quot;Isis&quot; 59, no. 2 (1968): 144–55. Accessed March 24, 2021. http://www.jstor.org/stable/228275 .
* Kelecsényi, Ágnes, 2004. &quot;Stein Aurél (1862–1943) És a Magyar Tudomány Kapcsolatok a Magyar Tudományos Akadémiával – Stein-gyűjtemények a Magyar Tudományos Akadémia Könyvtárában&quot; [PhD thesis: Aurel Stein and Hungarian academia]
* 
* Morgan, Joyce; Walters, Conrad, &quot;Journeys on the Silk Road: a desert explorer, Buddha&#x27;s secret library, and the unearthing of the world&#x27;s oldest printed book&quot;, Picador Australia, 2011, .
* Pandita, S.N., &quot;Aurel Stein in Kashmir: Sanskrit of Mohand Marg&quot;. Om Publications, 2004. .
* Walker, Annabel. 1999. &quot;Aurel Stein: Pioneer of the Silk Road&quot;. University of Washington Press. .
* Wang, Helen (ed.). 1999. &quot;Handbook to the Stein Collections in the UK&quot;. British Museum Occasional Paper 129. , fully available online .
* Wang, Helen (ed.). 2002. &quot;Sir Aurel Stein in The Times&quot;. London, Saffron Books. .
* Wang, Helen (ed.). 2004. &quot;Sir Aurel Stein. Proceedings of the British Museum Study Day, 2002&quot;. British Museum Occasional Paper 142. . 
* Wang, Helen (ed.). 2012. &quot;Sir Aurel Stein, Colleagues and Collections&quot;, British Museum Research Publication 184, . (This an online publication only) fully available online 
* Wang, Helen and Perkins, John (eds). 2008. &quot;Handbook to the Collections of Sir Aurel Stein in the UK&quot;. British Museum Research Publication 129 (updated and expanded edition of &quot;Handbook to the Stein Collections in the UK&quot;, 1999). .
* Wang Jiqing, Photographs in the British Library of Documents and Manuscripts from Sir Aurel Stein&#x27;s Fourth Central Asian Expedition. 
* Whitfield, Susan. 2004. &quot;Aurel Stein on the Silk Road&quot;. Serindia Publications. ; also: The British Museum Press, London. .

==External links==

* Central Asian Antiquities at the National Museum of India, New Delhi.
* Aurel Stein in Kashmir , Kashmir Bhawan Center, Luton, United Kingdom.
* The International Dunhuang Project Website of the project to conserve, catalogue, digitise and research the artefacts found in the Dunhuang Caves.
* Digital Archive of Toyo Bunko Rare Books Digital versions of books by Marc Aurel Stein.
* A page about Marc Aurel Stein in Hungarian
* Aurel Stein and the Caves of the Thousand Buddhas. An exhibition of his archive photos in the Library of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 2007.
* Life of Aurel Stein. Web catalog in four languages. A Hong Kong exhibition of his archive photos and documents conserved in the Oriental Collection of the LHAS, 2008. Preliminary articles on the web publication: 1 and 2 
* British Museum – Sir Aurel Stein at www.britishmuseum.org &quot;Sir Aurel Stein, proceedings of the British Museum study day, 23 March 2002&quot; (online publication)
* Expedition map
* The Collections of Sir Aurel Stein at the British Museum 
* 
* Aurel Stein in &quot;Encyclopædia Iranica&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313061" start="0" end="20" title="Aurel Stein" label="Sir Marc Aurel Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="91" end="104" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="218" end="224" title="British Raj" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q319114" start="359" end="367" title="Dunhuang" label="Dunhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="419" end="431" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="462" end="470" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="723" end="731" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q253094" start="739" end="757" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1526–1867)" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="759" end="774" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="889" end="897" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="936" end="945" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="1053" end="1059" title="University of Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="1061" end="1068" title="University of Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q153978" start="1073" end="1081" title="University of Tübingen" label="Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1099" end="1107" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="1112" end="1119" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375111" start="1288" end="1302" title="Rudolf Hoernlé" label="Rudolf Hoernlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="1332" end="1344" title="Oriental studies" label="Orientalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="1421" end="1429" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549932" start="1481" end="1505" title="University of the Punjab" label="University of the Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634583" start="1574" end="1598" title="Oriental College, Lahore" label="Oriental College, Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q154759" start="1808" end="1818" title="Sven Hedin" label="Sven Hedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950857" start="2029" end="2045" title="Bower Manuscript" label="Bower Manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q78810374" start="2050" end="2066" title="Weber Manuscript" label="Weber Manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q121841103" start="3045" end="3062" title="Chinese Turkestan" label="Chinese Turkestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="3344" end="3356" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132956" start="3594" end="3604" title="Taklamakan" label="Taklamakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159394" start="3621" end="3633" title="Dandan Oilik" label="Dandan Oilik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584528" start="3741" end="3752" title="Khara-Khoto" label="Khara-Khoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="3779" end="3785" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231327" start="3820" end="3831" title="Stone Tower (Ptolemy)" label="Stone Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="3863" end="3879" title="Ptolemy" label="Claudius Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="3918" end="3927" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="3957" end="3966" title="Geography (Ptolemy)" label="Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="3979" end="3994" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583551" start="4104" end="4113" title="Khotanese language" label="Khotanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13263" start="4115" end="4121" title="Uyghur language" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q205979" start="4123" end="4130" title="Sogdian language" label="Sogdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37029" start="4280" end="4299" title="Tocharian languages" label="Tocharian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q216622" start="4307" end="4318" title="Tarim Basin" label="Tarim Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192991" start="4322" end="4327" title="Miran (Xinjiang)" label="Miran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4409" end="4413" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="4418" end="4429" title="Balochistan (region)" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q235389" start="4451" end="4457" title="Khotan" label="Khotan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8279" start="4508" end="4516" title="Shahnama" label="Shahnama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36831" start="4570" end="4575" title="Turki" label="Turki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081651" start="4639" end="4650" title="Islam Akhun" label="Islam Akhun"/>
<link wikidata="Q43286" start="4830" end="4841" title="Mogao Caves" label="Mogao Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q319114" start="4905" end="4913" title="Dunhuang" label="Dunhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q494235" start="4983" end="4996" title="Diamond Sutra" label="Diamond Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="5157" end="5163" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q85742821" start="5827" end="5839" title="Ardagh–Johnson Line" label="Johnson Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q187871" start="5847" end="5863" title="Kunlun Mountains" label="Kunlun Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6069" end="6080" title="Ganderbal district#Mohand Marg" label="Mohand Marg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522097" start="6114" end="6125" title="Sind Valley" label="Sind Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761336" start="6193" end="6206" title="Rajatarangini" label="Rajatarangini"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="6219" end="6227" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783572" start="6614" end="6625" title="Fogg Museum" label="Fogg Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151510" start="6671" end="6684" title="Paul J. Sachs" label="Paul J. Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q785847" start="6689" end="6703" title="Langdon Warner" label="Langdon Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q798422" start="6822" end="6841" title="Ghaggar-Hakra River" label="Ghaggar-Hakra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q177321" start="6875" end="6890" title="Saraswati River" label="Saraswati River"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="6908" end="6916" title="Rig Veda" label="Rig Veda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707848" start="7086" end="7097" title="Hanumangarh" label="Hanumangarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q318156" start="7101" end="7111" title="Bahawalpur" label="Bahawalpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739213" start="7330" end="7346" title="Amalananda Ghosh" label="Amalananda Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q293785" start="7422" end="7427" title="Munda" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357162" start="7429" end="7446" title="Bhadrakali Temple" label="Bhadrakali Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050625" start="7452" end="7458" title="Yazman" label="Derwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="7613" end="7628" title="British citizen" label="British citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="7649" end="7654" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495312" start="7701" end="7719" title="Sherpur Cantonment" label="Sherpur Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q154759" start="7767" end="7777" title="Sven Hedin" label="Sven Hedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q353816" start="7783" end="7803" title="Francis Younghusband" label="Francis Younghusband"/>
<link wikidata="Q192442" start="7808" end="7827" title="Nikolai Przhevalsky" label="Nikolai Przhevalsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="7926" end="7936" title="Great Game" label="Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="8126" end="8146" title="spheres of influence" label="spheres of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="8274" end="8288" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="8294" end="8309" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="8315" end="8323" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356138" start="8340" end="8366" title="National Museum, New Delhi" label="National Museum, New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q119627729" start="8464" end="8484" title="Founder&amp;#x27;s Medal" label="Founder&amp;#x27;s Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="8492" end="8518" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058307" start="8692" end="8723" title="Asiatic Society of Mumbai" label="Royal Asiatic Society of Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297128" start="8793" end="8814" title="Société de Géographie" label="Société de Géographie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417172" start="8873" end="8923" title="Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="8959" end="8991" title="Society of Antiquaries of London" label="Society of Antiquaries of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419633" start="9054" end="9114" title="Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948906" start="9124" end="9157" title="1910 Birthday Honours" label="1910 King&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q93710" start="9176" end="9219" title="Companion of the Order of the Indian Empire" label="Companion of the Order of the Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412467" start="9311" end="9339" title="North-West Frontier Province (1901–1955)" label="North-West Frontier Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948910" start="9365" end="9386" title="1912 Birthday Honours" label="1912 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777144" start="9407" end="9423" title="Knight Commander" label="Knight Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="9577" end="9585" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="9586" end="9603" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="9619" end="9639" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="9673" end="9690" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="9704" end="9727" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518699" start="9761" end="9775" title="Legum Doctor" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="9789" end="9813" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q253439" start="9870" end="9916" title="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988727" start="9942" end="9971" title="Fellow of the British Academy" label="Fellow of the British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="10034" end="10071" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="10115" end="10145" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284713" start="13319" end="13335" title="Jeannette Mirsky" label="Jeannette Mirsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417172" start="13773" end="13793" title="Royal Asiatic Society" label="&amp;quot;J.R.A.S.&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q447201" start="13968" end="13979" title="Three hares" label="Three hares"/>
<link wikidata="Q355291" start="13982" end="14001" title="Sándor Kőrösi Csoma" label="Sándor Kőrösi Csoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q557360" start="14004" end="14017" title="Ármin Vámbéry" label="Ármin Vámbéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880747" start="14020" end="14036" title="Amluk-Dara stupa" label="Amluk-Dara stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="14039" end="14048" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342123" start="14991" end="15005" title="Peter Hopkirk" label="Hopkirk, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895718" start="15103" end="15136" title="University of Massachusetts Press" label="University of Massachusetts Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767701" start="15904" end="15919" title="Annabel Walker" label="Walker, Annabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43506434" start="16014" end="16025" title="Helen Wang" label="Wang, Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648534" start="16983" end="16999" title="Susan Whitfield" label="Whitfield, Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754962" start="17334" end="17341" title="International Dunhuang Project" label="project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21052" wikidata="Q3848329" url="?curid=21052" title="Mario Berlinguer">
<text>Mario Berlinguer (; 29 August 1891 – 5 September 1969) was an Italian lawyer and politician.

== Early life and family ==
Born on 29 August 1891 in Sassari, Sardinia, Kingdom of Italy, Berlinguer descended from a noble Sardinian family of Catalan origins. As many of his ancestors, he belonged to the Italian Freemasonry and was Great Master (33rd Scottish Rite Mason) of the regular lodge of Sassari, affiliated to the Grand Orient of Italy.

== Political career and later life ==
The young Berlinguer was a follower of the Meridionalist activist Gaetano Salvemini. After his graduation in law, he collaborated with the newspaper &quot;La Nuova Sardegna&quot; and other Italian newspapers. Berlinguer was elected to the Italian Chamber of Deputies in 1924. The following year, he founded the clandestine newspaper &quot;Sardegna libera&quot; (Free Sardinia), which attracted him the hostility of the Italian fascist regime. His sister, Ines, was among the anti-fascist figures and was married to Stefano Siglienti.

After the armistice with Italy (September 1943), he joined the Action Party. For the latter, Berlinguer was a member of the second Badoglio government formed by Pietro Badoglio in southern Italy. In 1945, Berlinguer was named to the Consulta Nazionale and collaborated to the elaboration of the special regional status for Sardinia. He was a deputy for the Italian Socialist Party from 1948 to 1953. He was the father of Giovanni and Enrico Berlinguer, both of whom were outstanding members of the Italian Communist Party. He died in Rome on 5 September 1969 at the age of 78.

== See also ==
* Enrico Berlinguer
* Giovanni Berlinguer

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3848329" start="0" end="16" title="Mario Berlinguer" label="Mario Berlinguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="157" end="165" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="167" end="183" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="219" end="228" title="Sardinians" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="239" end="246" title="Catalans" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080480" start="301" end="320" title="Italian Freemasonry" label="Italian Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542974" start="420" end="441" title="Grand Orient of Italy" label="Grand Orient of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855147" start="525" end="538" title="Meridionalist" label="Meridionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q730889" start="548" end="565" title="Gaetano Salvemini" label="Gaetano Salvemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q635392" start="637" end="654" title="La Nuova Sardegna" label="La Nuova Sardegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="721" end="748" title="Italian Chamber of Deputies" label="Italian Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="901" end="916" title="Italian fascist" label="Italian fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="957" end="969" title="anti-fascist" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972727" start="997" end="1014" title="Stefano Siglienti" label="Stefano Siglienti"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="1027" end="1047" title="armistice with Italy" label="armistice with Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q764125" start="1080" end="1092" title="Action Party (Italy)" label="Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773794" start="1141" end="1167" title="second Badoglio government" label="second Badoglio government"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="1178" end="1193" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995361" start="1250" end="1268" title="Consulta Nazionale" label="Consulta Nazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="1374" end="1397" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="1515" end="1538" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1551" end="1555" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q164995" start="1612" end="1629" title="Enrico Berlinguer" label="Enrico Berlinguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246904" start="1632" end="1651" title="Giovanni Berlinguer" label="Giovanni Berlinguer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21053" wikidata="Q3856564" url="?curid=21053" title="Michele Columbu">
<text>Michele Columbu (8 February 1914 – 10 July 2012) was an Italian politician and writer from Ollolai, Sardinia.

For decades, between World War II and the 1970s he was the leader of the Sardinian Action Party (PSd&#x27;Az), a Sardinian nationalist party calling for detachment from Italy and fiercely contesting the presence of NATO military bases in Sardinia. He was elected into the European Parliament in 1984.

He wrote a collection of short stories, &quot;L&#x27;aurora è lontana&quot; (1968), and the essay collection &quot;Senza un perché&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3856564" start="0" end="15" title="Michele Columbu" label="Michele Columbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q295337" start="91" end="98" title="Ollolai" label="Ollolai"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="132" end="144" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299105" start="184" end="206" title="Sardinian Action Party" label="Sardinian Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q547509" start="224" end="245" title="Sardinian nationalism" label="Sardinian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="326" end="330" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="383" end="402" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21056" wikidata="Q3019768" url="?curid=21056" title="Moral equivalence">
<text>Moral equivalence is a term used in political debate, usually to deny that a moral comparison can be made of two sides in a conflict, or in the actions or tactics of two sides.

The term had some currency in polemic debates about the Cold War. &quot;Moral equivalence&quot; began to be used as a polemic &quot;term-of-retort&quot; to &quot;moral relativism&quot;, which had been gaining use as an indictment against political foreign policy that appeared to use only a situation-based application of widely held ethical standards.

International conflicts are sometimes viewed similarly, and interested parties periodically urge both sides to conduct a ceasefire and negotiate their differences. However these negotiations may prove difficult in that both parties in a conflict believe that they are morally superior to the other, and are unwilling to negotiate on basis of moral equivalence.

==Cold War==
In the Cold War context, the term was and is most commonly used by anticommunists as an accusation of formal fallacy for leftist criticisms of United States foreign policy and military conduct.

Many such people believed in the idea that the United States was intrinsically benevolent and that the extension of its power, influence, and hegemony was an extension of benevolence and would bring freedom to those people subject to that hegemony. Therefore, those who opposed the United States were by definition evil, trying to deny its benevolence to people. The Soviet Union and its allies, in contrast, practiced a totalitarian ideology. A territory under US hegemony thus would be freed from possibly being in the camp of the totalitarian power and would help to weaken it. Thus, all means were justified in keeping territories away from Soviet influence in this way. That extended to countries not under Soviet influence but instead said to be sympathetic at all in any way with it. Therefore, Chile under Salvador Allende was not under Soviet domination, but removing him would help weaken the Soviet Union by removing a government ruled with the help of the Communist Party. The big picture, they would say, justified the tortures carried out by the Augusto Pinochet dictatorship, as it served to weaken the totalitarian communist camp and in time bring about the freedom of those under its domination.

Some of those who criticized US foreign policy at the time contended that US power in the Cold War was used only to pursue an economically driven agenda of capitalism. They claim that the underlying economic motivation eroded any claims of moral superiority, leaving the hostile acts (in Korea, Hungary, Cuba, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Nicaragua) to stand on their own. In contrast, those who justified US interventions in the Cold War period always cast these as being motivated by the need to contain totalitarianism and thus fulfilled a higher moral imperative.

An early popularizer of the expression was Jeane Kirkpatrick, the US ambassador to the United Nations during the Reagan administration. Kirkpatrick published the article &quot;The Myth of Moral Equivalence&quot; in 1986, which sharply criticized those who she alleged were claiming that there was &quot;no moral difference&quot; between the Soviet Union and democratic states. In fact, very few critics of US policies during the Cold War argued that there was a moral equivalence between the two sides. Communists, for instance, argued that the Soviet Union was morally superior to its adversaries. Kirkpatrick herself was one of the most outspoken voices calling for the US to support authoritarian military regimes in Central America that were responsible for major human rights violations. When four US churchwomen were raped and murdered by government soldiers in El Salvador, Kirkpatrick downplayed the gravity of the crime and claimed that &quot;the nuns were not just nuns, they were political activists.&quot; According to Congressman Robert Torricelli, Reagan administration officials, including Kirkpatrick, deliberately suppressed information about government abuses in El Salvador: &quot;While the Reagan Administration was certifying human rights progress in El Salvador they knew the terrible truth that the Salvadoran military was engaged in a widespread campaign of terror and torture.&quot;

Leftist critics usually argued that the United States itself created a &quot;moral equivalence&quot; when some of its actions, such as President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s support for the &quot;Contra&quot; insurgency against the Sandinista government in Nicaragua, put it on the same level of immorality as the Soviet Union.

Moral equivalence has featured in debates over NATO expansion, the overthrow of rogue states, the invasion of Iraq, and the War on Terror. Concepts of moral hierarchy have been applied to foreign policy challenges such as Islamic fundamentalists, anti-Israel powers, Russia, China, drug traffickers, and Serbian nationalists.

==See also==

* False equivalence
* Moral Equivalent of War speech
* Moral responsibility
* Morality
* Whataboutism
* And you are lynching Negroes

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3019768" start="0" end="17" title="Moral equivalence" label="Moral equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="234" end="242" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778848" start="340" end="356" title="moral relativism" label="moral relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428317" start="469" end="478" title="situational ethics" label="situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="512" end="519" title="Ethics" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269302" start="800" end="816" title="superiority complex" label="morally superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="914" end="922" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q962165" start="1009" end="1023" title="formal fallacy" label="formal fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="1028" end="1035" title="Left-wing politics" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1149" end="1162" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1469" end="1481" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="1523" end="1535" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1904" end="1909" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="1916" end="1932" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="2070" end="2085" title="Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="2162" end="2178" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2406" end="2414" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="2472" end="2482" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141479" start="2556" end="2573" title="moral hierarchy" label="moral superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="2604" end="2609" title="Korean War" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="2611" end="2618" title="1956 Hungarian Revolution" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="2620" end="2624" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2626" end="2633" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="2635" end="2646" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463516" start="2648" end="2657" title="Nicaraguan Revolution" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q240534" start="2921" end="2938" title="Jeane Kirkpatrick" label="Jeane Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2965" end="2979" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="2991" end="3012" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3219" end="3231" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="3381" end="3391" title="Communists" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="3598" end="3613" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="3746" end="3757" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="4432" end="4445" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="4475" end="4481" title="Contras" label="Contra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="4511" end="4521" title="Sandinista" label="Sandinista"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="4536" end="4545" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796713" start="4575" end="4585" title="immorality" label="immorality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367724" start="4655" end="4669" title="NATO expansion" label="NATO expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q828218" start="4688" end="4700" title="rogue states" label="rogue states"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="4706" end="4722" title="invasion of Iraq" label="invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="4732" end="4745" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140370" start="4830" end="4853" title="Islamic fundamentalists" label="Islamic fundamentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006179" start="4855" end="4866" title="Calls for the destruction of Israel" label="anti-Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4875" end="4881" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4883" end="4888" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="4890" end="4906" title="drug traffickers" label="drug traffickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097756" start="4912" end="4932" title="Serbian nationalists" label="Serbian nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432701" start="4951" end="4968" title="False equivalence" label="False equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909071" start="4971" end="5001" title="Moral Equivalent of War speech" label="Moral Equivalent of War speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190255" start="5004" end="5024" title="Moral responsibility" label="Moral responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="5027" end="5035" title="Morality" label="Morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053075" start="5038" end="5050" title="Whataboutism" label="Whataboutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503747" start="5053" end="5081" title="And you are lynching Negroes" label="And you are lynching Negroes"/>
</links>
</doc>
