<doc id="577771" wikidata="Q181533" url="?curid=577771" title="Bosnian War">
<text>The Bosnian War ( / Рат у Босни и Херцеговини) was an international armed conflict that took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina between 1992 and 1995. The war is commonly seen as having started on 6 April 1992, following several earlier violent incidents. It ended on 14 December 1995 when the Dayton Accords were signed. The main belligerents were the forces of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia, and the Republika Srpska, the latter two entities being proto-states led and supplied by Croatia and Serbia, respectively.

The war was part of the breakup of Yugoslavia. Following the Slovenian and Croatian secessions from the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1991, the multi-ethnic Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina – which was inhabited by mainly Muslim Bosniaks (44%), Orthodox Serbs (32.5%) and Catholic Croats (17%) – passed a referendum for independence on 29 February 1992. Political representatives of the Bosnian Serbs boycotted the referendum and rejected its outcome. Anticipating the outcome of the referendum, the Assembly of the Serb People in Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the Constitution of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 28 February 1992. Following Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s declaration of independence (which gained international recognition) and following the withdrawal of Alija Izetbegović from the previously signed Cutileiro Plan (which proposed a division of Bosnia into ethnic cantons), the Bosnian Serbs, led by Radovan Karadžić and supported by the government of Slobodan Milošević and the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (JNA), mobilised their forces inside Bosnia and Herzegovina to secure ethnic Serb territory. The war soon spread across the country, accompanied by ethnic cleansing.

The conflict was initially between Yugoslav Army units in Bosnia which later transformed into the Army of Republika Srpska (VRS) on the one side, and the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (ARBiH), largely composed of Bosniaks, and the Croat forces in the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) on the other side. Tensions between Croats and Bosniaks increased throughout late 1992, resulting in the escalation of the Croat–Bosniak War in early 1993. The Bosnian War was characterised by bitter fighting, indiscriminate shelling of cities and towns, ethnic cleansing, and systematic mass rape, mainly perpetrated by Serb, and to a lesser extent, Croat and Bosniak forces. Events such as the siege of Sarajevo and the July 1995 Srebrenica massacre later became iconic of the conflict. The massacre of over 8,000 Bosniak males by Serb forces in Srebrenica is the only incident in Europe to have been recognized as a genocide since World War II.

The Serbs, although initially militarily superior due to the weapons and resources provided by the JNA, eventually lost momentum as the Bosniaks and Croats allied against the Republika Srpska in 1994 with the creation of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina following the Washington Agreement. Pakistan ignored the UN&#x27;s ban on the supply of arms and airlifted anti-tank missiles to the Bosnian Muslims, while after the Srebrenica and Markale massacres, NATO intervened in 1995 with Operation Deliberate Force, targeting the positions of the Army of the Republika Srpska, which proved key in ending the war. The war ended after the signing of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina in Paris on 14 December 1995. Peace negotiations were held in Dayton, Ohio, and were finalised on 21 November 1995.

By early 2008, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia had convicted forty-five Serbs, twelve Croats, and four Bosniaks of war crimes in connection with the war in Bosnia. Estimates suggest over 100,000 people were killed during the war. Over 2.2 million people were displaced, making it, at the time, the most violent conflict in Europe since the end of World War II. In addition, an estimated 12,000–50,000 women were raped, mainly carried out by Serb forces, with most of the victims being Bosniak women.
== Chronology ==
Clashes between Bosniaks, Croats, and Serbs in Bosnia started in late February 1992, and &quot;full-scale hostilities had broken out by 6 April&quot;, the same day the US and European Economic Community (EEC) recognised Bosnia and Herzegovina. Misha Glenny gives a date of 22 March, Tom Gallagher gives 2 April, while Mary Kaldor, and Laura Silber and Allan Little give 6 April. Philip Hammond claimed the most common view is that the war started on 6 April.

Serbs consider the Sarajevo wedding shooting, when a groom&#x27;s father was killed on the 2nd day of the Bosnian independence referendum, 1 March 1992, as the first death of the war. The Sijekovac killings of Serbs took place on 26 March and the Bijeljina massacre on 1–2 April. On 5 April, after protesters approached a barricade, a demonstrator was killed by Serb forces.

The war was brought to an end by the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, negotiated at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio between 1 and 21 November 1995 and signed in Paris on 14 December.

== Background ==

=== Breakup of Yugoslavia ===

The war came about as a result of the breakup of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. A crisis emerged in Yugoslavia as a result of the weakening of the confederation system at the end of the Cold War. In Yugoslavia, the national communist party, the League of Communists of Yugoslavia, lost ideological potency. Meanwhile, ethnic nationalism experienced a renaissance in the 1980s after violence in Kosovo. While the goal of Serbian nationalists was the centralisation of Yugoslavia, other nationalities aspired to the federalisation and the decentralisation of the state.

Bosnia and Herzegovina, a former Ottoman province, has historically been a multi-ethnic state. According to the 1991 census, 44% of the population considered themselves Muslim (Bosniak), 33% Serb, and 17% Croat, with 6% describing themselves as Yugoslav.

In March 1989, the crisis in Yugoslavia deepened after the adoption of amendments to the Serbian Constitution allowing the government of Serbia to dominate the provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina. Until then, Kosovo and Vojvodina&#x27;s decision-making was independent, and each autonomous province had a vote at the Yugoslav federal level. Serbia, under newly elected President Slobodan Milošević, gained control over three out of eight votes in the Yugoslav presidency. With additional votes from Montenegro, Serbia was thus able to heavily influence the decisions of the federal government. This situation led to objections from the other republics and calls for the reform of the Yugoslav federation.

At the 14th Extraordinary Congress of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia, on 20 January 1990, the delegations of the republics could not agree on the main issues facing the Yugoslav federation. As a result, the Slovene and Croatian delegates left the Congress. The Slovene delegation, headed by Milan Kučan, demanded democratic changes and a looser federation, while the Serbian delegation, headed by Milošević, opposed it.

In the first multi-party election in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in November 1990, votes were cast largely according to ethnicity, leading to the success of the Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (SDA), the Serb Democratic Party (SDS), and the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ BiH).

Parties divided power along ethnic lines, so the president of the Presidency of the Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was a Bosniak, the president of the Parliament was a Serb, and the prime minister was a Croat. Separatist nationalist parties attained power in other republics, including Croatia and Slovenia.

=== Beginning of the Yugoslav Wars ===
Meetings were held in early 1991 between the leaders of the six Yugoslav republics, and the two autonomous regions, to discuss the crisis. The Serbian leadership favoured a federal solution, whereas the Croatian and Slovenian leadership favoured an alliance of sovereign states. Bosnian leader Alija Izetbegović proposed an asymmetrical federation in February, where Slovenia and Croatia would maintain loose ties with the four remaining republics. Shortly after, he changed his position and opted for a sovereign Bosnia as a prerequisite for such a federation.

On 25 March, Croatian President Franjo Tuđman and Serbian President Slobodan Milošević held a meeting in Karađorđevo. The meeting was controversial due to claims by some Yugoslav politicians, the two presidents agreed to the partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 6 June, Izetbegović and Macedonian president Kiro Gligorov proposed a weak confederation between Croatia, Slovenia, and a federation of the other four republics. That was rejected by the Milošević administration.

On 25 June 1991, Slovenia and Croatia declared independence. An armed conflict in Slovenia ensued, while clashes in areas of Croatia with substantial ethnic Serb populations escalated into a full-scale war. The Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (JNA) abandoned efforts to reassert control over Slovenia in July while fighting in Croatia intensified until a ceasefire was agreed in January 1992. The JNA also attacked Croatia from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In July 1991, representatives of the Serb Democratic Party (SDS), including SDS president Radovan Karadžić, Muhamed Filipović, and Adil Zulfikarpašić from the Muslim Bosniak Organisation (MBO), drafted an agreement known as the Zulfikarpašić–Karadžić agreement. This would leave SR Bosnia and Herzegovina in a state union with SR Serbia and SR Montenegro. The agreement was denounced by Croat political parties. Although initially welcoming the initiative, the Izetbegović administration later dismissed the agreement.

Between September and November 1991, the SDS organised the creation of six &quot;Serb Autonomous Regions&quot; (SAOs). This was in response to the Bosniaks&#x27; steps toward seceding from Yugoslavia. Similar steps were taken by the Bosnian Croats.

In August 1991, the European Economic Community hosted a conference in an attempt to prevent Bosnia and Herzegovina from sliding into war. On 25 September 1991, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 713, imposing an arms embargo on all former Yugoslav territories. The embargo had little effect on the JNA and Serb forces, while Croat forces had already built up a considerable arsenal from seized JNA equipment and could smuggle other weaponry across its borders with neighboring countries. The embargo had a significant impact in Bosnia and Herzegovina at the start of the Bosnian War. The Serb forces inherited the armaments and the equipment of the JNA, while the Croat and Bosniak forces obtained arms through Croatia in violation of the embargo.

On 19 September 1991, the JNA moved extra troops to the area around the city of Mostar. This was protested by the local government. On 20 September 1991, the JNA transferred troops to the front at Vukovar via the Višegrad region of northeastern Bosnia. In response, local Croats and Bosniaks set up barricades and machine-gun posts. They halted a column of 60 JNA tanks, but were dispersed by force the following day. More than 1,000 people had to flee the area. This action, nearly seven months before the start of the Bosnian War, caused the first casualties of the Yugoslav Wars in Bosnia. In the first days of October, the JNA attacked and leveled the Croat village of Ravno in eastern Herzegovina, on their way to attack Dubrovnik in southern Croatia.

On 6 October 1991, Bosnian president Alija Izetbegović gave a televised proclamation of neutrality, it included the statement &quot;it is not our war&quot;. Izetbegović made a statement before the Bosnian parliament on 14 October with regard to the JNA: &quot;Do not do anything against the Army. (...) the presence of the Army is a stabilizing factor to us, and we need that Army... Until now, we did not have problems with the Army, and we will not have problems later.&quot; Izetbegović had a testy exchange with Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadžić in parliament on that day. After Karadžić wagered that the Bosnian Muslims could not defend themselves if a state of war developed, Izetbegović observed that he found Karadžić&#x27;s manner and speech offensive and it explained why the Bosniaks felt unwelcome, that his tone might explain why the others federated by Yugoslavia felt repelled, and that the threats of Karadžić were unworthy of the Serbian people.

Throughout 1990, the RAM Plan was developed by SDB and a group of selected Serb officers of the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (JNA) with the purpose of organizing Serbs outside Serbia, consolidating control of the fledgling SDS parties and the positioning of arms and ammunition. The plan was meant to prepare the framework for a third Yugoslavia in which all Serbs with their territories would live together in the same state.

Journalist Giuseppe Zaccaria summarised a meeting of Serb army officers in Belgrade in 1992, reporting they had adopted an explicit policy to target women and children as the vulnerable portion of the Muslim social structure. According to some sources, the RAM plan was crafted in the 1980s. Its existence was leaked by Ante Marković, the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, an ethnic Croat from Bosnia and Herzegovina. The existence and possible implementation of it alarmed the Bosnian government.

=== Final political crisis ===
On 15 October 1991, the parliament of the Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in Sarajevo passed a &quot;Memorandum on the Sovereignty of Bosnia-Herzegovina&quot; by a simple majority. The Memorandum was hotly contested by the Bosnian Serb members of parliament, arguing the Constitution required procedural safeguards and a two-thirds majority for such issues. The Memorandum was debated anyway, leading to a boycott of the parliament by the Bosnian Serbs, and the legislation was passed. The Serb political representatives proclaimed the Assembly of the Serb People of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 24 October 1991, declaring that the Serb people wished to remain in Yugoslavia. The Party of Democratic Action (SDA), led by Alija Izetbegović, was determined to pursue independence and was supported by Europe and the US The SDS made it clear that if independence was declared, Serbs would secede as it was their right to exercise self-determination.

The HDZ BiH was established as a branch of the ruling party in Croatia, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ). While it called for the independence of the country, there was a split in the party with some advocating secession of Croat-majority areas. In November 1991, the Croat leadership organised autonomous communities in areas with a Croat majority. On 12 November 1991, the Croatian Community of Bosnian Posavina was established in Bosanski Brod. It covered 8 municipalities in northern Bosnia. On 18 November 1991, the Croatian Community of Herzeg-Bosnia was established in Mostar. Mate Boban was chosen as its president. Its founding document said: &quot;The Community will respect the democratically elected government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina for as long as exists the state independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina in relation to the former, or any other, Yugoslavia&quot;.

Borisav Jović&#x27;s memoirs show that on 5 December 1991 Milošević ordered the JNA troops in BiH to be reorganised and its non-Bosnian personnel to be withdrawn, in case recognition would result in the perception of the JNA as a foreign force; Bosnian Serbs would remain to form the nucleus of a Bosnian Serb army. Accordingly, by the end of the month only 10–15% of the personnel in the JNA in BiH were from outside the republic. Silber and Little note that Milošević secretly ordered all Bosnian-born JNA soldiers to be transferred to BiH. Jović&#x27;s memoirs suggest that Milošević planned for an attack on Bosnia well in advance.

On 9 January 1992, the Bosnian Serbs proclaimed the &quot;Republic of the Serbian People in Bosnia-Herzegovina&quot; (SR BiH, later Republika Srpska), but did not officially declare independence. The Arbitration Commission of the Peace Conference on Yugoslavia in its 11 January 1992 Opinion No. 4 on Bosnia and Herzegovina stated that the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina should not be recognised because the country had not yet held a referendum on independence.

On 25 January 1992, an hour after the session of parliament was adjourned, the parliament called for a referendum on independence on 29 February and 1 March. The debate had ended after Serb deputies withdrew after the majority Bosniak–Croat delegates turned down a motion that the referendum question be placed before the not yet established Council of National Equality. The referendum proposal was adopted in the form as proposed by Muslim deputies, in the absence of SDS members. As Burg and Shoup note, &quot;the decision placed the Bosnian government and the Serbs on a collision course&quot;. The upcoming referendum caused international concern in February.

The Croatian War would result in United Nations Security Council Resolution 743 on 21 February 1992, which created the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR). During talks in Lisbon on 21–22 February a peace plan was presented by EC mediator José Cutileiro, which proposed the independent state of Bosnia to be divided into three constituent units. Agreement was denounced by the Bosniak leadership on 25 February. On 28 February 1992, the Constitution of the SR BiH declared that the territory of that Republic included &quot;the territories of the Serbian Autonomous Regions and Districts and of other Serbian ethnic entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the regions in which the Serbian people remained in the minority due to the genocide conducted against it in World War II&quot;, and it was declared to be a part of Yugoslavia.

The Bosnian Serb assembly members advised Serbs to boycott the referendums held on 29 February and 1 March 1992. The turnout to the referendums was reported as 64%, with 93% of voters voting in favour of independence (implying that Bosnian Serbs, who made up approximately 34% of the population, largely boycotted the referendum). The Serb political leadership used the referendums as a pretext to set up roadblocks in protest. Independence was formally declared by the Bosnian parliament on 3 March 1992.

===March 1992 unrest===

During the referendum on 1 March, Sarajevo was quiet except for a Serbian wedding being fired upon. The brandishing of Serbian flags in the Baščaršija was seen by Muslims as a deliberate provocation on the day of the referendum. Nikola Gardović, the bridegroom&#x27;s father, was killed, and a Serbian Orthodox priest was wounded. Witnesses identified the killer as Ramiz Delalić, a gangster who had become a brazen criminal since the fall of communism and was stated to have been a member of the Bosniak paramilitary group the &quot;Green Berets&quot;. Arrest warrants were issued against him and another suspected assailant. SDS denounced the killing and claimed the failure to arrest him was due to SDA or Bosnian government complicity. A SDS spokesman stated it was evidence that Serbs were in mortal danger and would be further so in an independent Bosnia, which was rejected by Sefer Halilović, founder of the Patriotic League, who stated it was not a wedding but a provocation and accused the wedding guests of being SDS activists. Barricades appeared the following morning at key transit points across the city and were manned by armed and masked SDS supporters.

Following Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s declaration of independence from Yugoslavia on 3 March 1992, sporadic fighting broke out between Serbs and government forces all across the territory. On 18 March 1992, all three sides signed the Lisbon Agreement: Alija Izetbegović for the Bosniaks, Radovan Karadžić for the Serbs and Mate Boban for the Croats. However, on 28 March 1992, Izetbegović, after meeting with the US ambassador to Yugoslavia Warren Zimmermann in Sarajevo, withdrew his signature and declared his opposition to any type of ethnic division of Bosnia.
In late March 1992, there was fighting between Serbs and combined Croat and Bosniak forces in and near Bosanski Brod, resulting in the killing of Serbs in Sijekovac. Serb paramilitaries committed the Bijeljina massacre, most of the victims were Bosniaks, on 1–2 April 1992.

== Factions ==
There were three factions in the Bosnian War:
*Bosnian (mainly ethnically Bosniak), loyal to the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Croat, loyal to the Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia and Croatia
*Serb (or Yugoslav), loyal to the Republika Srpska and FR Yugoslavia

The three ethnic groups predominantly supported their respective ethnic or national faction: Bosniaks mainly the ARBiH, Croats the HVO, Serbs the VRS. There were foreign volunteers in each faction.

===Bosnian===
The Bosnians mainly organised into the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (&quot;&quot;, ARBiH) as the armed forces of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Forces of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina were divided into five Corps. 1st Corps operated in the region of Sarajevo and Goražde, while the stronger 5th Corps was positioned in the western Bosanska Krajina pocket, which cooperated with HVO units in and around Bihać. The Bosnian government forces were poorly equipped and unprepared for war.

Sefer Halilović, Chief of Staff of the Bosnian Territorial Defense, claimed in June 1992 that his forces were 70% Muslim, 18% Croat and 12% Serb. The percentage of Serb and Croat soldiers in the Bosnian Army was particularly high in Sarajevo, Mostar and Tuzla. The deputy commander of the Bosnian Army&#x27;s Headquarters, was general Jovan Divjak, the highest-ranking ethnic Serb in the Bosnian Army. General Stjepan Šiber, an ethnic Croat was the second deputy commander. Izetbegović also appointed colonel Blaž Kraljević, commander of the Croatian Defence Forces in Herzegovina, to be a member of Bosnian Army&#x27;s Headquarters, seven days before Kraljević&#x27;s assassination, in order to assemble a multi-ethnic pro-Bosnian defense front. This diversity was to reduce over the course of the war.

The Bosnian government lobbied to have the arms embargo lifted, but that was opposed by the United Kingdom, France and Russia. U.S. proposals to pursue this policy were known as lift and strike. The U.S. Congress passed two resolutions calling for the embargo to be lifted, but both were vetoed by President Bill Clinton for fear of creating a rift between the US and the aforementioned countries. Nonetheless, the United States used both &quot;black&quot; C-130 transport planes and back channels, including Islamist groups, to smuggle weapons to Bosnian-Muslim forces, as well as allowed Iranian-supplied arms to transit through Croatia to Bosnia. However, in light of widespread NATO opposition to American (and possibly Turkish) endeavors in coordinating the &quot;black flights of Tuzla&quot;, the United Kingdom and Norway expressed disapproval of these measures and their counterproductive effects on NATO enforcement of the arms embargo.

During 1992–1995, Pakistan&#x27;s Inter-Services Intelligence secretly supplied the Muslim fighters with arms, ammunition and guided anti-tank missiles to give them a chance against the Serbs. Pakistan was thus defying the UN arms embargo. General Javed Nasir later claimed that the ISI had airlifted anti-tank guided missiles to Bosnia, which ultimately turned the tide in favour of Bosnian Muslims and forced the Serbs to lift the siege.

In his book &quot;The Clinton Tapes: Wrestling History with the President&quot; from 2009, historian and author Taylor Branch, a friend of U.S. President Bill Clinton, made public more than 70 recorded sessions with the president during his presidency from 1993 through 2001. According to a session taped on 14 October 1993, it is stated that:

===Croat===
The Croats started organizing their military forces in late 1991. On 8 April 1992, the Croatian Defence Council (, HVO) was founded as the &quot;supreme body of Croatian defence in Herzeg-Bosnia&quot;. The HVO was organised in four Operative Zones with headquarters in Mostar, Tomislavgrad, Vitez and Orašje. In February 1993, the HVO Main Staff estimated the strength of the HVO at 34,080 officers and men. Its armaments included around 50 main battle tanks, mainly T-34 and T-55, and 500 various artillery weapons.

At the beginning of the war, the Croatian government helped arm both the Croat and Bosniak forces. Logistics centres were established in Zagreb and Rijeka for the recruitment of soldiers for the ARBiH. The Croatian National Guard (Zbor Narodne Garde, ZNG), later renamed officially to Croatian Army (, HV) was engaged in Bosnian Posavina, Herzegovina and Western Bosnia against the Serb forces. During the Croat-Bosniak conflict, the Croatian government provided arms for the HVO and organised the sending of units of volunteers, with origins from Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the HVO.

The Croatian Defence Forces (HOS), the paramilitary wing of the Croatian Party of Rights, fought against the Serb forces together with the HVO and ARBiH. The HOS was disbanded shortly after the death of their commander Blaž Kraljević and incorporated into the HVO and ARBiH.

===Serb===
The Army of Republika Srpska (&quot;&quot;, VRS) was established on 12 May 1992. It was loyal to Republika Srpska, the Serbian-populated portion of Bosnia which did not wish to break away from Yugoslavia. Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadžić stated &quot;Our optimum is a Greater Serbia, and if not that, then a Federal Yugoslavia&quot;.

Throughout the war, the VRS was involved in numerous military operations, many of which were marked by severe human rights violations. The most infamous of these was the Srebrenica massacre in July 1995, where more than 8,000 Bosniak men and boys were killed. This event has been classified as genocide by international courts and is emblematic of the VRS&#x27;s broader campaign against Bosniak civilians, which included systematic ethnic cleansing, forced displacement, and other war crimes.

Serbia provided logistical support, money and supplies to the VRS. Bosnian Serbs had made up a substantial part of the JNA officer corps. Milošević relied on the Bosnian Serbs to win the war themselves, but most of the command chain, weaponry, and higher-ranked military personnel, including General Ratko Mladić, were from the JNA.

===Paramilitary and volunteers===

Various paramilitary units operated during the Bosnian War: the Serb &quot;White Eagles&quot; (&quot;Beli Orlovi&quot;) and &quot;Serbian Volunteer Guard&quot; (&quot;Srpska Dobrovoljačka Garda&quot;), also known as &quot;Arkan&#x27;s Tigers&quot;; the Bosnian &quot;Patriotic League&quot; (&quot;Patriotska Liga&quot;) and &quot;Green Berets&quot; (&quot;Zelene Beretke&quot;); and Croat &quot;Croatian Defence Forces&quot; (&quot;Hrvatske Obrambene Snage&quot;), etc. The Serb and Croat paramilitaries involved volunteers from Serbia and Croatia, and were supported by nationalist political parties in those countries.

The war attracted foreign fighters and mercenaries from various countries. Volunteers came to fight for a variety of reasons, including religious or ethnic loyalties and in some cases for money. As a general rule, Bosniaks received support from Islamic countries, Serbs from Eastern Orthodox countries, and Croats from Catholic countries. The presence of foreign fighters is well documented, however none of these groups comprised more than 5 percent of any of the respective armies&#x27; total manpower strength.

The Bosnian Serbs received support from Christian Slavic fighters from various countries in Eastern Europe, including volunteers from other Orthodox Christian countries. These included hundreds of Russians, around 100 Greeks, and some Ukrainians and Romanians. Some estimate as many as 1,000 such volunteers. Greek volunteers of the Greek Volunteer Guard were reported to have taken part in the Srebrenica Massacre, with the Greek flag being hoisted in Srebrenica when the town fell to the Serbs.

Some individuals from other European countries volunteered to fight for the Croat side, including Neo-Nazis such as Jackie Arklöv, who was charged with war crimes upon his return to Sweden. Later he confessed he committed war crimes on Bosnian Muslim civilians in the Heliodrom and Dretelj camps as a member of Croatian forces.

The Bosnians received support from Muslim groups. Pakistan supported Bosnia while providing technical and military support. Pakistan&#x27;s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) allegedly ran an active military intelligence program during the Bosnian War which started in 1992 lasting until 1995. Executed and supervised by Pakistani General Javed Nasir, the program provided logistics and ammunition supplies to various groups of Bosnian mujahideen during the war. The ISI Bosnian contingent was organised with financial assistance provided by Saudi Arabia, according to the British historian Mark Curtis.

According to The Washington Post, Saudi Arabia provided $300 million in weapons to government forces in Bosnia with the knowledge and tacit cooperation of the United States, a claim denied by US officials. Foreign Muslim fighters also joined the ranks of the Bosnian Muslims, including from the Lebanese guerrilla organisation Hezbollah, and the global organization al-Qaeda.

==Prelude==
From July 1991 to January 1992, during the Croatian War of Independence, the JNA and Serb paramilitaries used Bosnian territory to mount attacks on Croatia. The JNA armed Bosnian Serbs, and the Croatian Defence Force armed Herzegovinian Croats during the war in Croatia. The Bosnian Muslim Green Berets were already established in the autumn of 1991, and drew up a defense plan in February 1992. It was estimated that 250–300,000 Bosnians were armed, and that some 10,000 were fighting in Croatia. By March 1992, perhaps three-quarters of the country were claimed by Serb and Croat nationalists. On 4 April 1992, Izetbegović ordered all reservists and police in Sarajevo to mobilise, and SDS called for evacuation of the city&#x27;s Serbs, marking the &quot;definite rupture between the Bosnian government and Serbs&quot;. Bosnia and Herzegovina received international recognition on 6 April 1992. The most common view is that the war started that day.

== Course of the war ==
===1992 ===

The war in Bosnia escalated in April. On 3 April, the Battle of Kupres began between the JNA and a combined HV-HVO force that ended in a JNA victory. On 6 April, Serb forces began shelling Sarajevo, and in the next two days crossed the Drina from Serbia proper and besieged Muslim-majority Zvornik, Višegrad and Foča. After the capture of Zvornik, Bosnian Serb troops killed several hundred Muslims and forced tens of thousands to flee. All of Bosnia was engulfed in war by mid-April. On 23 April, the JNA evacuated its personnel by helicopter from the barracks in Čapljina, which had been blockaded since 4 March. There were efforts to halt violence. On 27 April, the Bosnian government ordered the JNA to be put under civilian control or expelled, which was followed by conflicts in early May between the two. Prijedor was taken over by Serbs on 30 April. On 2 May, the Green Berets and local gang members fought back a disorganised Serb attack aimed at cutting Sarajevo in two. On 3 May, Izetbegović was kidnapped at the Sarajevo airport by JNA officers, and used to gain safe passage of JNA troops from downtown Sarajevo. However, Bosnian forces attacked the departing JNA convoy, which embittered all sides. A ceasefire and agreement on evacuation of the JNA was signed on 18 May, and on 20 May the Bosnian presidency declared the JNA an occupation force.

The Army of Republika Srpska was newly established and put under the command of General Ratko Mladić, in a new phase of the war. Shellings on Sarajevo on 24, 26, 28 and 29 May were attributed to Mladić by UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali. Civilian casualties of a 27 May shelling led to Western intervention, in the form of sanctions imposed on 30 May through United Nations Security Council Resolution 757. Bosnian forces attacked JNA barracks in the city, which was followed by heavy shelling. On 5 and 6 June the last JNA personnel left the city during street fighting and shelling. The 20 June ceasefire, executed in order for UN takeover of the Sarajevo airport for humanitarian flights, was broken as both sides battled for the territory between the city and airport. The airport crisis led to Boutros-Ghali&#x27;s ultimatum on 26 June, that the Serbs stop attacks on the city, allow the UN to take the airport, and place their heavy weapons under UN supervision. Meanwhile, media reported that Bush considered the use of force in Bosnia. World public opinion was &quot;decisively and permanently against the Serbs&quot; following media reports on the sniping and shelling of Sarajevo.

Outside of Sarajevo, the combatants&#x27; successes varied greatly in 1992. Serbs had seized Muslim-majority cities along the Drina and Sava rivers and expelled their Muslim population within months. A joint Bosnian–HVO offensive in May, having taken advantage of the confusion following JNA withdrawal, reversed Serb advances into Posavina and central Bosnia. The offensive continued southwards, besieging Doboj, thereby cutting off Serb forces in Bosanska Krajina from Semberija and Serbia. In mid-May, Srebrenica was retaken by Bosnian forces under Naser Orić. Serb forces suffered a costly defeat in eastern Bosnia in May, when according to Serbian accounts Avdo Palić&#x27;s force was ambushed near Srebrenica, killing 400. From May to August, Goražde was besieged by the VRS, until the siege was broken by the ARBiH on 1 September. In April 1992, the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) entered Orašje and, according to Croatian sources, began a campaign of harassment against Serb civilians, including torture, rape and murder.

On 15 May 1992, a JNA column was ambushed in Tuzla. 92nd Motorised JNA Brigade received orders to leave Tuzla and Bosnia-Herzegovina, and enter Serbia. An agreement was made with the Bosnian government that JNA units would be allowed until 19 May to leave Bosnia peacefully. Despite the agreement, the convoy was attacked in Tuzla&#x27;s Brčanska Malta district with rifles and rocket launchers; mines were placed along its route. 52 JNA soldiers were killed and over 40 were wounded, most ethnic Serbs.

The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was admitted as a member state of the UN on 22 May 1992. World public opinion was shaken by the existence of concentration camps established by the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (JNA) and the authorities of Republika Srpska (RS), where thousands of Bosnian Muslims and Croat civilians were tortured, and killed. 
Following the occupation of the Prijedor region, Muslim civilians were captured and transported to camps such as Omarska, Trnopolje, Keraterm, Manjača, where they endured months of inhumane treatment and torture. 
A significant number were killed or disappeared, marking the gravest crime in the war until the Srebrenica genocide 3 years later.
Other camps for non-Serbs were established throughout Bosnia in the campaign of ethnic cleansing, including Luka, Liplje, Batković, Sušica, Uzamnica, as well as camps for the rape of women in Foča and Višegrad. Bosniaks and Croats set up camps, with significantly fewer prisoners. The ICTY convicted about 20 individuals for crimes in these camps.

From May to December 1992, the Bosnian Ministry of the Interior (BiH MUP), HVO and later the Bosnian Territorial Defence Forces (TO RBiH) operated the Čelebići camp. It was used to detain Bosnian Serb prisoners of war, many were elderly, arrested during operations intended to de-block routes to Sarajevo and Mostar in May 1992 which had earlier been blocked by Serb forces. Of the 700 prisoners, at least 13 died while in captivity. Detainees were subjected to torture, sexual assaults, beatings and other cruel and inhuman treatment. Certain prisoners were shot, or beaten to death.

On 6 May 1992, Mate Boban met with Radovan Karadžić in Graz, Austria, where they reached an agreement for a ceasefire and discussed a demarcation between a Croat and Serb territorial unit, in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, the ceasefire was broken the following day, when the JNA and Bosnian Serb forces mounted an attack on Croat-held positions in Mostar. In June 1992, Bosnian Serb forces attacked and pounded the Bosnian village of Žepa, which would lead to the 3-year long siege of Žepa.

By June 1992, refugees and internally displaced persons had reached 2.6 million. By September 1992, Croatia had accepted 335,985 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, mostly Bosniak civilians (excluding men of military age). The number of refugees significantly strained the Croatian economy and infrastructure. Then-U.S. Ambassador to Croatia, Peter Galbraith, put the number of refugees in Croatia into a proper perspective in an interview on 8 November 1993. He said the situation would be the equivalent of the US taking in 30,000,000 refugees. The number of Bosnian refugees in Croatia, was surpassed only by the number of the internally displaced persons within Bosnia and Herzegovina itself, at 588,000. Serbia took in 252,130 refugees from Bosnia, while other former Yugoslav republics received a total of 148,657 people.

In June 1992, the Bosnian Serbs started Operation Corridor in northern Bosnia against HV–HVO forces, to secure an open road between Belgrade, Banja Luka, and Knin. The reported deaths of 12 newborn babies in Banja Luka hospital due to a shortage of bottled oxygen for incubators was cited as an immediate cause for the action, but the veracity of these deaths has been questioned. Borisav Jović, a contemporary high-ranking Serbian official and member of the Yugoslav Presidency, has claimed the report was propaganda, stating that Banja Luka had 2 bottled oxygen production plants in its immediate vicinity and was self-reliant in that respect. Operation Corridor began on 14 June 1992, when the 16th Krajina Motorized Brigade of the VRS, aided by a VRS tank company from Doboj, began the offensive near Derventa. The VRS captured Modriča on 28 June, Derventa on 4–5 July, and Odžak on 12 July. The HV–HVO forces were reduced to isolated positions around Bosanski Brod and Orašje, which held out during August and September. The VRS managed to break through their lines in early October and capture Bosanski Brod. Most remaining Croat forces withdrew north to Croatia. The HV–HVO continued to hold the Orašje enclave and were able to repel an VRS attack in November. On 21 June 1992, Bosniak forces entered the Bosnian Serb village of Ratkovići near Srebrenica and murdered 24 Serb civilians.

In June 1992, the UNPROFOR, originally deployed in Croatia, had its mandate extended into Bosnia and Herzegovina, initially to protect the Sarajevo International Airport. In September, the role of UNPROFOR was expanded to protect humanitarian aid and assist relief delivery in the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as to help protect civilian refugees when required by the Red Cross.

On 12 August 1992, the name of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was changed to Republika Srpska (RS). By November 1992, of eastern Bosnia was under Muslim control.

==== Croat–Bosniak relations in late 1992 ====
The Croat–Bosniak alliance, formed at the beginning of the war, was often not harmonious. The existence of two parallel commands caused problems in coordinating the two armies against the VRS. An attempt to create a joint HVO and TO military headquarters in mid-April failed. On 21 July 1992, the Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation was signed by Tuđman and Izetbegović, establishing a military cooperation between the two armies. At a session held on 6 August, the Bosnian Presidency accepted HVO as an integral part of the Bosnian armed forces.

Despite these attempts, tensions steadily increased throughout the second half of 1992. An armed conflict occurred in Busovača in early May and another one on 13 June. On 19 June, a conflict between the units of the TO on one side, and HVO and HOS units on the other side broke out in Novi Travnik. Incidents were also recorded in Konjic in July, and in Kiseljak and the Croat settlement of Stup in Sarajevo during August. On 14 September, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina declared the proclamation of Herzeg-Bosnia unconstitutional.

On 18 October, a dispute over a petrol station near Novi Travnik that was shared by both armies escalated into armed conflict in the town centre. The situation worsened after HVO Commander Ivica Stojak was killed near Travnik on 20 October. On the same day, fighting escalated on an ARBiH roadblock set on the main road through the Lašva Valley. Spontaneous clashes spread throughout the region and resulted in almost 50 casualties until a ceasefire was negotiated by the UNPROFOR on 21 October. On 23 October, a major battle between the ARBiH and the HVO started in the town of Prozor in northern Herzegovina and resulted in an HVO victory.

On 29 October, the VRS captured Jajce. The town was defended by both the HVO and the ARBiH, but the lack of cooperation, as well as an advantage in troop size and firepower for the VRS, led to the fall of the town. Croat refugees from Jajce fled to Herzegovina and Croatia, while around 20,000 Bosniak refugees settled in Travnik, Novi Travnik, Vitez, Busovača, and villages near Zenica. Despite the October confrontations, and with each side blaming the other for the fall of Jajce, there were no large-scale clashes and a general military alliance was still in effect. Tuđman and Izetbegović met in Zagreb on 1 November 1992 and agreed to establish a Joint Command of HVO and ARBiH.

=== 1993 ===

On 7 January 1993, Orthodox Christmas Day, 8th Operational Unit Srebrenica, a unit of the ARBiH under the command of Naser Orić, attacked the village of Kravica near Bratunac. 46 Serbs died in the attack: 35 soldiers and 11 civilians. 119 Serb civilians and 424 Serb soldiers died in Bratunac during the war. Republika Srpska claimed that the ARBiH forces torched Serb homes and massacred civilians. However, this could not be verified during the ICTY trials, which concluded that many homes were already destroyed and that the siege of Srebrenica caused hunger, forcing Bosniaks to attack nearby Serb villages to acquire food to survive. In 2006, Orić was found guilty by the ICTY on the charges of not preventing murder of Serbs, but was acquitted of all charges on appeal.

On 8 January 1993, Serb forces killed the deputy prime minister of the RBiH Hakija Turajlić after stopping the UN convoy transporting him from the airport. On 16 January 1993, soldiers of the ARBiH attacked the Bosnian Serb village of Skelani, near Srebrenica. 69 people were killed, 185 were wounded. Among the victims were 6 children.

Peace plans were proposed by the UN, US and European Community (EC), but they had little impact on the war. These included the Vance-Owen Peace Plan, revealed in January 1993. The plan was presented by UN Special Envoy Cyrus Vance and EC representative David Owen. It envisioned Bosnia and Herzegovina as a decentralised state with ten autonomous provinces.

On 22 February 1993, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 808 &quot;that an international tribunal shall be established for the prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law&quot;. On 15–16 May, the Vance-Owen peace plan was rejected in a referendum. The peace plan was viewed by some as one of the factors leading to the escalation of the Croat–Bosniak conflict in central Bosnia.
On 31 March 1993, the Security Council issued Resolution 816, calling on member states to enforce a no-fly zone over Bosnia-Herzegovina. On 12 April 1993, NATO commenced Operation Deny Flight to enforce this no-fly zone. On 25 May 1993 the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) was formally established by United Nations Security Council Resolution 827.

In late July, representatives of Bosnia&#x27;s three warring factions entered into a new round of negotiations. On 20 August, UN mediators Thorvald Stoltenberg and David Owen, showed a map that would set the stage for Bosnia to be partitioned into 3 ethnic states. Bosnian-Serbs would be given 52% of Bosnia&#x27;s territory, Muslims 30% and Bosnian-Croats 18%. Alija Izetbegović rejected the plan on 29 August.

==== Outbreak of the Croat–Bosniak War ====


Much of 1993 was dominated by the Croat–Bosniak War. In early January, the HVO and the ARBiH clashed in Gornji Vakuf in central Bosnia. A temporary ceasefire was reached after days of fighting, with UNPROFOR mediation. The war spread from Gornji Vakuf into Busovača in the second half of January. Busovača was the main intersection point of the lines of communication in the Lašva Valley. By 26 January, the ARBiH seized control of villages in the area, including Kaćuni and Bilalovac on the Busovača–Kiseljak road, thus isolating Kiseljak from Busovača. In the Kiseljak area, the ARBiH secured the villages northeast of the town of Kiseljak, but most of the municipality and the town itself remained in HVO control. On 26 January, six POWs and a Serb civilian were killed by the ARBiH in the village of Dusina, north of Busovača. The fighting in Busovača also led to Bosniak civilian casualties.

On 30 January, ARBiH and HVO leaders met in Vitez, together with representatives from UNPROFOR and other foreign observers, and signed a ceasefire in the area of central Bosnia, which came into effect the following day. The situation was still tense so Enver Hadžihasanović, commander of ARBiH&#x27;s 3rd Corps, and Tihomir Blaškić, commander of HVO&#x27;s Operative Zone Central Bosnia, had a meeting on 13 February where a joint ARBiH-HVO commission was formed to resolve incidents. The January ceasefire in central Bosnia held through to early April, despite minor incidents. The Croats attributed the escalation of the conflict to the increased Islamic policy of the Bosniaks, while Bosniaks accused the Croat side of separatism.

==== Central Bosnia ====
The beginning of April was marked by incidents in central Bosnia between Bosniak and Croat civilians and soldiers, including assaults, murders and armed confrontations. The most serious were the kidnapping of four members of the HVO outside Novi Travnik, and of HVO commander Živko Totić near Zenica by the mujahideen. The ARBiH representatives denied any involvement and a joint ARBiH-HVO commission was formed to investigate. The HVO personnel were subsequently exchanged in May for POWs that were arrested by the HVO. The April incidents escalated into an armed conflict on 15 April in the area of Vitez, Busovača, Kiseljak and Zenica. The outnumbered HVO in the Zenica municipality was quickly defeated, followed by an exodus of Croat civilians.

In the Busovača municipality, the ARBiH gained some ground and inflicted heavy casualties on the HVO, but the HVO held the town of Busovača and the Kaonik intersection between Busovača and Vitez. The ARBiH failed to cut the HVO held Kiseljak enclave into smaller parts and isolate the town of Fojnica from Kiseljak. Many Bosniak civilians were detained or forced to leave Kiseljak.

In the Vitez area, Blaškić used his limited forces to carry out spoiling attacks on the ARBiH, thus preventing the ARBiH from cutting of the Travnik–Busovača road and seizing the SPS explosives factory in Vitez. On 16 April, the HVO launched a spoiling attack on Ahmići, east of Vitez. After the attacking units breached the ARBiH lines and entered the village, groups of irregular HVO units went from house to house, burning them and killing civilians. When Croat forces arrived in Ahmići, they left all Croats alone, and massacred the Muslims who could not flee in time. The Ahmići massacre resulted in more than 100 killed Bosniak civilians. The massacre was discovered by UN peacekeeping troops of the 1st Battalion, Cheshire Regiment, drawn from the British Army, under the command of Colonel Bob Stewart. The Bosnian Government made a monument dedicated to all 116 victims. Elsewhere in the area, the HVO blocked the ARBiH forces in the Stari Vitez quarter of Vitez and prevented an ARBiH advance south of the town. On 24 April, mujahideen forces attacked the Miletići northeast of Travnik and killed four Croat civilians. The rest of the captured civilians were taken to the Poljanice camp. However, the conflict did not spread to Travnik and Novi Travnik, though the HVO and the ARBiH brought in reinforcements from this area. On 25 April, Izetbegović and Boban signed a ceasefire. ARBiH Chief of Staff, Sefer Halilović, and HVO Chief of Staff, Milivoj Petković, met on a weekly basis to solve issues and implement the ceasefire. However, the truce was not respected on the ground and the HVO and ARBiH forces were still engaged in the Busovača area until 30 April.

==== Herzegovina ====
The Croat–Bosniak War spread from central Bosnia to northern Herzegovina on 14 April with an ARBiH attack on a HVO-held village outside of Konjic. The HVO responded, capturing 3 villages northeast of Jablanica. On 16 April, 15 Croat civilians and 7 POWs were killed by the ARBiH in the village of Trusina, north of Jablanica. The battles of Konjic and Jablanica lasted until May, with the ARBiH taking control of both towns and nearby villages.

By mid-April, Mostar had become a divided city with the majority-Croat western part dominated by the HVO, and the majority-Bosniak eastern part dominated by the ARBiH. The Battle of Mostar began on 9 May when both the east and west parts of the city came under artillery fire. Street battles followed, despite a ceasefire signed on 13 May by Milivoj Petković and Sefer Halilović, until 21 May. The HVO established prison camps in Dretelj near Čapljina and in Heliodrom, while the ARBiH formed prison camps in Potoci and in a school in eastern Mostar. The battle was renewed on 30 June. The ARBiH secured the northern approaches to Mostar and the east of the city, but their advance to the south was repelled by the HVO.

==== June–July Offensives ====
In the first week of June, the ARBiH attacked the HVO headquarters in Travnik and HVO units positioned on the front lines against the VRS. After three days of street fighting the outnumbered HVO forces were defeated, with thousands of Croat civilians and soldiers fleeing to nearby Serb-held territory as they were cut off from HVO-held positions. The ARBiH offensive continued east of Travnik to secure the road to Zenica, which was achieved by 14 June. On 8 June, 24 Croat civilians and POWs were killed by the mujahideen near the village of Bikoši.

A similar development took place in Novi Travnik. On 9 June, the ARBiH attacked HVO units positioned east of the town, facing the VRS in Donji Vakuf, and the next day fighting followed in Novi Travnik. By 15 June, the ARBiH secured the area northwest of the town, while the HVO kept the northeast part of the municipality and the town of Novi Travnik. The battle continued into July with only minor changes on the front lines.

The HVO in the town of Kakanj was overran in mid June and around 13–15,000 Croat refugees fled to Kiseljak and Vareš. In the Kiseljak enclave, the HVO held off an attack on Kreševo, but lost Fojnica on 3 July. On 24 June, the Battle of Žepče began that ended with an ARBiH defeat on 30 June. In late July the ARBiH seized control of Bugojno, leading to the departure of 15,000 Croats. A prison camp was established in the football stadium, where around 800 Croats were sent.

At the beginning of September, the ARBiH launched an operation known as &quot;Operation Neretva &#x27;93&quot; against the HVO in Herzegovina and central Bosnia, on a 200 km long front. It was one of their largest offensives in 1993. The ARBiH expanded its territory west of Jablanica and secured the road to eastern Mostar, while the HVO kept the area of Prozor and secured its forces rear in western Mostar. During the night of 8/9 September, at least 13 Croat civilians were killed by the ARBiH in the Grabovica massacre. 29 Croat civilians and one POW were killed in the Uzdol massacre on 14 September.

On 23 October, 37 Bosniaks were killed by the HVO in the Stupni Do massacre. It was used as an excuse for an ARBiH attack on the HVO-held Vareš enclave at the beginning of November. Croat civilians and soldiers abandoned Vareš on 3 November and fled to Kiseljak. The ARBiH entered Vareš on the following day, which was looted.

==== May–June 1993 UN Safe Areas extension ====
In an attempt to protect civilians, the role of UNPROFOR was extended in May 1993 to protect the &quot;safe havens&quot; the UN Security Council had declared around Sarajevo, Goražde, Srebrenica, Tuzla, Žepa and Bihać in Resolution 824 of 6 May 1993. On 4 June 1993 the UN Security Council passed Resolution 836 authorising use of force by UNPROFOR in the protection of the safe zones. On 15 June 1993, Operation Sharp Guard, a naval blockade in the Adriatic Sea by NATO and the Western European Union, began and continued until it was lifted in June 1996 on termination of the UN arms embargo.

The HVO and the ARBiH continued to fight side by side against the VRS in some areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the Bihać pocket, Bosnian Posavina and the Tešanj area. Despite some animosity, an HVO brigade of around 1,500 soldiers fought along with the ARBiH in Sarajevo. In other areas where the alliance collapsed, the VRS occasionally cooperated with both the HVO and ARBiH, pursuing a local balancing policy and allying with the weaker side.

=== 1994 ===
The forced deportations of Bosniaks from Serb-held territories and the resulting refugee crisis continued to escalate. Thousands of people were being bused out of Bosnia each month, threatened on religious grounds. As a result, Croatia was strained by 500,000 refugees, and in mid-1994 the Croatian authorities forbade entry to a group of 462 refugees fleeing northern Bosnia, forcing UNPROFOR to improvise shelter for them. Between 30 March and 23 April 1994, the Serbs launched another major offensive against the town with the primary objective of overrunning Goražde. On 9 April 1994, the Secretary General of the UN, citing Security Resolution 836, threatened airstrikes on the Serbian forces which were attacking the Goražde enclave. For the next two days, NATO planes carried out air strikes against Serb tanks and outposts. However, these attacks did little to stop the overwhelming Bosnian Serb Army. The Bosnian Serb Army surrounded 150 UNPROFOR soldiers taking them hostage in Goražde. Knowing Goražde would fall unless there was foreign intervention, NATO issued the Serbs an ultimatum, which they were forced to comply with. Under the conditions of the ultimatum, the Serbs had to withdraw all militias to 3 km from the town by 23 April 1994, and all of their artillery and armored vehicles from the town by 26 April 1994. The VRS complied.

==== Markale massacre ====
On 5 February 1994 Sarajevo suffered its deadliest single attack of the entire siege with the first Markale massacre, when a 120 millimeter mortar shell landed in the centre of the crowded marketplace, killing 68 people and wounding another 144. On 6 February, UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali formally requested NATO to confirm that future requests for air strikes would be carried out immediately.

On 9 February 1994, NATO authorised the Commander of Allied Forces Southern Europe (CINCSOUTH), US Admiral Jeremy Boorda, to launch air strikes—at the request of the UN—against artillery and mortar positions in or around Sarajevo determined by UNPROFOR to be responsible for attacks against civilian targets. Only Greece failed to support the use of air strikes, but did not veto the proposal.

NATO also issued an ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs demanding the removal of heavy weapons around Sarajevo by midnight of 20–21 February, or they would face air strikes. On 12 February, Sarajevo enjoyed its first casualty free day since April 1992. The large-scale removal of Bosnian-Serb heavy weapons began on 17 February 1994.

==== Washington Agreement ====

The Croat-Bosniak war ended with the signing of a ceasefire agreement between the HVO Chief of Staff, general Ante Roso, and the ARBiH Chief of Staff, general Rasim Delić, on 23 February 1994 in Zagreb. The agreement went into effect on 25 February. A peace agreement known as the Washington Agreement, mediated by the US, was concluded on 2 March by representatives of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Herzeg-Bosnia. The agreement was signed on 18 March 1994 in Washington. Under this agreement, the combined territory held by the HVO and the ARBiH was divided into autonomous cantons within the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Tuđman and Izetbegović also signed a preliminary agreement on a confederation between Croatia and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Croat-Bosniak alliance was renewed, although the issues dividing them were not resolved.

The first military effort coordinated between the HVO and the ARBiH following the Washington Agreement was the advance towards Kupres, which was retaken from the VRS on 3 November 1994. On 29 November, the HV and the HVO initiated Operation Winter &#x27;94 in southwestern Bosnia. After a month of fighting, Croat forces had taken around of VRS-held territory and directly threatened the main supply route between Republika Srpska and Knin, the capital of Republic of Serbian Krajina. The primary objective of relieving pressure on the Bihać pocket was not achieved, although the ARBiH repelled VRS attacks on the enclave.

==== UNPROFOR and NATO ====

NATO became actively involved when its jets shot down four Serb aircraft over central Bosnia on 28 February 1994 for violating the UN no-fly zone. On 12 March 1994, the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) made its first request for NATO air support, but close air support was not deployed, owing to a number of delays associated with the approval process. On 20 March an aid convoy with medical supplies and doctors reached Maglaj, a city of 100,000 people, which had been under siege since May 1993 and had been surviving off food supplies dropped by US aircraft. A second convoy on 23 March was hijacked and looted.

On 10–11 April 1994, UNPROFOR called in air strikes to protect the Goražde safe area, resulting in the bombing of a Serbian military command outpost near Goražde by two US F-16 jets. This was the first time in NATO&#x27;s history it had conducted air strikes. In retaliation, Serbs took 150 U.N. personnel hostage on 14 April. On 15 April the Bosnian government lines around Goražde broke, and on 16 April a British Sea Harrier was shot down over Goražde by Serb forces.

Around 29 April 1994, a Danish contingent (Nordbat 2) on peacekeeping duty in Bosnia, as part of UNPROFOR&#x27;s Nordic battalion located in Tuzla, was ambushed when trying to relieve a Swedish observation post (Tango 2) that was under heavy artillery fire by the Bosnian Serb Šekovići brigade at the village of Kalesija. The ambush was dispersed when the UN forces retaliated with heavy fire in what would be known as Operation Bøllebank.

On 12 May, the US Senate adopted , introduced by Sen. Bob Dole, to unilaterally lift the arms embargo against the Bosnians, but it was repudiated by President Clinton. On 5 October 1994, was signed by the President and stated that if the Bosnian Serbs had not accepted the Contact Group proposal by 15 October the President should introduce a UN Security Council proposal to end the arms embargo, and that if it was not passed by 15 November, only funds required by all UN members under Resolution 713 could be used to enforce the embargo, which would effectively end the embargo. On 12–13 November, the US unilaterally lifted the arms embargo against the government of Bosnia.

On 5 August, at the request of UNPROFOR, NATO aircraft attacked a target within the Sarajevo Exclusion Zone after weapons were seized by Bosnian Serbs from a weapons collection site near Sarajevo. On 22 September 1994, NATO aircraft carried out an air strike against a Bosnian Serb tank at the request of UNPROFOR. Operation Amanda was an UNPROFOR mission led by Danish peacekeeping troops, with the aim of recovering an observation post near Gradačac, Bosnia and Herzegovina, on 25 October 1994.

On 19 November 1994, the North Atlantic Council approved the extension of Close Air Support to Croatia for the protection of UN forces in that country. NATO aircraft attacked the Udbina airfield in Serb-held Croatia on 21 November, in response to attacks launched from that airfield against targets in the Bihac area of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 23 November, after attacks launched from a surface-to-air missile site south of Otoka (north-west Bosnia and Herzegovina) on two NATO aircraft, air strikes were conducted against air defence radars in that area.

=== 1995 ===

On 25 May 1995, NATO bombed VRS positions in Pale due to their failure to return heavy weapons. The VRS then shelled all safe areas, including Tuzla. Approximately 70 civilians were killed and 150 were injured. During April and June, Croatian forces conducted two offensives known as Leap 1 and Leap 2. With these offensives, they secured the remainder of the Livno Valley and threatened the VRS-held town of Bosansko Grahovo.

On 27 May 1995, a confrontation occurred across the Vrbanja Bridge. During the battle, elements of the Bosnian Serb army stormed French-built UNPROFOR observation posts, taking hostage 10 French troops. The French Army, led by François Lecointre, sent about 100 UN-peacekeeping troops to the bridge, retaking the post and soon after the VRS withdrew.

On 11 July 1995, Army of Republika Srpska (VRS) forces under general Ratko Mladić occupied the UN &quot;safe area&quot; of Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia where more than 8,000 men were killed in the Srebrenica massacre (most women were expelled to Bosniak-held territory). The United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), represented on the ground by a 400-strong contingent of Dutch peacekeepers, Dutchbat, failed to prevent the town&#x27;s capture by the VRS and the subsequent massacre. The ICTY ruled this event as genocide in the &quot;Krstić&quot; case. On 25 July 1995, Serbs launched &quot;Operation Stupčanica 95&quot; to occupy the second UN &quot;safe area&quot;, Žepa. UNPROFOR only sent 79 Ukrainian peacekeepers to Žepa.

In line with the Split Agreement signed between Tuđman and Izetbegović on 22 July, a joint military offensive by the HV and the HVO codenamed Operation Summer &#x27;95 took place in western Bosnia. The HV-HVO force gained control of Glamoč and Bosansko Grahovo and isolated Knin from Republika Srpska. On 4 August, the HV launched Operation Storm that effectively dissolved the Republic of Serbian Krajina. With this, the Bosniak-Croat alliance gained the initiative in the war, taking much of western Bosnia from the VRS in several operations in September and October. In Novi Grad, Croatian forces launched Operation Una, which began on 18 September 1995, when HV crossed the Una river and entered Bosnia. In 2006, Croatian authorities began investigating allegations of war crimes committed during this operation, specifically the killing of 40 civilians in the Bosanska Dubica area by troops of the 1st Battalion of the 2nd Guards Brigade.

The HV-HVO secured over of territory during Operation Mistral 2, including the towns of Jajce, Šipovo and Drvar. At the same time, the ARBiH engaged the VRS further to the north in Operation Sana and captured several towns, including Bosanska Krupa, Bosanski Petrovac, Ključ and Sanski Most. A VRS counteroffensive against the ARBiH in western Bosnia was launched on 23/24 September. Within two weeks the VRS was in the vicinity of the town of Ključ. The ARBiH requested Croatian assistance and on 8 October the HV-HVO launched Operation Southern Move under the overall command of HV Major General Ante Gotovina. The VRS lost the town of Mrkonjić Grad, while HVO units came within south of Banja Luka.

On 28 August, a VRS mortar attack on the Sarajevo &quot;Markale&quot; marketplace killed 43 people. In response to the second Markale massacre, on 30 August, the Secretary General of NATO announced the start of Operation Deliberate Force, widespread airstrikes against Bosnian Serb positions supported by UNPROFOR rapid reaction force artillery attacks. On 14 September 1995, the NATO air strikes were suspended to allow the implementation of an agreement with Bosnian Serbs for the withdrawal of heavy weapons from around Sarajevo. Twelve days later, on 26 September, an agreement of further basic principles for a peace accord was reached in New York City between the foreign ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and the FRY. A 60-day ceasefire came into effect on 12 October, and on 1 November peace talks began in Dayton, Ohio. The war ended with the Dayton Peace Agreement signed on 21 November 1995; the final version of the peace agreement was signed 14 December 1995 in Paris.

Following the Dayton Agreement, a NATO-led Implementation Force (IFOR) was deployed to Bosnia-Herzegovina. This 80,000 strong unit, was deployed in order to enforce the peace, as well as other tasks such as providing support for humanitarian and political aid, reconstruction, providing support for displaced civilians to return to their homes, collection of arms, and mine and unexploded ordnance clearing of the affected areas.

== Casualties ==

Calculating the number of deaths resulting from the conflict has been subject to considerable, highly politicised debate, sometimes &quot;fused with narratives about victimhood&quot;, from the political elites of various groups. Estimates of the total number of casualties have ranged from 25,000 to 329,000. The variations are partly the result of the use of inconsistent definitions of who can be considered victims of the war, as some research calculated only direct casualties of military activity while other research included those who died from hunger, cold, disease or other war conditions. Early overcounts were also the result of many victims being entered in both civilian and military lists because little systematic coordination of those lists took place in wartime conditions. The death toll was originally estimated in 1994 at around 200,000 by Cherif Bassiouni, head of the UN expert commission investigating war crimes.

Steven L. Burg and Paul S. Shoup, writing in 1999, observed about early high figures:
=== RDC figures ===

In June 2007, the Sarajevo-based Research and Documentation Center published extensive research on the Bosnian war deaths, also called &quot;The Bosnian Book of the Dead&quot;, a database that initially revealed a minimum of 97,207 names of Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s citizens confirmed as killed or missing during the 1992–1995 war. The head of the UN war crimes tribunal&#x27;s Demographic Unit, Ewa Tabeau, has called it &quot;the largest existing database on Bosnian war victims&quot;, and it is considered the most authoritative account of human losses in the Bosnian war. More than 240,000 pieces of data were collected, checked, compared and evaluated by an international team of experts in order to produce the 2007 list of 97,207 victims&#x27; names.

The RDC 2007 figures stated that these were confirmed figures and that several thousand cases were still being examined. All of the RDC figures are believed to be a slight undercount as their methodology is dependent on a family member having survived to report the missing relative, though the undercount is not thought to be statistically significant. At least 30 percent of the 2007 confirmed Bosniak civilian victims were women and children.

The RDC published periodic updates of its figures until June 2012, when it published its final report. The 2012 figures recorded a total of 101,040 dead or disappeared, of whom 61.4 percent were Bosniaks, 24.7 percent were Serbs, 8.3 percent were Croats and less than 1 percent were of other ethnicities, with a further 5 percent whose ethnicity was unstated.

Civilian deaths were established as 38,239, which represented 37.9 percent of total deaths. Bosniaks accounted for 81.3 percent of those civilian deaths, compared to Serbs 10.9 percent and Croats 6.5 percent. The proportion of civilian victims is, moreover, an absolute minimum because the status of 5,100 victims was unestablished and because relatives were believed to have registered their dead loved ones as military victims in order to obtain veteran&#x27;s financial benefits or for &quot;honour&quot; reasons.

Both the RDC and the ICTY&#x27;s demographic unit applied statistical techniques to identify possible duplication caused by a given victim being recorded in multiple primary lists, the original documents being then hand-checked to assess duplication.

Some 30 categories of information existed within the database for each individual record, including basic personal information, place and date of death, and, in the case of soldiers, the military unit to which the individual belonged. This has allowed the database to present deaths by gender, military unit, year and region of death, in addition to ethnicity and &quot;status in war&quot; (civilian or soldier). The category intended to describe which military formation caused the death of each victim was the most incomplete and was deemed unusable.

=== ICTY figures ===
Research conducted in 2010 for the Office of the Prosecutors at the Hague Tribunal, headed by Ewa Tabeau, pointed to errors in earlier figures and calculated the minimum number of victims as 89,186, with a probable figure of around 104,732. Tabeau noted the numbers should not be confused with &quot;who killed who&quot;, because, for example, many Serbs were killed by the Serb army during the shelling of Sarajevo, Tuzla and other multi-ethnic cities. The authors of this report said that the actual death toll may be slightly higher.

These figures were not based solely on &quot;battle deaths&quot;, but included accidental deaths taking place in battle conditions and acts of mass violence. Specifically excluded were &quot;non-violent mortality increases&quot; and &quot;criminal and unorganised violence increases&quot;. Similarly &quot;military deaths&quot; included both combat and non-combat deaths.

=== Other statistics ===
There are no statistics dealing specifically with the casualties of the Croat-Bosniak conflict along ethnic lines. However, according to The RDC&#x27;s data on human losses in the regions, in Central Bosnia 62 percent of the 10,448 documented deaths were Bosniaks, while Croats constituted 24 percent and Serbs 13 percent. The municipalities of Gornji Vakuf and Bugojno are geographically located in Central Bosnia (known as Gornje Povrbasje region), but the 1,337 region&#x27;s documented deaths are included in Vrbas regional statistics. Approximately 70–80 percent of the casualties from Gornje Povrbasje were Bosniaks. In the region of Neretva river, of 6,717 casualties, 54 percent were Bosniaks, 24 percent Serbs and 21 percent Croats. The casualties in those regions were mainly, but not exclusively, the consequence of Croat-Bosniak conflict.

According to the UN, there were 167 fatalities amongst UNPROFOR personnel during the course of the force&#x27;s mandate, from February 1992 to March 1995. Of those who died, three were military observers, 159 were other military personnel, one was a member of the civilian police, two were international civilian staff and two were local staff.

In a statement in September 2008 to the United Nations General Assembly, Haris Silajdžić said that &quot;According to the ICRC data, 200,000 people were killed, 12,000 of them children, up to 50,000 women were raped, and 2.2 million were forced to flee their homes. This was a veritable genocide and sociocide&quot;. However, Silajdžić and others have been criticised for inflating the number of fatalities to attract international support. An ICRC book published in 2010 cites the total number killed in all of the Balkan wars in the 1990s as &quot;about 140,000 people&quot;.

In 2012 Amnesty International reported that the fate of an estimated 10,500 people, most of whom were Bosnian Muslims, remained unknown at that time. Bodies of victims are still being unearthed two decades later. In July 2014 the remains of 284 victims, unearthed from the Tomašica mass grave near the town of Prijedor, were laid to rest in a mass ceremony in the northwestern town of Kozarac, attended by relatives.

The UNCHR stated that the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina forced more than 2.2 million people to flee their homes, at that time, the largest displacement of people in Europe since the end of World War II.

== War crimes ==

According to a report compiled by the UN, and chaired by M. Cherif Bassiouni, while all sides committed war crimes during the conflict, Serbian forces were responsible for ninety percent of them, whereas Croatian forces were responsible for six percent, and Bosniak forces four percent. The report echoed conclusions published by a Central Intelligence Agency estimate in 1995. In October 2019, a third of the war crime charges filed by the Bosnian state prosecution during the year were transferred to lower-level courts, which sparked criticism of prosecutors.

=== Ethnic cleansing ===

Ethnic cleansing was a common phenomenon in the war. Large numbers of Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian Croats were forced to flee their homes or were expelled by the Army of Republika Srpska and Serb paramilitaries. This entailed intimidation, forced expulsion, or killing of the unwanted ethnic group as well as the destruction of the places of worship, cemeteries and cultural and historical buildings of that ethnic group. Due to this, tens of thousands were killed, between one and 1.3 million deported or forcibly resettled, and 12,000 to 20,000 women raped. Academics Matjaž Klemenčič and Mitja Žagar argue that: &quot;Ideas of nationalistic ethnic politicians that Bosnia and Herzegovina be reorganised into homogenous national territories inevitably required the division of ethnically mixed territories into their Serb, Croat, and Muslim parts&quot;.
According to numerous ICTY verdicts and indictments, Serb and Croat forces performed ethnic cleansing of their territories to create ethnically pure states (Republika Srpska and Herzeg-Bosnia). Serb forces carried out the Srebrenica genocide towards the end of the war. Although comparatively rare, there were also cases of Bosniak forces forcing other ethnic groups to flee during the war. According to The New York Times, the Central Intelligence Agency concluded in a March 1995 report that Bosnian Serb forces had been responsible for 90 percent of the ethnic cleansing committed up to that time and that leading Serb politicians almost certainly knew of the crimes.

Based on the evidence of numerous HVO attacks, the ICTY Trial Chamber concluded in the &quot;Kordić and Čerkez&quot; case that by April 1993 Croat leadership had a common design or plan conceived and executed to ethnically cleanse Bosniaks from the Lašva Valley in Central Bosnia. Dario Kordić, as the local political leader, was found to be the planner and of this plan.

=== Genocide ===

A trial took place before the International Court of Justice, following a 1993 suit by Bosnia and Herzegovina against Serbia and Montenegro alleging genocide. The ICJ ruling of 26 February 2007 indirectly determined the war&#x27;s nature to be international, though clearing Serbia of direct responsibility for the genocide committed by the forces of Republika Srpska. The ICJ concluded, however, that Serbia failed to prevent genocide committed by Serb forces and failed to punish those responsible, and bring them to justice. A telegram sent to the White House on 8 February 1994 and penned by U.S. Ambassador to Croatia, Peter W. Galbraith, stated that genocide was occurring. The telegram cited &quot;constant and indiscriminate shelling and gunfire&quot; of Sarajevo by Karadzic&#x27;s Yugoslav People Army; the harassment of minority groups in Northern Bosnia &quot;in an attempt to force them to leave&quot;; and the use of detainees &quot;to do dangerous work on the front lines&quot; as evidence that genocide was being committed. In 2005, the United States Congress passed a resolution declaring that &quot;the Serbian policies of aggression and ethnic cleansing meet the terms defining genocide&quot;.

Despite the evidence of many kinds of war crimes conducted simultaneously by different Serb forces in different parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially in Bijeljina, Sarajevo, Prijedor, Zvornik, Banja Luka, Višegrad and Foča, the judges ruled that the criteria for genocide with the specific intent (&quot;dolus specialis&quot;) to destroy Bosnian Muslims were met only in Srebrenica or Eastern Bosnia in 1995.

The court concluded the crimes committed during the 1992–1995 war, may amount to crimes against humanity according to the international law, but that these acts did not, in themselves, constitute genocide per se. The Court further decided that, following Montenegro&#x27;s declaration of independence in May 2006, Serbia was the only respondent party in the case, but that &quot;any responsibility for &quot;past&quot; events involved at the relevant time the composite State of Serbia and Montenegro&quot;.

=== Rape ===
An estimated 12,000–50,000 women were raped, most of them Bosnian Muslims with the majority of cases committed by Serb forces. This has been referred to as &quot;Mass rape&quot;, particularly with regard to the coordinated use of rape as a weapon of war by members in the VRS and Bosnian Serb police. For the first time in judicial history, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) declared that &quot;systematic rape&quot;, and &quot;sexual enslavement&quot; in time of war was a crime against humanity, second only to the war crime of genocide. Rape was most systematic in Eastern Bosnia (e.g. during campaigns in Foča and Višegrad), and in Grbavica during the siege of Sarajevo. Women and girls were kept in various detention centres where they had to live in intolerably unhygienic conditions and were mistreated in many ways including being repeatedly raped. A notorious example was &quot;Karaman&#x27;s house&quot; in Foča. Common complications among surviving women and girls include psychological, gynaecological and other physical disorders, as well as unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases.

=== Prosecutions and legal proceedings ===
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) was established in 1993 as a body of the UN to prosecute war crimes committed during the wars in the former Yugoslavia, and to try their perpetrators. The tribunal is an ad hoc court which is located in The Hague, the Netherlands.

According to legal experts, as of early 2008, 45 Serbs, 12 Croats and 4 Bosniaks were convicted of war crimes by the ICTY in connection with the Balkan wars of the 1990s. Both Serbs and Croats were indicted and convicted of systematic war crimes (joint criminal enterprise), while Bosniaks were indicted and convicted of individual ones. Most of the Bosnian Serb wartime leadership – Biljana Plavšić, Momčilo Krajišnik, Radoslav Brđanin, and Duško Tadić – were indicted and judged guilty for war crimes and ethnic cleansing.

The former president of Republika Srpska Radovan Karadžić was held on trial and was sentenced to life in prison for crimes, including crimes against humanity and genocide. Ratko Mladić was also tried by the ICTY, charged with crimes in connection with the siege of Sarajevo and the Srebrenica massacre. Mladić was found guilty and also sentenced to life imprisonment by The Hague in November 2017. Paramilitary leader Vojislav Šešelj was on trial from 2007 to 2018, accused of being a part of a joint criminal enterprise to ethnically cleanse large areas of Bosnia-Herzegovina of non-Serbs. The Serbian president Slobodan Milošević was charged with war crimes in connection with the war in Bosnia, including grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, crimes against humanity and genocide, but died in 2006 before the trial could finish.

After the death of Alija Izetbegović, The Hague revealed that an ICTY investigation of Izetbegović had been in progress which ended with his death. Bosniaks who were convicted of or were tried for war crimes include Rasim Delić, chief of staff of the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who was sentenced to three years&#x27; imprisonment on 15 September 2008 for his failure to prevent the Bosnian mujahideen members of the Bosnian army from committing crimes against captured civilians and enemy combatants. Enver Hadžihasanović, a general of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was sentenced to 3.5 years for authority over acts of murder and wanton destruction in Central Bosnia. Hazim Delić was the Bosniak Deputy Commander of the Čelebići prison camp, which detained Serb civilians. He was sentenced to 18 years by the ICTY Appeals Chamber on 8 April 2003 for murder and torture of the prisoners and for raping two Serbian women. Bosnian commander Sefer Halilović was charged with one count of violation of the laws and customs of war on the basis of superior criminal responsibility of the incidents during Operation Neretva &#x27;93 and found not guilty. Serbs have accused Sarajevo authorities of practicing selective justice by actively prosecuting Serbs while ignoring or downplaying Bosniak war crimes.

Dario Kordić, political leader of Croats in Central Bosnia, was convicted of the crimes against humanity in Central Bosnia i.e. ethnic cleansing and sentenced to 25 years in prison. On 29 May 2013, in a first instance verdict, the ICTY sentenced Prlić to 25 years in prison. The tribunal also convicted five other war time leaders of the joint trial: defence minister of Herzeg-Bosnia Bruno Stojić (20 years), military officers Slobodan Praljak (20 years) and Milivoj Petković (20 years), military police commander Valentin Ćorić (20 years), and head of prisoner exchanges and detention facilities Berislav Pušić (10 years). The Chamber ruled, by majority, with the presiding judge Jean-Claude Antonetti dissenting, that they took part in a joint criminal enterprise (JCE) against the non-Croat population of Bosnia and Herzegovina and that the JCE included the Croatian President Franjo Tuđman, Defence Minister Gojko Šušak, and general Janko Bobetko. However, on 19 July 2016 the Appeals Chamber in the case announced that the &quot;Trial Chamber made no explicit findings concerning [Tudjman&#x27;s, Šušak&#x27;s and Bobetko&#x27;s] participation in the JCE and did not find [them] guilty of any crimes.&quot;

Genocide at Srebrenica is the most serious war crime that any Serbs were convicted of. Crimes against humanity is the most serious war crime that any Bosniaks or Croats were convicted of.

=== Reconciliation ===

On 6 December 2004, Serbian president Boris Tadić made an apology in Bosnia and Herzegovina to all those who suffered crimes committed in the name of the Serb people.

Croatia&#x27;s president Ivo Josipović apologised in April 2010 for his country&#x27;s role in the Bosnian War. Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s then-president Haris Silajdžić in turn praised relations with Croatia, remarks that starkly contrasted with his harsh criticism of Serbia the day before. &quot;I&#x27;m deeply sorry that the Republic of Croatia has contributed to the suffering of people and divisions which still burden us today&quot;, Josipović told Bosnia and Herzegovina&#x27;s parliament.

On 31 March 2010, the Serbian parliament adopted a declaration &quot;condemning in strongest terms the crime committed in July 1995 against Bosniak population of Srebrenica&quot; and apologizing to the families of the victims, the first of its kind in the region. The initiative to pass a resolution came from President Boris Tadić, who pushed for it even though the issue was politically controversial. In the past, only human rights groups and non-nationalistic parties had supported such a measure.

==Assessment==
=== Civil war or a war of aggression ===
Due to the involvement of Croatia and Serbia, there has been a long-standing debate as to whether the conflict was a civil war or a war of aggression on Bosnia by neighbouring states. Academics Steven Burg and Paul Shoup argue that:

On the one hand, the war could be viewed as &quot;a clear-cut case of civil war – that is, of internal war among groups unable to agree on arrangements for sharing power&quot;.

David Campbell is critical of narratives about &quot;civil war&quot;, which he argues often involve what he terms &quot;moral levelling&quot;, in which all sides are &quot;said to be equally guilty of atrocities&quot;, and &quot;emphasise credible Serb fears as a rationale for their actions&quot;.

Bosnian Serbs and Bosnian Croats enjoyed substantial political and military backing from Serbia and Croatia, and the decision to grant Bosnia diplomatic recognition also had implications for the international interpretation of the conflict. As Burg and Shoup state:
Sumantra Bose, meanwhile, argues that it is possible to characterise the Bosnian War as a civil war, without necessarily agreeing with the narrative of Serb and Croat nationalists. He states that while &quot;all episodes of severe violence have been sparked by &#x27;external&#x27; events and forces, local society too has been deeply implicated in that violence&quot; and therefore argues that &quot;it makes relatively more sense to regard the 1992–95 conflict in Bosnia as a &#x27;civil war&#x27; – albeit obviously with a vital dimension that is territorially external to Bosnia&quot;.

In the cases involving Duško Tadić and Zdravko Mucić, the ICTY concluded that the conflict between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was an international one:
Similarly, in the cases involving Ivica Rajić, Tihomir Blaškić and Dario Kordić, the ICTY concluded that the conflict between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia was also an international one:
In 2010, Bosnian Commander Ejup Ganić was detained in London on a Serbian extradition request for alleged war crimes. Judge Timothy Workman decided that Ganić should be released after ruling that Serbia&#x27;s request was &quot;politically motivated&quot;. In his decision, he characterised the Bosnian War to have been an international armed conflict as Bosnia had declared independence on 3 March 1992.

Academic Mary Kaldor argues that the Bosnian War is an example of what she terms new wars, which are neither civil nor inter-state, but rather combine elements of both.

===Ethnic war===
In &quot;The Myth of Ethnic War: Serbia and Croatia in the 1990s&quot;, Ithaca College Professor V.P. Gagnon challenges the widely accepted belief in the West that the Bosnian War (and the other Yugoslav wars) were a product of ethnic hatred between the warring factions. Gagnon argues that the wars were caused by power-hungry political elites who resisted political and economical liberalization and democratization, not ordinary people. In disputing the common assessment by Western academics, politicians and journalists of an ethnic war and of the Balkans as a region antithetical to Western values, Gagnon cites high intermarriage rates, the high percentage of draft-resisters, resistance to nationalist movements and favourable views of inter-ethnic relations in polling conducted in the late 1980s in Yugoslavia among other factors.

== In popular culture ==
=== Film ===
The Bosnian War has been depicted in a number of films including Hollywood films such as &quot;The Hunting Party&quot;, starring Richard Gere as journalist Simon Hunt in his bid to apprehend suspected war criminal and former Bosnian Serb president Radovan Karadžić; &quot;Behind Enemy Lines&quot;, loosely based on the Mrkonjić Grad incident, tells about a downed US Navy pilot who uncovers a massacre while on the run from Serb troops who want him dead; &quot;The Peacemaker&quot;, starring George Clooney and Nicole Kidman, is a story about a US Army colonel and a White House nuclear expert investigating stolen Russian nuclear weapons obtained by a revenge-fueled Yugoslav diplomat, Dušan Gavrić.

&quot;In the Land of Blood and Honey&quot;, is a 2011 American film written, produced and directed by Angelina Jolie; the film was Jolie&#x27;s directorial debut and it depicts a love story set against the mass rape of Muslim women in the Bosnian War. The Spanish/Italian 2013 film &quot;Twice Born&quot;, starring Penélope Cruz, based on a book by Margaret Mazzantini. It tells the story of a mother who brings her teenage son to Sarajevo, where his father died in the Bosnian conflict years ago.

British films include &quot;Welcome to Sarajevo&quot;, about the life of Sarajevans during the siege. The Bosnian-British film &quot;Beautiful People&quot; directed by Jasmin Dizdar portrays the encounter between English families and arriving Bosnian refugees at the height of the Bosnian War. The film was awarded the at the 1999 Cannes Festival. The Spanish film &quot;Territorio Comanche&quot; shows the story of a Spanish TV crew during the siege of Sarajevo. The Polish film &quot;Demons of War&quot; (1998), set during the Bosnian conflict, portrays a group of Polish soldiers in IFOR who help a pair of journalists tracked by a local warlord whose crimes they had taped.

Bosnian director Danis Tanović&#x27;s &quot;No Man&#x27;s Land&quot; won the Best Foreign Language Film awards at the 2001 Academy Awards and the 2002 Golden Globes. The Bosnian film &quot;Grbavica&quot;, about the life of a single mother in contemporary Sarajevo in the aftermath of systematic rape of Bosniak women by Serbian troops during the war, won the Golden Bear at the Berlin International Film Festival.

The 2003 film &quot;Remake&quot;, directed by Bosnian director Dino Mustafić and written by Zlatko Topčić, follows father Ahmed and son Tarik Karaga during World War II and the Siege of Sarajevo. It premiered at the 32nd International Film Festival Rotterdam. The 2010 film &quot;The Abandoned&quot;, directed by Adis Bakrač and written by Zlatko Topčić, tells the story of a boy from a home for abandoned children who tries to find the truth about his origins, it being implied that he is the child of a rape. The film premiered at the 45th Karlovy Vary International Film Festival.

The 1997 film &quot;The Perfect Circle&quot;, directed by Bosnian filmmaker Ademir Kenović, tells the story of two boys during the Siege of Sarajevo and was awarded with the François Chalais Prize at the 1997 Cannes Festival.

The 1998 film &quot;Savior&quot;, starring Dennis Quaid tells the story of a hardened mercenary in the Foreign Legion who begins to find his own humanity when confronted with atrocities during the fighting in Bosnia.

&quot;Pretty Village, Pretty Flame&quot; directed by Serbian filmmaker Srđan Dragojević, presents a bleak yet darkly humorous account of the Bosnian War. The Serbian film &quot;Life Is a Miracle&quot;, produced by Emir Kusturica, depicts the romance of a pacific Serb station caretaker and a Muslim Bosniak young woman entrusted to him as a hostage in the context of Bosniak-Serb border clashes; it was nominated at the 2004 Cannes Festival.

Short films include &quot;In the Name of the Son&quot;, about a father who murders his son during the Bosnian War, and &quot;10 Minutes&quot;, which contrasts 10 minutes of life of a Japanese tourist in Rome with a Bosnian family during the war. &quot;10 Minutes&quot; was awarded Best short film of 2002 by the European Film Academy.

A number of Western films have used the Bosnian conflict as their background – these include &quot;Avenger&quot;, based on Frederick Forsyth&#x27;s novel in which a mercenary tracks down a Serbian warlord responsible for war crimes, and &quot;The Peacemaker&quot;, in which a devastated Yugoslav man plots to take revenge on the United Nations by exploding a nuclear bomb in New York. &quot;The Whistleblower&quot; is based on the story of Kathryn Bolkovac, a UN peacekeeper who uncovered a sex trafficking scandal in post-war Bosnia. &quot;Shot Through the Heart&quot; is a 1998 TV film, directed by David Attwood, shown on BBC and HBO in 1998, which covers the Siege of Sarajevo during the Bosnian War from the perspective of two Olympic-level Yugoslavian marksmen, one whom becomes a sniper.

&quot;Quo Vadis, Aida?&quot; is a 2020 Bosnian film, written and directed by Jasmila Žbanić, about Aida, a UN translator who tries to save her family after the Army of Republika Srpska takes over the city of Srebrenica immediately prior to the Srebrenica massacre.

==== Drama series ====
The award-winning British television series, &quot;Warriors&quot;, aired on BBC One in 1999. It tells the story of a group of British peacekeepers during the Lašva Valley ethnic cleansing. Many of the war&#x27;s events were depicted in the Pakistani drama series, &quot;Alpha Bravo Charlie&quot;, written and directed by Shoaib Mansoor in 1998. Produced by the Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), the series showed several active battlefield events and the involvement of Pakistan military personnel in the UN peacekeeping missions. &quot;Alpha Bravo Charlie&quot; was presented on Pakistan Television Corporation (PTV).

==== Documentaries ====
A BBC documentary series, &quot;The Death of Yugoslavia&quot;, covers the collapse of Yugoslavia from the roots of the conflict in the 1980s to the subsequent wars and peace accords, and a BBC book was issued with the same title. Other documentaries include Bernard-Henri Lévy&#x27;s &quot;Bosna!&quot; about Bosnian resistance against well equipped Serbian troops at the beginning of the war; the Slovenian documentary &quot;Tunel upanja&quot; (&quot;A Tunnel of Hope&quot;) about the Sarajevo Tunnel constructed by the besieged citizens of Sarajevo to link Sarajevo with Bosnian government territory; and the British documentary &quot;A Cry from the Grave&quot; about the Srebrenica massacre. &quot;Miracle in Bosnia&quot; is a 1995 documentary film shot on the occasion of the third anniversary of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina; it premiered at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival and won the Special Award. The Bosnian War is a central focus in &quot;The Diplomat&quot;, a documentary about the career of Richard Holbrooke. &quot;Yugoslavia: The Avoidable War&quot; (1999) looks at the wider context of the ex-Yugoslavian civil wars. &quot;Scream for Me Sarajevo&quot; is a 2017 documentary directed by Tarik Hodzic about a concert played by Bruce Dickinson, the lead singer of an English heavy metal band Iron Maiden and his band Skunkworks, in Sarajevo, in late 1994, during the siege.

=== Books ===
Semezdin Mehmedinović&#x27;s &quot;Sarajevo Blues&quot; and Miljenko Jergović&#x27;s &quot;Sarajevo Marlboro&quot; are among the best known books written during the war in Bosnia. &quot;Zlata&#x27;s Diary&quot; is a published diary kept by a young girl, Zlata Filipović, which chronicles her life in Sarajevo from 1991 to 1993. Because of the diary, she is sometimes referred to as &quot;The Anne Frank of Sarajevo&quot;. &quot;The Bosnia List&quot; by Kenan Trebincevic and Susan Shapiro chronicles the war through the eyes of a Bosnian refugee returning home for the first time after 18 years in New York.

Other works about the war include:
* &quot;Bosnia Warriors: Living on the Front Line&quot;, by Major Vaughan Kent-Payne is an account of UN operations in Bosnia written by A British Army infantry officer who was based in Vitez, Central Bosnia for seven months in 1993.
* &quot;Necessary Targets&quot; (by Eve Ensler)
* &quot;Winter Warriors – Across Bosnia with the PBI&quot; by Les Howard, a factual account by a British Territorial infantryman who volunteered to serve as a UN Peacekeeper in the latter stages of the war, and during the first stages of the NATO led Dayton Peace Accord.
* &quot;Pretty Birds&quot;, by Scott Simon, depicts a teenage girl in Sarajevo, once a basketball player on her high school team, who becomes a sniper.
* &quot;The Cellist of Sarajevo&quot;, by Steven Galloway, is a novel following the stories of four people living in Sarajevo during the war.
* &quot;Life&#x27;s Too Short to Forgive&quot;, written in 2005 by Len Biser, follows the efforts of three people who unite to assassinate Karadzic to stop Serb atrocities.
* &quot;Fools Rush In&quot;, written by Bill Carter, tells the story of a man who helped bring U2 to a landmark Sarajevo concert.
* &quot;Evil Doesn&#x27;t Live Here&quot;, by Daoud Sarhandi and Alina Boboc, presents 180 posters created by Bosnian artist which plastered walls during the war.
* &quot;The Avenger&quot; by Frederick Forsyth.
* &quot;Hotel Sarajevo&quot; by Jack Kersh.
* &quot;Top je bio vreo&quot; by Vladimir Kecmanović, a story of a Bosnian Serb boy in the part of Sarajevo held by Bosnian Muslim forces during the Siege of Sarajevo.
* &quot;I Bog je zaplakao nad Bosnom&quot; (&quot;And God cried over Bosnia&quot;), written by Momir Krsmanović, is a depiction of war that mainly focuses on the crimes committed by Muslim people.
* &quot;Safe Area Goražde&quot; is a graphic novel by Joe Sacco about the war in eastern Bosnia.
* &quot;Dampyr&quot; is an Italian comic book, created by Mauro Boselli and Maurizio Colombo and published in Italy by Sergio Bonelli Editore about Harlan Draka, half human, half vampire, who wages war on the multifaceted forces of Evil. The first two episodes are located in Bosnia and Herzegovina (#1 Il figlio del Diavolo) i.e. Sarajevo (#2 La stirpe della note) during the Bosnian War.
* &quot;Goodbye Sarajevo – A True Story of Courage, Love and Survival&quot; by Atka Reid and Hana Schofield and published in 2011, is the story of two sisters from Sarajevo and their separate experiences of the war.
* &quot;Love Thy Neighbor: A Story of War&quot; (by Peter Maass), published in 1997 is his account as a reporter at the height of the Bosnian War.
* &quot; Shrader, Charles R. (2003). The Muslim-Croat Civil War in Central Bosnia: A Military History, 1992–1994. College Station, Texas: Texas A&amp;M University Press. ISBN 978-1-58544-261-4.
* &quot;My War Gone By, I Miss It So&quot; by Anthony Loyd is a memoir of Loyd&#x27;s time spent covering the conflict as a photojournalist and writer.
* &quot;The Pepperdogs&quot;, a 2004 novel by Bing West, features a United States Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance team caught between sides during the NATO peacekeeping effort.
* Canadian author Steven Galloway&#x27;s book &quot;The Cellist of Sarajevo&quot; follows three characters living through the siege and the impacts it has on them.

=== Music ===

* &quot;Miss Sarajevo&quot; by U2, featuring Bono and Luciano Pavarotti.
* &quot;Pure Massacre&quot; by Silverchair.
* &quot;Bosnia&quot; by the Cranberries.
* &quot;Sarajevo&quot; by UHF.
* &quot;Sarajevo&quot; by Greek rock band Magic De Spell
* &quot;Sva bol svijeta&quot; by Fazla.
* &quot;Nad trupem Jugosławii&quot; by Polish punk rock band KSU.
* The concept album &quot;Dead Winter Dead&quot; by Savatage tells a story set during the Bosnian War.
* American rock band Jackopierce wrote the song &quot;Anderson&#x27;s Luck&quot; from their album &quot;Weather&quot; based on the siege, describing the life of a couple trying to survive in Sarajevo contrasted with the singer&#x27;s family, safely watching the events unfold on television.

=== Video games ===
The 2014 video game &quot;This War of Mine&quot; was inspired by the poor living conditions and wartime atrocities that Bosnian civilians endured during the Siege of Sarajevo where the player controls a group of civilian survivors in a makeshift-damaged house.

== See also ==
* 1991 population census in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* 1995 NATO bombing in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Command responsibility
* High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Land mine contamination in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* List of massacres in the Bosnian War
* Role of the media in the Yugoslav wars

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==

=== Books ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Hall, Richard C. ed. &quot;War in the Balkans: An Encyclopedic History from the Fall of the Ottoman Empire to the Breakup of Yugoslavia&quot; (2014)
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
*
* 
* 
=== Journals ===

* Baker, Catherine. &quot;Between the round table and the waiting room: Scholarship on war and peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo after the &#x27;Post-Cold War&#x27;.&quot; &quot;Contemporary European History&quot; 28.1 (2019): 107–119. online
* 
*
*
*
=== Other sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
== External links ==

* Future of Bosnia and Hercegovina Balkan Insight
* UN report on prison camps during the war
* Open UN document on Serb atrocities towards non-Serbs
* Summary of the ICTY verdicts related to the conflict between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
* Summary of the ICTY verdicts related to the conflict between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia
* Roy, Pinaki. &quot;&quot;Bosnian War Requiems&quot;: Snippets of the Balkan Commemorations&quot;. &quot;The Atlantic Critical Review Quarterly&quot;. 10(4), October–December 2011. pp. 95–115. , ISSN 0972-6373.
* Through My Eyes Website Imperial War Museum – Online Exhibition (Including images, video and interviews with refugees from the war in Bosnia)
*Map of Europe showing the Bosnian War (omniatlas.com)
*&quot;Quest For War, and One Green Beret&#x27;s Subsequent Evolution&quot; contains insights on postwar activities by &quot;Joint Commissioned Observers&quot;
* (dedicated to the study, research, and documentation of the destruction and damage of historic heritage during the Balkan Wars of the 1990s. The website contains judicial documents from the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="4" end="15" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="68" end="82" title="armed conflict" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274468" start="102" end="124" title="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="291" end="305" title="Dayton accords" label="Dayton Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274468" start="364" end="398" title="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q334731" start="404" end="429" title="Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia" label="Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16761250" start="439" end="455" title="Republika Srpska (1992–1995)" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23037160" start="487" end="498" title="proto-state" label="proto-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="520" end="527" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q934644" start="532" end="538" title="Republic of Serbia (1992–2006)" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="579" end="600" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="616" end="624" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="659" end="699" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208545" start="726" end="770" title="Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137457" start="803" end="809" title="Muslims (ethnic group)" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="810" end="818" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="826" end="834" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="835" end="840" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="853" end="861" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="862" end="868" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q63685" start="1081" end="1134" title="Assembly of the Serb People in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Assembly of the Serb People in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="1147" end="1209" title="Constitution of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Constitution of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="1286" end="1298" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q183848" start="1372" end="1389" title="Alija Izetbegović" label="Alija Izetbegović"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1417" end="1431" title="Peace plans proposed before and during the Bosnian War#Carrington–Cutileiro plan" label="Cutileiro Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="1481" end="1488" title="Canton (administrative division)" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="1495" end="1508" title="Bosnian Serbs" label="Bosnian Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q123923" start="1517" end="1533" title="Radovan Karadžić" label="Radovan Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="1569" end="1587" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="1596" end="1623" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="1772" end="1788" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="1889" end="1913" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q687076" start="1945" end="1991" title="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q35895" start="2059" end="2083" title="Croatian Defence Council" label="Croatian Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069736" start="2213" end="2230" title="Croat–Bosniak War" label="Croat–Bosniak War"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="2315" end="2323" title="shell (projectile)" label="shelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408310" start="2367" end="2387" title="Wartime sexual violence" label="systematic mass rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="2486" end="2503" title="siege of Sarajevo" label="siege of Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="2522" end="2541" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="2638" end="2648" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2724" end="2736" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="2964" end="3000" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378244" start="3015" end="3035" title="Washington Agreement" label="Washington Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3037" end="3045" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3058" end="3060" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="3108" end="3126" title="Anti-tank guided missile" label="anti-tank missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482369" start="3182" end="3189" title="Markale massacre" label="Markale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3201" end="3205" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q160774" start="3230" end="3256" title="Operation Deliberate Force" label="Operation Deliberate Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="3520" end="3532" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="3594" end="3651" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293896" start="4006" end="4022" title="Rape during the Bosnian War" label="women were raped"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="4297" end="4324" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859025" start="4366" end="4378" title="Misha Glenny" label="Misha Glenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789994" start="4405" end="4418" title="Thomas Gerard Gallagher" label="Tom Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779977" start="4440" end="4451" title="Mary Kaldor" label="Mary Kaldor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499431" start="4457" end="4469" title="Laura Silber" label="Laura Silber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730786" start="4474" end="4486" title="Allan Little" label="Allan Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760314" start="4601" end="4626" title="Sarajevo wedding shooting" label="Sarajevo wedding shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947346" start="4688" end="4719" title="1992 Bosnian independence referendum" label="Bosnian independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438698" start="4770" end="4788" title="Sijekovac killings" label="Sijekovac killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500162" start="4829" end="4847" title="Bijeljina massacre" label="Bijeljina massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="4995" end="5058" title="Dayton Agreement" label="General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="5074" end="5105" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="5109" end="5121" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="5292" end="5332" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5440" end="5448" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="5478" end="5493" title="communist party" label="communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="5499" end="5533" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="League of Communists of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="5648" end="5654" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097756" start="5674" end="5693" title="Serbian nationalist" label="Serbian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5856" end="5863" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="6252" end="6258" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="6263" end="6272" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="6456" end="6474" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q194443" start="7082" end="7093" title="Milan Kučan" label="Milan Kučan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067054" start="7219" end="7245" title="1990 Bosnian general election" label="first multi-party election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132677" start="7377" end="7403" title="Party of Democratic Action" label="Party of Democratic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164533" start="7415" end="7436" title="Serb Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Serb Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16792" start="7452" end="7477" title="Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q208545" start="7574" end="7618" title="Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="7672" end="7676" title="Serb" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q183848" start="8146" end="8163" title="Alija Izetbegović" label="Alija Izetbegović"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="8447" end="8460" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="8483" end="8501" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271272" start="8509" end="8531" title="Milošević-Tuđman Karađorđevo meeting" label="meeting in Karađorđevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153381" start="8725" end="8738" title="Kiro Gligorov" label="Kiro Gligorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q163883" start="8958" end="8972" title="Ten-Day War" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="9010" end="9055" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="areas of Croatia with substantial ethnic Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="9085" end="9099" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="full-scale war"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="9105" end="9132" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9245" end="9254" title="Vance plan#Implementation Agreement" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164533" start="9380" end="9401" title="Serbian Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Serb Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q123923" start="9433" end="9449" title="Radovan Karadžić" label="Radovan Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327480" start="9451" end="9468" title="Muhamed Filipović" label="Muhamed Filipović"/>
<link wikidata="Q357209" start="9474" end="9492" title="Adil Zulfikarpašić" label="Adil Zulfikarpašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096834" start="9502" end="9529" title="Muslim Bosniak Organisation" label="Muslim Bosniak Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20526746" start="9571" end="9603" title="Zulfikarpašić–Karadžić agreement" label="Zulfikarpašić–Karadžić agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099331" start="9944" end="9967" title="Serb Autonomous Regions" label="Serb Autonomous Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="10133" end="10160" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q428991" start="10168" end="10180" title="Arbitration Commission of the Peace Conference on Yugoslavia" label="a conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="10278" end="10309" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250438" start="10317" end="10331" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 713" label="Resolution 713"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="10962" end="10968" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q505939" start="11066" end="11086" title="battle of Vukovar" label="the front at Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q239266" start="11095" end="11103" title="Višegrad" label="Višegrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904421" start="11555" end="11560" title="Ravno, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Ravno"/>
<link wikidata="Q815140" start="11601" end="11617" title="Siege of Dubrovnik" label="attack Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q183848" start="11677" end="11694" title="Alija Izetbegović" label="Alija Izetbegović"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238223" start="12628" end="12636" title="RAM Plan" label="RAM Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124454477" start="12654" end="12657" title="State Security Administration" label="SDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="12703" end="12730" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164533" start="12829" end="12832" title="Serb Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="SDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q317547" start="13354" end="13367" title="Ante Marković" label="Ante Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419999" start="13373" end="13401" title="Prime Minister of Yugoslavia" label="Prime Minister of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="13650" end="13658" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="13892" end="13913" title="supermajority" label="a two-thirds majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q63685" start="14109" end="14162" title="National Assembly of Republika Srpska" label="Assembly of the Serb People of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132677" start="14250" end="14276" title="Party of Democratic Action" label="Party of Democratic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="14594" end="14619" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q334731" start="14896" end="14934" title="Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia" label="Croatian Community of Bosnian Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q194482" start="14954" end="14967" title="Bosanski Brod" label="Bosanski Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q36111" start="15105" end="15115" title="Mate Boban" label="Mate Boban"/>
<link wikidata="Q893817" start="15417" end="15430" title="Borisav Jović" label="Borisav Jović"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="16186" end="16202" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q428991" start="16254" end="16314" title="Arbitration Commission of the Peace Conference on Yugoslavia" label="Arbitration Commission of the Peace Conference on Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q749308" start="17225" end="17271" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 743" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 743"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="17311" end="17342" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="United Nations Protection Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="17371" end="17377" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17398" end="17408" title="Peace plans proposed before and during the Bosnian War#Carrington–Cutileiro plan" label="peace plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709131" start="17438" end="17452" title="José Cutileiro" label="José Cutileiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760314" start="18637" end="18670" title="Sarajevo wedding attack" label="Serbian wedding being fired upon."/>
<link wikidata="Q629641" start="18711" end="18721" title="Baščaršija" label="Baščaršija"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760314" start="18800" end="18815" title="Nikola Gardović" label="Nikola Gardović"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="18865" end="18888" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289652" start="18937" end="18950" title="Ramiz Delalić" label="Ramiz Delalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283353" start="19105" end="19117" title="Green Berets (Bosnian paramilitary)" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285208" start="19455" end="19470" title="Sefer Halilović" label="Sefer Halilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435180" start="19487" end="19503" title="Patriotic League (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Patriotic League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19979" end="19995" title="Peace plans offered before and during the Bosnian War#Carrington–Cutileiro plan" label="Lisbon Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q183848" start="19997" end="20014" title="Alija Izetbegović" label="Alija Izetbegović"/>
<link wikidata="Q123923" start="20033" end="20049" title="Radovan Karadžić" label="Radovan Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q36111" start="20068" end="20078" title="Mate Boban" label="Mate Boban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771904" start="20186" end="20203" title="Warren Zimmermann" label="Warren Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q194482" start="20413" end="20426" title="Bosanski Brod" label="Bosanski Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438698" start="20445" end="20474" title="Sijekovac killings" label="killing of Serbs in Sijekovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500162" start="20510" end="20528" title="Bijeljina massacre" label="Bijeljina massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="20674" end="20681" title="Bosniak" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274468" start="20697" end="20731" title="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q334731" start="20753" end="20787" title="Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia" label="Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="20792" end="20799" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="20834" end="20850" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="20855" end="20868" title="FR Yugoslavia" label="FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468394" start="21032" end="21050" title="Foreign fighters in the Bosnian War" label="foreign volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q687076" start="21122" end="21168" title="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274468" start="21218" end="21252" title="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779054" start="21450" end="21466" title="Bosanska Krajina" label="Bosanska Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="21521" end="21526" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285208" start="21604" end="21619" title="Sefer Halilović" label="Sefer Halilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q716049" start="21939" end="21951" title="Jovan Divjak" label="Jovan Divjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437249" start="22014" end="22027" title="Stjepan Šiber" label="Stjepan Šiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="22105" end="22112" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656947" start="22113" end="22127" title="Blaž Kraljević" label="Blaž Kraljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q648014" start="22146" end="22169" title="Croatian Defence Forces" label="Croatian Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="22173" end="22184" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545644" start="22587" end="22602" title="Lift and strike (Bosnia)" label="lift and strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="22717" end="22729" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="22854" end="22859" title="black operation" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839588" start="22893" end="22905" title="back channel" label="back channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="22918" end="22926" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="23195" end="23200" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="23390" end="23417" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165322" start="23604" end="23615" title="Javed Nasir" label="Javed Nasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981664" start="23909" end="23922" title="Taylor Branch" label="Taylor Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="23951" end="23963" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35895" start="24241" end="24265" title="Croatian Defence Council" label="Croatian Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q371899" start="24878" end="24901" title="Croatian National Guard" label="Croatian National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753805" start="24957" end="24970" title="Croatian Army" label="Croatian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069736" start="25078" end="25100" title="Croat–Bosniak War" label="Croat-Bosniak conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q648014" start="25261" end="25284" title="Croatian Defence Forces" label="Croatian Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257515" start="25321" end="25345" title="Croatian Party of Rights" label="Croatian Party of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656947" start="25476" end="25490" title="Blaž Kraljević" label="Blaž Kraljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="25548" end="25572" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q16761250" start="25641" end="25657" title="Republika Srpska (1992–95)" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="25737" end="25747" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="25826" end="25840" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93167" start="26688" end="26700" title="Ratko Mladić" label="Ratko Mladić"/>
<link wikidata="Q815581" start="26832" end="26844" title="White Eagles (paramilitary)" label="White Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130041" start="26887" end="26910" title="Serbian Volunteer Guard" label="Serbian Volunteer Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435180" start="27024" end="27040" title="Patriotic League (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Patriotic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283353" start="27087" end="27099" title="Green Berets (Bosnian paramilitary)" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q648014" start="27152" end="27175" title="Croatian Defence Forces" label="Croatian Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="28034" end="28052" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="28203" end="28208" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148739" start="28227" end="28248" title="Greek Volunteer Guard" label="Greek Volunteer Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="28289" end="28308" title="Srebrenica Massacre" label="Srebrenica Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q129132" start="28319" end="28329" title="Greek flag" label="Greek flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="28490" end="28499" title="Neo-Nazism" label="Neo-Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657915" start="28508" end="28521" title="Jackie Arklöv" label="Jackie Arklöv"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="28574" end="28580" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="28614" end="28624" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379862" start="28660" end="28669" title="Heliodrom camp" label="Heliodrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q843093" start="28674" end="28686" title="Dretelj camp" label="Dretelj camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="28861" end="28888" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847936" start="28919" end="28940" title="Inter-Services Intelligence activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="29051" end="29058" title="Lieutenant-General" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165322" start="29059" end="29070" title="Javed Nasir" label="Javed Nasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621507" start="29148" end="29166" title="Bosnian mujahideen" label="Bosnian mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427166" start="29229" end="29274" title="Saudi foreign assistance" label="financial assistance provided by Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294038" start="29311" end="29322" title="Mark Curtis (British author)" label="Mark Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="29338" end="29357" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="29652" end="29661" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="29691" end="29699" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="29757" end="29785" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12627990" start="30759" end="30775" title="Battle of Kupres (1992)" label="Battle of Kupres"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="30894" end="30902" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186901" start="30941" end="30946" title="Drina" label="Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190773" start="30952" end="30965" title="Serbia proper" label="Serbia proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q231517" start="30995" end="31002" title="Zvornik" label="Zvornik"/>
<link wikidata="Q239266" start="31004" end="31012" title="Višegrad" label="Višegrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180333" start="31017" end="31021" title="Foča" label="Foča"/>
<link wikidata="Q337683" start="31270" end="31278" title="Čapljina" label="Čapljina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439306" start="31855" end="31888" title="1992 Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army column incident in Sarajevo" label="attacked the departing JNA convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="32071" end="32095" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q93167" start="32155" end="32167" title="Ratko Mladić" label="Ratko Mladić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257" start="32293" end="32314" title="Boutros Boutros-Ghali" label="Boutros Boutros-Ghali"/>
<link wikidata="Q860231" start="32437" end="32483" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 757" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q975995" start="33602" end="33610" title="Posavina" label="Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779054" start="33719" end="33735" title="Bosanska Krajina" label="Bosanska Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q166852" start="33741" end="33750" title="Semberija" label="Semberija"/>
<link wikidata="Q361189" start="33822" end="33832" title="Naser Orić" label="Naser Orić"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687544" start="34019" end="34039" title="Siege of Goražde" label="Goražde was besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q35895" start="34127" end="34151" title="Croatian Defence Council" label="Croatian Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q751452" start="34317" end="34351" title="1992 Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army column incident in Tuzla" label="a JNA column was ambushed in Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274468" start="34810" end="34844" title="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="34993" end="35020" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="35050" end="35066" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268468" start="35170" end="35196" title="Prijedor ethnic cleansing" label="occupation of the Prijedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538004" start="35269" end="35276" title="Omarska camp" label="Omarska"/>
<link wikidata="Q24588" start="35278" end="35287" title="Trnopolje camp" label="Trnopolje"/>
<link wikidata="Q24498" start="35289" end="35297" title="Keraterm camp" label="Keraterm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800275" start="35299" end="35306" title="Manjača camp" label="Manjača"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="35466" end="35485" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533032" start="35569" end="35597" title="Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War" label="campaign of ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701640" start="35609" end="35613" title="Luka camp" label="Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893118" start="35615" end="35621" title="Liplje camp" label="Liplje"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873104" start="35623" end="35631" title="Batković camp" label="Batković"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651574" start="35633" end="35639" title="Sušica camp" label="Sušica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904491" start="35641" end="35649" title="Uzamnica camp" label="Uzamnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268036" start="35693" end="35697" title="Foča ethnic cleansing" label="Foča"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930228" start="35702" end="35710" title="Vilina Vlas" label="Višegrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500488" start="35881" end="35913" title="Bosnian Ministry of the Interior" label="Bosnian Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358643" start="35943" end="35977" title="Territorial Defence Force of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian Territorial Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301608" start="36001" end="36014" title="Čelebići camp" label="Čelebići camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="36051" end="36067" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="36159" end="36165" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="36491" end="36495" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="36497" end="36504" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489816" start="36525" end="36537" title="Graz agreement" label="an agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q114554788" start="36915" end="36928" title="siege of Žepa" label="siege of Žepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400658" start="37276" end="37291" title="Peter Galbraith" label="Peter Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935145" start="37802" end="37820" title="Operation Corridor 92" label="Operation Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q121191746" start="38011" end="38025" title="bottled oxygen" label="bottled oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008292" start="38030" end="38040" title="Incubator (neonatal)" label="incubators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279803" start="38221" end="38240" title="Presidency of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254844" start="38269" end="38279" title="Role of the media in the Yugoslav Wars" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471129" start="38459" end="38489" title="16th Krajina Motorized Brigade" label="16th Krajina Motorized Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q169247" start="38535" end="38540" title="Doboj" label="Doboj"/>
<link wikidata="Q768439" start="38567" end="38575" title="Derventa" label="Derventa"/>
<link wikidata="Q180743" start="38594" end="38601" title="Modriča" label="Modriča"/>
<link wikidata="Q768439" start="38614" end="38622" title="Derventa" label="Derventa"/>
<link wikidata="Q994167" start="38640" end="38645" title="Odžak" label="Odžak"/>
<link wikidata="Q194482" start="38718" end="38731" title="Brod, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosanski Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q994255" start="38736" end="38742" title="Orašje, Bosnia" label="Orašje"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="39537" end="39546" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991230" start="40072" end="40111" title="Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia" label="Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017907" start="40932" end="40944" title="Novi Travnik" label="Novi Travnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q506875" start="41459" end="41465" title="Prozor, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Prozor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335265" start="41542" end="41560" title="Operation Vrbas &amp;#x27;92" label="VRS captured Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="42251" end="42264" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q361189" start="42340" end="42350" title="Naser Orić" label="Naser Orić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379845" start="42352" end="42383" title="Kravica attack (1993)" label="attacked the village of Kravica"/>
<link wikidata="Q169001" start="42389" end="42397" title="Bratunac" label="Bratunac"/>
<link wikidata="Q169001" start="42507" end="42515" title="Bratunac" label="Bratunac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480288" start="42751" end="42770" title="siege of Srebrenica" label="siege of Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569980" start="43076" end="43091" title="Hakija Turajlić" label="Hakija Turajlić"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406214" start="43198" end="43242" title="Skelani massacre" label="attacked the Bosnian Serb village of Skelani"/>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="43249" end="43259" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104836" start="43338" end="43349" title="Peace plans offered before and during the Bosnian War" label="Peace plans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43465" end="43486" title="Peace plans offered before and during the Bosnian War#Vance-Owen plan" label="Vance-Owen Peace Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="43557" end="43568" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q333085" start="43591" end="43601" title="David Owen" label="David Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="43722" end="43753" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253118" start="43761" end="43775" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 808" label="Resolution 808"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314738" start="43985" end="44009" title="1993 Republika Srpska Vance-Owen Peace Plan referendum" label="rejected in a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050489" start="44188" end="44202" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 816" label="Resolution 816"/>
<link wikidata="Q567343" start="44312" end="44333" title="Operation Deny Flight" label="Operation Deny Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="44382" end="44439" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449325" start="44475" end="44521" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 827" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 827"/>
<link wikidata="Q377977" start="44663" end="44683" title="Thorvald Stoltenberg" label="Thorvald Stoltenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q333085" start="44688" end="44698" title="David Owen" label="David Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069736" start="45017" end="45034" title="Croat–Bosniak War" label="Croat–Bosniak War"/>
<link wikidata="Q924098" start="45087" end="45099" title="Gornji Vakuf" label="Gornji Vakuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q612603" start="45240" end="45248" title="Busovača" label="Busovača"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506264" start="45358" end="45370" title="Lašva Valley" label="Lašva Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194540" start="45447" end="45453" title="Kaćuni" label="Kaćuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902652" start="45458" end="45467" title="Bilalovac" label="Bilalovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018006" start="45925" end="45930" title="Vitez" label="Vitez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822621" start="46134" end="46154" title="Enver Hadžihasanović" label="Enver Hadžihasanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q223340" start="46182" end="46191" title="3rd Corps of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="3rd Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697877" start="46197" end="46212" title="Tihomir Blaškić" label="Tihomir Blaškić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017907" start="46882" end="46894" title="Novi Travnik" label="Novi Travnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387922" start="48352" end="48367" title="Ahmići massacre" label="Ahmići massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092970" start="48496" end="48513" title="Cheshire Regiment" label="Cheshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="48530" end="48542" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q341511" start="48573" end="48584" title="Bob Stewart (British Army officer)" label="Bob Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314100" start="48841" end="48849" title="Miletići" label="Miletići"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285208" start="49187" end="49202" title="Sefer Halilović" label="Sefer Halilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274770" start="49228" end="49244" title="Milivoj Petković" label="Milivoj Petković"/>
<link wikidata="Q974745" start="49611" end="49617" title="Konjic" label="Konjic"/>
<link wikidata="Q994232" start="49672" end="49681" title="Jablanica, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Jablanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588836" start="49769" end="49776" title="Trusina killings" label="Trusina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724348" start="50090" end="50106" title="Siege of Mostar" label="Battle of Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q843093" start="50348" end="50355" title="Dretelj camp" label="Dretelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379862" start="50377" end="50386" title="Heliodrom camp" label="Heliodrom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50427" end="50433" title="Potoci camp" label="Potoci"/>
<link wikidata="Q972698" start="51824" end="51831" title="Kreševo" label="Kreševo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822765" start="51877" end="51892" title="Battle of Žepče" label="Battle of Žepče"/>
<link wikidata="Q61861980" start="51966" end="51991" title="Battle of Bugojno" label="seized control of Bugojno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335295" start="52205" end="52231" title="Operation Neretva &amp;#x27;93" label="Operation Neretva &amp;#x27;93"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907384" start="52632" end="52650" title="Grabovica massacre" label="Grabovica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="52679" end="52682" title="Prisoner of war" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q120682645" start="52702" end="52716" title="Uzdol massacre" label="Uzdol massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628907" start="52792" end="52810" title="Stupni Do massacre" label="Stupni Do massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q504058" start="53286" end="53293" title="Goražde" label="Goražde"/>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="53295" end="53305" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="53307" end="53312" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q393848" start="53314" end="53318" title="Žepa" label="Žepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="53323" end="53328" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964688" start="53332" end="53346" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 824" label="Resolution 824"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479587" start="53408" end="53422" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 836" label="Resolution 836"/>
<link wikidata="Q472398" start="53514" end="53535" title="Operation Sharp Guard" label="Operation Sharp Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="53561" end="53573" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="53590" end="53612" title="Western European Union" label="Western European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="54770" end="54797" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary General of the UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479587" start="54806" end="54829" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 836" label="Security Resolution 836"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="54940" end="54944" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="55578" end="55586" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="55638" end="55643" title="Siege of Sarajevo" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482369" start="55653" end="55675" title="Markale massacres" label="first Markale massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="55823" end="55840" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257" start="55841" end="55862" title="Boutros Boutros-Ghali" label="Boutros Boutros-Ghali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="55990" end="55994" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380335" start="56102" end="56112" title="air strike" label="air strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="56365" end="56369" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56837" end="56846" title="Ante Roso (Bosnian Croat)" label="Ante Roso"/>
<link wikidata="Q463856" start="56886" end="56897" title="Rasim Delić" label="Rasim Delić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378244" start="57008" end="57028" title="Washington Agreement" label="Washington Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="57343" end="57379" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505468" start="57726" end="57748" title="Battle of Kupres (1994)" label="advance towards Kupres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487383" start="57846" end="57871" title="Operation Winter &amp;#x27;94" label="Operation Winter &amp;#x27;94"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="58050" end="58054" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="58268" end="58272" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984410" start="58312" end="58321" title="Banja Luka incident (February 1994)" label="shot down"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="58437" end="58468" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="United Nations Protection Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q967813" start="58699" end="58705" title="Maglaj" label="Maglaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="58827" end="58829" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q504058" start="58961" end="58968" title="Goražde" label="Goražde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467392" start="58969" end="58978" title="safe area (Bosnian War)" label="safe area"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="59066" end="59070" title="General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="F-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q210384" start="59310" end="59321" title="British Aerospace Sea Harrier" label="Sea Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="59444" end="59450" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="59507" end="59512" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="59630" end="59642" title="Bosnian Serb" label="Bosnian Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q260496" start="59643" end="59651" title="Šekovići" label="Šekovići"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017926" start="59678" end="59686" title="Kalesija" label="Kalesija"/>
<link wikidata="Q568992" start="59785" end="59804" title="Operation Bøllebank" label="Operation Bøllebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="59822" end="59831" title="United States Senate" label="US Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="59861" end="59869" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096745" start="60801" end="60817" title="Operation Amanda" label="Operation Amanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q994196" start="60929" end="60937" title="Gradačac" label="Gradačac"/>
<link wikidata="Q922609" start="61163" end="61169" title="Udbina" label="Udbina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097350" start="61701" end="61706" title="25 May 1995 Tuzla shelling" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61842" end="61848" title="Operation Winter &amp;#x27;94#Operation Leap 1" label="Leap 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61853" end="61859" title="Operation Winter &amp;#x27;94#Operation Leap 2" label="Leap 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q746073" start="61918" end="61923" title="Livno" label="Livno"/>
<link wikidata="Q894349" start="61967" end="61983" title="Bosansko Grahovo" label="Bosansko Grahovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33115691" start="62213" end="62231" title="François Lecointre" label="François Lecointre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="62355" end="62379" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q93167" start="62407" end="62419" title="Ratko Mladić" label="Ratko Mladić"/>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="62461" end="62471" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="62535" end="62554" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="62646" end="62654" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="UNPROFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="62719" end="62731" title="Peacekeeping" label="peacekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q950566" start="62733" end="62741" title="Dutchbat" label="Dutchbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="62829" end="62833" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q393848" start="63010" end="63014" title="Žepa" label="Žepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540932" start="63088" end="63103" title="Split Agreement" label="Split Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984013" start="63213" end="63238" title="Operation Summer &amp;#x27;95" label="Operation Summer &amp;#x27;95"/>
<link wikidata="Q769377" start="63402" end="63417" title="Operation Storm" label="Operation Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="63449" end="63476" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="Republic of Serbian Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q194948" start="63644" end="63653" title="Novi Grad, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Novi Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12746404" start="63680" end="63693" title="Operation Una" label="Operation Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="63749" end="63758" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una river"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="63844" end="63853" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756737" start="64060" end="64079" title="Operation Mistral 2" label="Operation Mistral 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q258429" start="64104" end="64109" title="Jajce" label="Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q185660" start="64111" end="64117" title="Šipovo" label="Šipovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q762884" start="64122" end="64127" title="Drvar" label="Drvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409105" start="64197" end="64211" title="Operation Sana" label="Operation Sana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354894" start="64544" end="64567" title="Operation Southern Move" label="Operation Southern Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q297318" start="64614" end="64627" title="Ante Gotovina" label="Ante Gotovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000971" start="64654" end="64667" title="Mrkonjić Grad" label="Mrkonjić Grad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64845" end="64861" title="Markale massacres#Second massacre" label="Markale massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q167662" start="64881" end="64906" title="Secretary General of NATO" label="Secretary General of NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q160774" start="64930" end="64956" title="Operation Deliberate Force" label="Operation Deliberate Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="65363" end="65376" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="65545" end="65557" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="65582" end="65604" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Peace Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="65705" end="65710" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="65778" end="65782" title="IFOR" label="IFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302880" start="66091" end="66110" title="unexploded ordnance" label="unexploded ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712478" start="67022" end="67038" title="M. Cherif Bassiouni" label="Cherif Bassiouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315143" start="67240" end="67273" title="Research and Documentation Center in Sarajevo" label="Research and Documentation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315143" start="69306" end="69309" title="Research and Documentation Center in Sarajevo" label="RDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="69318" end="69322" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="70192" end="70206" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="Hague Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q924098" start="71405" end="71417" title="Gornji Vakuf" label="Gornji Vakuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q934612" start="71422" end="71429" title="Bugojno" label="Bugojno"/>
<link wikidata="Q126712" start="71573" end="71578" title="Vrbas (river)" label="Vrbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="71700" end="71707" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="71967" end="71975" title="UNPROFOR" label="UNPROFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="72298" end="72329" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q57381" start="72331" end="72346" title="Haris Silajdžić" label="Haris Silajdžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="72380" end="72384" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="ICRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288108" start="72545" end="72553" title="Bosnian Genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="72774" end="72785" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Balkan wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="72845" end="72866" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q638273" start="73110" end="73129" title="Tomašica, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Tomašica mass grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q323986" start="73147" end="73155" title="Prijedor" label="Prijedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785760" start="73222" end="73229" title="Kozarac" label="Kozarac"/>
<link wikidata="Q685248" start="73259" end="73264" title="UNCHR" label="UNCHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712478" start="73539" end="73558" title="M. Cherif Bassiouni" label="M. Cherif Bassiouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="73814" end="73841" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="74072" end="74088" title="Ethnic cleansing" label="Ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="74233" end="74257" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596769" start="74262" end="74281" title="Serb paramilitary" label="Serb paramilitaries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75084" end="75100" title="History of Republika Srpska#1991–1995" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q334731" start="75105" end="75118" title="Herzeg-Bosnia" label="Herzeg-Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="75149" end="75168" title="Srebrenica genocide" label="Srebrenica genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="75355" end="75382" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504602" start="75811" end="75860" title="Lašva Valley ethnic cleansing" label="ethnically cleanse Bosniaks from the Lašva Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283467" start="75880" end="75892" title="Dario Kordić" label="Dario Kordić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="76020" end="76050" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947408" start="76064" end="76073" title="Bosnian Genocide Case" label="1993 suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="76139" end="76147" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76341" end="76357" title="History of Republika Srpska#1991–1995" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400658" start="76614" end="76632" title="Peter W. Galbraith" label="Peter W. Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="77043" end="77065" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500162" start="77363" end="77372" title="Bijeljina massacre" label="Bijeljina"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="77374" end="77382" title="Siege of Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268468" start="77384" end="77392" title="Prijedor massacre" label="Prijedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075596" start="77394" end="77401" title="Zvornik massacre" label="Zvornik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77403" end="77413" title="Banja Luka#Bosnian War" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042255" start="77415" end="77423" title="Višegrad massacres" label="Višegrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268036" start="77428" end="77432" title="Foča massacre" label="Foča"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187548" start="77514" end="77529" title="dolus specialis" label="dolus specialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="77573" end="77591" title="Srebrenica Genocide" label="only in Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="77701" end="77724" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293896" start="78169" end="78185" title="Rape during the Bosnian War" label="women were raped"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="78487" end="78544" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="78651" end="78673" title="crime against humanity" label="crime against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="78694" end="78703" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="78707" end="78715" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268036" start="78786" end="78790" title="Foča ethnic cleansing" label="Foča"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042255" start="78795" end="78803" title="Višegrad massacres" label="Višegrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="79336" end="79393" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="79448" end="79457" title="prosecute" label="prosecute"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="79490" end="79519" title="wars in the former Yugoslavia" label="wars in the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192683" start="79571" end="79583" title="Ad hoc" label="ad hoc court"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="79604" end="79613" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268118" start="79880" end="79905" title="joint criminal enterprise" label="joint criminal enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q26769" start="80017" end="80032" title="Biljana Plavšić" label="Biljana Plavšić"/>
<link wikidata="Q26776" start="80034" end="80051" title="Momčilo Krajišnik" label="Momčilo Krajišnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q373375" start="80053" end="80069" title="Radoslav Brđanin" label="Radoslav Brđanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268263" start="80075" end="80086" title="Duško Tadić" label="Duško Tadić"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="80125" end="80135" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123923" start="80200" end="80216" title="Radovan Karadžić" label="Radovan Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251958" start="80221" end="80234" title="Trial of Radovan Karadžić" label="held on trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="80256" end="80270" title="life in prison" label="life in prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="80293" end="80316" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="80321" end="80329" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q93167" start="80331" end="80343" title="Ratko Mladić" label="Ratko Mladić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758602" start="80353" end="80370" title="Trial of Ratko Mladić" label="tried by the ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="80415" end="80432" title="siege of Sarajevo" label="siege of Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="80441" end="80460" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="80557" end="80569" title="Paramilitary" label="Paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q298063" start="80577" end="80592" title="Vojislav Šešelj" label="Vojislav Šešelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268118" start="80654" end="80679" title="joint criminal enterprise" label="joint criminal enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="80772" end="80790" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="80889" end="80906" title="Geneva Convention" label="Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="80909" end="80932" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="80937" end="80945" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q183848" start="81015" end="81032" title="Alija Izetbegović" label="Alija Izetbegović"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="81061" end="81065" title="ICTY" label="ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q463856" start="81212" end="81223" title="Rasim Delić" label="Rasim Delić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621507" start="81383" end="81401" title="Bosnian mujahideen" label="Bosnian mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822621" start="81502" end="81522" title="Enver Hadžihasanović" label="Enver Hadžihasanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688282" start="81692" end="81703" title="Hazim Delić" label="Hazim Delić"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="81712" end="81719" title="Bosniak" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301608" start="81744" end="81764" title="Čelebići prison camp" label="Čelebići prison camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="81833" end="81837" title="ICTY" label="ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285208" start="81962" end="81977" title="Sefer Halilović" label="Sefer Halilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283467" start="82324" end="82336" title="Dario Kordić" label="Dario Kordić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607707" start="82709" end="82721" title="Bruno Stojić" label="Bruno Stojić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270169" start="82752" end="82768" title="Slobodan Praljak" label="Slobodan Praljak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274770" start="82784" end="82800" title="Milivoj Petković" label="Milivoj Petković"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607698" start="82839" end="82853" title="Valentin Ćorić" label="Valentin Ćorić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268118" start="83065" end="83090" title="joint criminal enterprise" label="joint criminal enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534460" start="83237" end="83248" title="Gojko Šušak" label="Gojko Šušak"/>
<link wikidata="Q666662" start="83262" end="83275" title="Janko Bobetko" label="Janko Bobetko"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="83538" end="83546" title="Srebrenica Genocide" label="Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="83688" end="83696" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="83700" end="83706" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q483290" start="83789" end="83800" title="Boris Tadić" label="Boris Tadić"/>
<link wikidata="Q57258" start="83944" end="83957" title="Ivo Josipović" label="Ivo Josipović"/>
<link wikidata="Q57381" start="84076" end="84091" title="Haris Silajdžić" label="Haris Silajdžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q920222" start="84444" end="84462" title="National Assembly of Serbia" label="Serbian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="85007" end="85014" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="85019" end="85025" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="85098" end="85107" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q474138" start="85113" end="85130" title="war of aggression" label="war of aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232121" start="85393" end="85407" title="David Campbell (academic)" label="David Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636959" start="85959" end="85972" title="Sumantra Bose" label="Sumantra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268263" start="86573" end="86584" title="Duško Tadić" label="Duško Tadić"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86589" end="86602" title="Zdravko Mucić" label="Zdravko Mucić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099675" start="86767" end="86778" title="Ivica Rajić" label="Ivica Rajić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697877" start="86780" end="86795" title="Tihomir Blaškić" label="Tihomir Blaškić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283467" start="86800" end="86812" title="Dario Kordić" label="Dario Kordić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276440" start="86952" end="86962" title="Ejup Ganić" label="Ejup Ganić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807619" start="87049" end="87064" title="Timothy Workman" label="Timothy Workman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779977" start="87340" end="87351" title="Mary Kaldor" label="Mary Kaldor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17124667" start="87412" end="87420" title="new wars" label="new wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540690" start="87590" end="87604" title="Ithaca College" label="Ithaca College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467522" start="88493" end="88510" title="The Hunting Party (2007 film)" label="The Hunting Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48410" start="88527" end="88539" title="Richard Gere" label="Richard Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q123923" start="88646" end="88662" title="Radovan Karadžić" label="Radovan Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q723659" start="88670" end="88688" title="Behind Enemy Lines (2001 film)" label="Behind Enemy Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635310" start="88717" end="88739" title="Mrkonjić Grad incident" label="Mrkonjić Grad incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="88762" end="88769" title="United States Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141706" start="88859" end="88873" title="The Peacemaker (1997 film)" label="The Peacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="88890" end="88904" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="88909" end="88922" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459759" start="89106" end="89136" title="In the Land of Blood and Honey" label="In the Land of Blood and Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q13909" start="89202" end="89216" title="Angelina Jolie" label="Angelina Jolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293896" start="89306" end="89350" title="Rape in the Bosnian War" label="mass rape of Muslim women in the Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q39666" start="89415" end="89428" title="Penélope Cruz" label="Penélope Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q750917" start="89627" end="89646" title="Welcome to Sarajevo" label="Welcome to Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="89694" end="89699" title="Siege of Sarajevo" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750518" start="89732" end="89748" title="Beautiful People (film)" label="Beautiful People"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161684" start="89767" end="89780" title="Jasmin Dizdar" label="Jasmin Dizdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21819908" start="89970" end="89989" title="Territorio Comanche" label="Territorio Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132686" start="90085" end="90098" title="Demons of War" label="Demons of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="90166" end="90172" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="90185" end="90189" title="IFOR" label="IFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q313497" start="90295" end="90308" title="Danis Tanović" label="Danis Tanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q845235" start="90322" end="90340" title="No Man&amp;#x27;s Land (2001 film)" label="No Man&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q753167" start="90401" end="90415" title="74th Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q730491" start="90424" end="90442" title="59th Golden Globe Awards" label="2002 Golden Globes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116171" start="90467" end="90475" title="Grbavica (film)" label="Grbavica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="90533" end="90541" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293896" start="90562" end="90594" title="Rape in the Bosnian War" label="systematic rape of Bosniak women"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="90656" end="90690" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311526" start="90713" end="90719" title="Remake (2003 film)" label="Remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471266" start="90785" end="90798" title="Zlatko Topčić" label="Zlatko Topčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="90849" end="90861" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="90870" end="90887" title="Siege of Sarajevo" label="Siege of Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666554" start="90914" end="90951" title="International Film Festival Rotterdam" label="International Film Festival Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20814796" start="90973" end="90986" title="The Abandoned (2010 film)" label="The Abandoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471266" start="91033" end="91046" title="Zlatko Topčić" label="Zlatko Topčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q29833759" start="91230" end="91275" title="45th Karlovy Vary International Film Festival" label="45th Karlovy Vary International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610039" start="91298" end="91316" title="The Perfect Circle" label="The Perfect Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437212" start="91354" end="91368" title="Ademir Kenović" label="Ademir Kenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404611" start="91452" end="91474" title="François Chalais Prize" label="François Chalais Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q212493" start="91525" end="91531" title="Savior (film)" label="Savior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530135" start="91729" end="91757" title="Pretty Village, Pretty Flame" label="Pretty Village, Pretty Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q385312" start="91794" end="91810" title="Srđan Dragojević" label="Srđan Dragojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q585821" start="91900" end="91917" title="Life Is a Miracle" label="Life Is a Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q94882" start="91937" end="91951" title="Emir Kusturica" label="Emir Kusturica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012663" start="92192" end="92214" title="In the Name of the Son (2007 film)" label="In the Name of the Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q4195338" start="92291" end="92301" title="10 Minutes (2002 film)" label="10 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377756" start="92447" end="92470" title="European Film Award for Best Short Film" label="Best short film of 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377331" start="92478" end="92499" title="European Film Academy" label="European Film Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305636" start="92601" end="92608" title="Avenger (film)" label="Avenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q701892" start="92893" end="92910" title="The Whistleblower" label="The Whistleblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q440892" start="92942" end="92958" title="Kathryn Bolkovac" label="Kathryn Bolkovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q21129531" start="92993" end="93008" title="sex trafficking" label="sex trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482537" start="93037" end="93071" title="Shot_Through_the_Heart_(film)" label="&amp;quot;Shot Through the Heart&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q97765712" start="93304" end="93320" title="Quo Vadis, Aida?" label="Quo Vadis, Aida?"/>
<link wikidata="Q83487" start="93375" end="93389" title="Jasmila Žbanić" label="Jasmila Žbanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="93405" end="93407" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="93458" end="93482" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Army of Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="93506" end="93516" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="93542" end="93561" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q838306" start="93638" end="93646" title="Warriors (TV series)" label="Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="93663" end="93670" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="93721" end="93733" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504602" start="93745" end="93774" title="Lašva Valley ethnic cleansing" label="Lašva Valley ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18129107" start="93827" end="93842" title="Pakistani drama" label="Pakistani drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734997" start="93857" end="93876" title="Alpha Bravo Charlie" label="Alpha Bravo Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695153" start="93908" end="93922" title="Shoaib Mansoor" label="Shoaib Mansoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044705" start="93948" end="93979" title="Inter-Services Public Relations" label="Inter-Services Public Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q837906" start="94063" end="94080" title="Pakistan Armed Forces" label="Pakistan military"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888985" start="94098" end="94122" title="United Nations peacekeeping missions involving Pakistan" label="UN peacekeeping missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246250" start="94173" end="94204" title="Pakistan Television Corporation" label="Pakistan Television Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729462" start="94269" end="94292" title="The Death of Yugoslavia" label="The Death of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313509" start="94495" end="94513" title="Bernard-Henri Lévy" label="Bernard-Henri Lévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="94635" end="94643" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400323" start="94723" end="94738" title="Sarajevo Tunnel" label="Sarajevo Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q97177505" start="94874" end="94894" title="A Cry from the Grave" label="A Cry from the Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="94911" end="94930" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47072367" start="94938" end="94955" title="Miracle in Bosnia" label="Miracle in Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q687076" start="95042" end="95088" title="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049019" start="95110" end="95135" title="1995 Cannes Film Festival" label="1995 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198151" start="95207" end="95219" title="The Diplomat (2015 film)" label="The Diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155649" start="95261" end="95278" title="Richard Holbrooke" label="Richard Holbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q190151" start="95498" end="95513" title="Bruce Dickinson" label="Bruce Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="95545" end="95556" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="95562" end="95573" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628868" start="95587" end="95597" title="Skunkworks (album)" label="Skunkworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500516" start="95659" end="95680" title="Semezdin Mehmedinović" label="Semezdin Mehmedinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422976" start="95694" end="95708" title="Sarajevo Blues" label="Sarajevo Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q715932" start="95719" end="95736" title="Miljenko Jergović" label="Miljenko Jergović"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95750" end="95767" title="Sarajevo Marlboro" label="Sarajevo Marlboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48443" start="95845" end="95863" title="Zlata&amp;#x27;s Diary" label="Zlata&amp;#x27;s Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48354" start="95913" end="95928" title="Zlata Filipović" label="Zlata Filipović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648372" start="96134" end="96147" title="Susan Shapiro" label="Susan Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086841" start="96573" end="96583" title="Eve Ensler" label="Eve Ensler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="96682" end="96713" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="British Territorial infantryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437257" start="96888" end="96899" title="Scott Simon" label="Scott Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614734" start="97051" end="97066" title="Steven Galloway" label="Steven Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908434" start="97364" end="97375" title="Bill Carter" label="Bill Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863589" start="97413" end="97452" title="1997 U2 concert in Sarajevo" label="bring U2 to a landmark Sarajevo concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q249197" start="97646" end="97663" title="Frederick Forsyth" label="Frederick Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="97858" end="97875" title="Siege of Sarajevo" label="Siege of Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928979" start="98082" end="98099" title="Safe Area Goražde" label="Safe Area Goražde"/>
<link wikidata="Q335397" start="98128" end="98137" title="Joe Sacco" label="Joe Sacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="98206" end="98216" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103" start="98290" end="98312" title="Sergio Bonelli Editore" label="Sergio Bonelli Editore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175567" start="98829" end="98840" title="Peter Maass" label="Peter Maass"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429845" start="99164" end="99176" title="Anthony Loyd" label="Anthony Loyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914148" start="99316" end="99325" title="Bing West" label="Bing West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187943" start="99338" end="99385" title="United States Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance" label="United States Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q767768" start="99637" end="99650" title="Miss Sarajevo" label="Miss Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="99660" end="99662" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="99674" end="99678" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q37615" start="99683" end="99700" title="Luciano Pavarotti" label="Luciano Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q116539" start="99710" end="99723" title="Pure Massacre" label="Pure Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q157327" start="99733" end="99744" title="Silverchair" label="Silverchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="99770" end="99785" title="the Cranberries" label="the Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356252" start="99813" end="99816" title="UHF (Portuguese band)" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="" start="99860" end="99874" title=":el:Magic De Spell" label="Magic De Spell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947339" start="99883" end="99898" title="Sva bol svijeta" label="Sva bol svijeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399185" start="99908" end="99913" title="Fazla" label="Fazla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542689" start="99976" end="99979" title="KSU (band)" label="KSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="99987" end="100000" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q902943" start="100007" end="100023" title="Dead Winter Dead" label="Dead Winter Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q830598" start="100033" end="100041" title="Savatage" label="Savatage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116785" start="100105" end="100116" title="Jackopierce" label="Jackopierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16743212" start="100422" end="100438" title="This War of Mine" label="This War of Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435635" start="100675" end="100723" title="1991 population census in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="1991 population census in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q160774" start="100726" end="100769" title="1995 NATO bombing in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="1995 NATO bombing in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q276294" start="100772" end="100810" title="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q931567" start="100813" end="100835" title="Command responsibility" label="Command responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q470446" start="100838" end="100884" title="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484090" start="100887" end="100936" title="Land mine contamination in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Land mine contamination in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627231" start="100939" end="100975" title="List of massacres in the Bosnian War" label="List of massacres in the Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254844" start="100978" end="101016" title="Role of the media in the Yugoslav wars" label="Role of the media in the Yugoslav wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851082" start="101648" end="101662" title="Balkan Insight" label="Balkan Insight"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577774" wikidata="Q10858950" url="?curid=577774" title="Assassination of Reinhard Heydrich">
<text>Reinhard Heydrich, the commander of the German Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), the acting governor of the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a principal architect of the Holocaust, was assassinated during the Second World War in a coordinated operation by the Czechoslovak resistance. The assassination attempt, code-named Operation Anthropoid, was carried out by resistance operatives Jozef Gabčík and Jan Kubiš on 27 May 1942. Heydrich was wounded in the attack and died of his injuries on 4 June.

The operatives who carried out the assassination were soldiers of the Czechoslovak Army who were prepared and trained by the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) with the approval of the Czechoslovak government-in-exile, led by Edvard Beneš. The Czechoslovaks undertook the operation to help confer legitimacy on the government-in-exile, and to exact retribution for Heydrich&#x27;s brutal rule. The operation was the only verified government-sponsored assassination of a senior Nazi leader during the war. Heydrich&#x27;s death led to a wave of reprisals by SS troops, including the destruction of villages and mass killings of civilians, notably the Lidice massacre.

Multiple memorials have been created in different nations such as in the Czech Republic, Slovakia and in the United Kingdom as a result of both the assassination and its aftermath. The events have been the subject of various films (usually in the general context of World War II in popular culture and specifically portrayals of Heydrich).

==Background==
===Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia===
Reinhard Heydrich had been the chief of the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA) since September 1939 and was appointed acting Protector of Bohemia and Moravia after replacing Konstantin von Neurath in September 1941. Chancellor Adolf Hitler agreed with &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot; Heinrich Himmler and Heydrich that von Neurath&#x27;s relatively lenient approach to the Czechs promoted anti-German sentiment, and encouraged anti-German resistance by strikes and sabotage.

Heydrich came to Prague to &quot;strengthen policy, carry out countermeasures against resistance&quot;, and keep up production quotas of Czech motors and arms that were &quot;extremely important to the German war effort&quot;. During his role as &quot;de facto&quot; dictator of Bohemia and Moravia, Heydrich often drove with his chauffeur in a car with an open roof. This was a show of his confidence in the occupation forces and in the effectiveness of his government. Due to his brutal efficiency, Heydrich was nicknamed the &quot;Butcher of Prague&quot;, the &quot;Blond Beast&quot; and the &quot;Hangman&quot;.

===Strategic context===

By late 1941, Nazi Germany controlled almost all of continental Europe, and German forces were approaching Moscow. The Allies deemed Soviet capitulation likely. The exiled government of Czechoslovakia under President Edvard Beneš was under pressure from British intelligence, as there had been very little visible resistance since the occupation of the Sudeten regions of the country in 1938. The takeover of these regions was accepted by the United Kingdom and France in the Munich Agreement. Occupation of the whole country had begun in 1939, and the initial betrayal by the United Kingdom and France, along with the subsequent terror of the Nazis, seemed to break the will of the Czechs for a period.

The German invasion of the Soviet Union had stimulated acts of sabotage by Czech communists, leading to Heydrich&#x27;s appointment. As well as terrorizing the opposition and establishing the Theresienstadt ghetto/concentration camp, Heydrich had overseen a progressive policy of good wages (equivalent to those in Germany) for industrial workers and farmers, which caused acts of sabotage to drop significantly and helped cooperative production of war materials. Heydrich was thought to be scheduled to transfer to occupied northern France and Belgium, with the intent to implement similar policies there.

Resistance movements were active from the very beginning of occupation in several other countries defeated in open warfare (Poland, Yugoslavia and Greece), but the subjugated Czech lands remained relatively calm and produced significant amounts of materiel for Germany. The exiled government felt that it had to do something that would inspire the Czechoslovaks, as well as show the world that the Czechs and Slovaks were allies. In particular, Beneš felt that a dramatic action displaying a Czech contribution to the Allied cause would make it politically harder for the British to forge any possible peace agreement with Germany that would undermine Czech national interests. Heydrich was chosen over Karl Hermann Frank as an assassination target due to his status as the acting Protector of Bohemia and Moravia as well as his reputation for terrorizing local citizens. The operation was also intended to demonstrate to senior Nazis that they were not beyond the reach of Allied forces and the resistance groups they supported.

==Assassination==
===Planning===
The operation was initiated by František Moravec, head of the Czechoslovak intelligence services, with the knowledge and approval of Beneš, almost as soon as Heydrich was appointed Protector. Moravec personally briefed Brigadier Colin Gubbins, who at the time was the Director of Operations in the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) and who had responsibility for the Czech and Polish &quot;country&quot; sections of the organisation. Gubbins readily agreed to help mount the operation, although knowledge of it was restricted to a few of the headquarters and training staff of SOE. The operation was given the codename &quot;Anthropoid&quot;, Greek for &quot;having the form of a human&quot;, a term usually used in zoology.

Preparation began on 20 October 1941. Moravec had personally selected two dozen of the most promising personnel from among the 2,000 exiled Czechoslovak soldiers based in Britain. They were sent to one of SOE&#x27;s commando training centres at Arisaig in Scotland. Warrant Officer Jozef Gabčík (Slovak) and Staff Sergeant Karel Svoboda (Czech) were chosen to carry out the operation on 28 October 1941 (Czechoslovakia&#x27;s Independence Day), but after Svoboda received a head injury during training he was replaced by Jan Kubiš (Czech). This caused delays in the mission because Kubiš had not completed training. The necessary false documents had not been prepared for him, either.

Training was supervised by the nominated head of the Czech section, Major Alfgar Hesketh-Prichard, who turned to Cecil Clarke to develop the necessary weapon. It was light enough to throw but still lethal enough to destroy an armour-plated Mercedes. During extensive training, the new weapon was found to be easy to throw by Hesketh-Prichard (who had a strong cricketing background, his father having been a first-class bowler), but less so by Gabčík and Kubiš.

===Insertion===
Gabčík and Kubiš, along with seven other soldiers from Czechoslovakia&#x27;s army-in-exile in the United Kingdom in two other groups, &quot;Silver A&quot; and &quot;Silver B&quot; (who had different missions), were flown from RAF Tangmere by a Halifax of No. 138 Squadron RAF at 22:00 on 28 December 1941. The groups, along with some supply containers, left the plane by parachute, in drops in three separate areas. The Anthropoid pair landed near Nehvizdy east of Prague. Originally, the plane had been planned to land near Pilsen, but the aircrew had navigation problems and each of the groups landed in different places from where intended. Gabčík and Kubiš then moved to Pilsen to contact their allies, and from there on to Prague, where the attack was planned.

In Prague, the pair contacted families and Czechoslovak resistance organisations who helped them during the preparations for the assassination. Upon learning of the nature of the mission, resistance leaders begged the Czechoslovak government-in-exile to call off the attack, saying that &quot;[a]n attempt against Heydrich&#x27;s life... would be of no use to the Allies and its consequences for our people would be immeasurable&quot;. Beneš personally broadcast a message insisting that the attack go forward, although he denied any involvement after the war. Professor Vojtěch Mastný argues that he &quot;clung to the scheme as the last resort to dramatize Czech resistance&quot;.

Gabčík and Kubiš initially planned to kill Heydrich on a train, but after examination of the practicalities they realised this was not going to be possible. A second plan was to kill Heydrich on a forest road that led from his home to Prague. They planned to pull a cable across the road that would stop Heydrich&#x27;s car, but after waiting several hours their commander, Lt. Adolf Opálka (from the group Out Distance), came to bring them back to Prague. A third plan was to kill Heydrich in Prague.

===Attack in Prague===

At 10:30 on Wednesday, 27 May 1942, Heydrich started his daily commute from his home in Panenské Břežany, north of central Prague, to his headquarters at Prague Castle. He was driven by SS-&quot;Oberscharführer&quot; Johannes Klein. Gabčík and Kubiš waited at the tram stop at the junction between the road then known as , and , in Prague 8-Libeň near Bulovka Hospital. The tight curve there would force Heydrich&#x27;s car to slow down as it turned westwards into . Josef Valčík (from group &quot;Silver A&quot;) was positioned about north of Gabčík and Kubiš to look out for the approaching car.

Heydrich&#x27;s green, open-topped Mercedes 320 Cabriolet B reached the curve two minutes later. Gabčík concealed his Sten submachine gun under a raincoat. As the car slowed and rounded the corner, Gabčík dropped his raincoat and raised the gun to shoot Heydrich but the gun jammed. Heydrich stood up and drew his Luger pistol, yelling to halt instead of ordering to accelerate. As the car braked in front of him, Kubiš, who was not spotted, threw a modified anti-tank grenade (concealed in a briefcase) at the car; he misjudged his throw. Instead of landing inside the car, it landed against the rear wheel. Nonetheless, the bomb severely wounded Heydrich when it detonated, its fragments ripping through the right rear fender and embedding fragmentation and fibers from the upholstery of the car into Heydrich, causing serious injuries to his left side, with major damage to his diaphragm, spleen and lung, as well as fracturing a rib. Kubiš received a minor wound to his face from the shrapnel. The explosion shattered the windows of the tram which had stopped on the opposite side of the road, shrapnel striking passengers. Two SS jackets folded on the back seat of the car were whirled upwards by the blast and draped themselves over the trolley wire.

Heydrich and Klein leapt out of the shattered Mercedes with drawn pistols; Klein ran towards Kubiš, who had staggered against the railings, while Heydrich went to Gabčík, who stood holding the Sten. Kubiš recovered, jumped on his bicycle and pedaled away, scattering passengers spilling from the tram by firing in the air with his Colt M1903 pistol. Klein tried to shoot at him, but dazed by the explosion, pressed the magazine release catch and the gun jammed. A staggering Heydrich came towards Gabčík, who dropped his Sten and tried to reach his bicycle but was forced to abandon the attempt and took cover behind a telegraph pole, firing at Heydrich with his pistol. Heydrich returned fire and ducked behind the stalled tram, when he suddenly doubled over and staggered to the side of the road in pain. He then collapsed against the railings, holding himself up with one hand. As Gabčík took the opportunity to run, Klein rushed to help his superior. Heydrich, his face pale and contorted in pain, pointed toward the fleeing Gabčík, saying, &quot;Get that bastard!&quot; As Klein gave pursuit, Heydrich stumbled along the pavement before collapsing against the bonnet of his wrecked car. Gabčík fled into a butcher shop, where the owner, a man named Brauer, who was a Nazi sympathiser and had a brother who worked for the Gestapo, ignored his request for help. Brauer ran out to the street and attracted Klein&#x27;s attention by shouting and pointing to the shop. Klein, whose gun was still jammed, ran into the shop and collided with Gabčík in the doorway. In the confusion, Gabčík shot him twice, severely wounding him in the leg. Gabčík then escaped in a tram, reaching a local safe house. At this point, Gabčík and Kubiš did not know that Heydrich was wounded and thought the attack had failed.

===Medical treatment and death===
A Czech woman and an off-duty policeman went to Heydrich&#x27;s aid and flagged down a delivery van. Heydrich was first placed in the driver&#x27;s cab but complained that the truck&#x27;s movement was causing him pain. He was then transferred to the back of the truck on his stomach and taken to the emergency room at Bulovka Hospital. A Dr. Slanina packed the chest wound, while Dr. Walter Diek, the Sudeten German chief of surgery at the hospital, tried to remove the shrapnel splinters.

Professor Hollbaum (a Silesian German who was chairman of surgery at Charles University in Prague) operated on Heydrich with Diek and Slanina&#x27;s assistance. The surgeons reinflated the collapsed left lung, removed the tip of the fractured 11th rib, sutured the torn diaphragm, inserted several catheters and removed the spleen, which contained a grenade fragment and upholstery. Himmler, Heydrich&#x27;s superior, dispatched his personal physician, Karl Gebhardt, who flew to Prague and arrived that evening. After 29 May, Heydrich was entirely in the care of SS physicians. Postoperative care included administration of large amounts of morphine.

Conflicting accounts exist concerning whether sulfanilamide, a new antibacterial drug, was given; Gebhardt testified at his 1947 war crimes trial that it was not. Theodor Morell, Hitler&#x27;s doctor, suggested its use, but Gebhardt, thinking Heydrich was recovering, declined. Heydrich developed a fever of and wound drainage, and he was in great pain. Despite the fever, his recovery appeared to progress well. On 2 June, during a visit by Himmler, Heydrich reconciled himself to his fate by reciting a part of one of his father&#x27;s operas:

&lt;poem lang=&quot;de&quot; style=&quot;float:left;&quot;&gt;Ja, die Welt ist nur ein Leierkasten,
die unser Herrgott selber dreht.
Jeder muß nach dem Liede tanzen,
das gerade auf der Walze steht.&lt;/poem&gt;
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left:2em; float:left;&quot;&gt;The world is just a barrel-organ
which the Lord God turns Himself.
We all have to dance to the tune
which is already on the drum.&lt;/poem&gt;

Heydrich&#x27;s fever and drainage subsided and his condition appeared to be improving until, while sitting up eating a noon meal on 3 June, he suddenly went into shock. He soon slipped into a deep coma and died on Thursday, 4 June around 4:30 a.m. Heydrich&#x27;s facial expression as he died betrayed an &quot;uncanny spirituality and entirely perverted beauty, like a renaissance Cardinal&quot; according to Bernhard Wehner, a &quot;Kriminalpolizei&quot; police official who investigated the assassination. An autopsy concluded he died of sepsis.

One of the hypotheses was that some of the horsehair in the upholstery of Heydrich&#x27;s car was forced into his body by the blast of the grenade, causing a systemic infection. Another suggestion was that Heydrich died of a massive pulmonary embolism (probably a fat embolism). In support of the latter possibility, particles of fat and blood clots were found at autopsy in the right ventricle and pulmonary artery and severe oedema was noted in the upper lobes of the lungs, while the lower lobes were collapsed.

===Botulinum poisoning hypothesis===
The authors of &quot;A Higher Form of Killing&quot; claim that Heydrich died from botulism (&quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot;) toxin poisoning. According to this hypothesis, based on statements made by Paul Fildes, a Porton Down botulism researcher, the No. 73 anti-tank grenade used in the attack had been modified to contain botulinum toxin. The authors say that only circumstantial evidence supports this allegation; SOE records for the period have remained sealed and few medical records of Heydrich&#x27;s condition and treatment have been preserved.

The evidence cited to support the hypothesis includes the modifications made to the No. 73 grenade, the bottom two-thirds of this weapon had been removed, and the open end and sides were wrapped up with adhesive tape. The modification of the weapon could indicate an attached toxic or biological agent. Heydrich received excellent medical care by the standards of the time. His &quot;post mortem&quot; examination showed none of the usual signs of sepsis, although infection of the wound and areas surrounding the lungs and heart was reported. A German wartime report on the incident stated, &quot;[d]eath occurred as a consequence of lesions in the vital parenchymatous organs caused by bacteria and possibly by poisons carried into them by bomb splinters&quot;.

Heydrich&#x27;s condition while hospitalized was not documented in detail, but he was not noted to have developed any of the distinctive symptoms associated with botulism, which have a gradual onset, invariably including paralysis, with death generally resulting from respiratory failure. Two others were also wounded by fragments of the same grenade — Kubiš, the Czech soldier who threw the grenade, and a bystander — but neither was reported to have shown any sign of poisoning.

The botulinum toxin theory has not found widespread acceptance among scholars. Fildes had a reputation for &quot;extravagant boasts&quot;, and the grenade modifications could have been aimed at making the weapon lighter. Two of the six original modified grenades are kept by the Military History Institute in Prague.

==Consequences==
===Reprisals===

Hitler ordered an investigation and reprisals on the day of the assassination attempt, suggesting that Himmler send SS General Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski to Prague. According to Karl Hermann Frank&#x27;s postwar testimony, Hitler knew Zelewski to be even harsher than Heydrich. Hitler favoured killing 10,000 politically unreliable Czechs, but after he consulted Himmler, the idea was dropped because Czech territory was an important industrial zone for the German military, and indiscriminate killing could reduce the productivity of the region.

According to one estimate, 5,000 people were murdered in the reprisals. More than 13,000 people were arrested, including Kubiš&#x27;s girlfriend Anna Malinová, who died in the Mauthausen concentration camp. Adolf Opálka&#x27;s aunt, Marie Opálková, was executed in the Mauthausen camp on 24 October 1942; his father Viktor Jarolím was also killed.

Nazi intelligence falsely linked Heydrich&#x27;s assassins to the village of Lidice. A Gestapo report suggested Lidice was the hiding place of the assassins, since several Czech army officers exiled in England were known to have come from there. On 9 June 1942, the Germans committed the Lidice massacre; 199 men were killed, 195 women were deported to Ravensbrück concentration camp and 95 children taken prisoner. Of the children, 81 were later killed in gas vans at the Chełmno extermination camp, while eight were adopted by German families. The Czech village of Ležáky was also destroyed because a radio transmitter belonging to the &quot;Silver A&quot; team was found there. The men and women of Ležáky were murdered, both villages were burned and the ruins of Lidice were levelled.

===Investigation and manhunt===

In the days following the Lidice massacre, no leads were found for those responsible for Heydrich&#x27;s death. A deadline was issued to the military and the people of Czechoslovakia for the assassins to be apprehended by 18 June 1942. If they were not caught by then, the Germans threatened to spill far more blood, believing that this threat would be enough to force a potential informant to sell out the culprits. Many civilians were indeed wary and fearful of further reprisals, making hiding information much longer increasingly difficult. The assailants initially hid with two Prague families and later took refuge in the Cathedral of Sts Cyril and Methodius (until 1935 the Karel Boromejsky Church) a cathedral of the Czech and Slovak Orthodox Church in Prague. The Germans were unable to locate the attackers until Karel Čurda of the Out Distance sabotage group turned himself in to the Gestapo and gave up the names of the team&#x27;s local contacts for the bounty of one million Reichsmarks.

Čurda betrayed several safe houses provided by the Jindra group, including that of the Moravec family in Žižkov. At 05:00 on 17 June, the Moravec flat was raided. The family was made to stand in the hallway while the Gestapo searched their flat. Marie Moravec was allowed to go to the toilet, where she bit into a cyanide capsule and killed herself. Alois Moravec was unaware of his family&#x27;s involvement with the resistance; he was taken to the Petschek Palace together with his 17-year-old son Vlastimil, or &quot;Ata&quot;, who was tortured throughout the day but refused to talk. The youth was stupefied with brandy, shown his mother&#x27;s severed head in a fish tank, and warned that, if he did not talk, his father would be next; Ata gave in. Ata was executed by the Nazis in Mauthausen on 24 October 1942, the same day as his father, his fiancée, her mother and her brother.

&quot;Waffen-SS&quot; troops laid siege to the church the following day, but they were unable to take the assailants alive, despite the best efforts of 750 SS soldiers under the command of SS-&quot;Gruppenführer&quot; Karl Fischer von Treuenfeld. They also brought along Čurda, who tried to get them to surrender by shouting: &quot; () to which the paratroopers fired back and shouted: &quot; () Adolf Opálka and Josef Bublík were killed in the prayer loft after a two-hour gun battle, and Kubiš was reportedly found unconscious and died shortly after from his injuries. Gabčík, Josef Valčík, Jaroslav Švarc and Jan Hrubý killed themselves in the crypt after repeated SS attacks, attempts to force them out with tear gas and fire brigade trucks brought in to try to flood the crypt. The SS report about the fight mentioned five wounded SS soldiers. The men in the church had only pistols, while the attackers had machine guns, submachine guns and hand grenades. After the battle, Čurda confirmed the identity of the dead Czech resistance fighters, including Kubiš and Gabčík.

Bishop Gorazd took the blame for the actions in the church to minimize the reprisals among his flock, and even wrote letters to the Nazi authorities, who arrested him on 27 June 1942 and tortured him. On 4 September 1942, the bishop, the church&#x27;s priests and senior lay leaders were taken to Kobylisy Shooting Range in a northern suburb of Prague and shot. For his actions, Bishop Gorazd was later glorified as a martyr by the Eastern Orthodox Church.

===Aftermath===

Two large funeral ceremonies were held for Heydrich as one of the most important Nazi leaders, first in Prague, where the way to Prague Castle was lined by thousands of SS men with torches, and then in Berlin attended by all high-ranking Nazi figures. Hitler attended the Berlin ceremony and placed the German Order and Blood Order medals on Heydrich&#x27;s funeral pillow.

The assassination of Heydrich was one of the most significant moments of the resistance in Czechoslovakia. Čurda, who had betrayed Heydrich&#x27;s assassins, was hanged for high treason in 1947 after attempting suicide.

On 5 August 1942, British foreign secretary Anthony Eden issued a declaration that Germany had destroyed the Munich Agreement. However, the declaration did not commit the UK to Czechoslovakia&#x27;s pre-Munich borders, nor did it declare the Munich agreement &quot;void ab initio, a&quot;s Czechoslovakia wanted. Thus, the statement has been questioned as a full repudiation of the deal. A September 1942 declaration by the French National Committee suggested that the agreement was &quot;void ab initio&quot; since it had come about under threat of aggression. The committee recognized no changes in Czechoslovakia&#x27;s borders as of 1938.

Neither the Czech government-in-exile nor the British SOE likely foresaw that the Germans would apply the principle of &quot;Sippenhaft&quot; (collective responsibility) on the scale they did to avenge Heydrich&#x27;s assassination. Moreover, decisions whether to conduct assassinations are resistant to a rational decision process. Computing the probability of success, or the cost-versus-benefit aspect, is inherently difficult. Even if it were possible, the benefit (in this case, the diplomatic value of British repudiation of the Munich Agreement) was not in a form that Beneš could readily compare against the nature of the cost (the loss of Czech civilian lives). British Prime Minister Winston Churchill was so infuriated by the scale of reprisals as to suggest levelling three German villages for every Czech village that the Nazis destroyed. Two years after Heydrich&#x27;s death, Operation Foxley, a similar assassination plan, was drawn up against Hitler, but never implemented.

Operation Anthropoid was the only successful government-organized assassination of a top-ranking Nazi official. The Polish underground killed two senior SS officers in the General Government in Operation Kutschera and Operation Bürkl; Wilhelm Kube, the General-kommissar of Belarus, was killed in Operation Blowup by Soviet partisan Yelena Mazanik, a Belarusian woman who had managed to find employment in his household.

==Memorials==


The soldiers of Operation Anthropoid, their helpers and the operation itself were memorialized in the Czech Republic and abroad. The oldest memorial is a plaque on the Cathedral of Saints Cyril and Methodius in Resslova Street, Prague. It was created in 1947 by an ex-soldier of the Czechoslovak army-in-exile, František Bělský and is dedicated to the paratroopers, the clergymen and other Czech patriots who died for the sake of the operation.

The National Memorial to the Heroes of the Heydrich Terror was created beneath the Cathedral of Saints Cyril and Methodius in 1995. Later, it underwent significant reconstruction and the extended exposition was reopened in 2010.

Another important monument is in the form of a fountain, and symbolically commemorates the seven paratroopers. It was installed in 1968 in the Jephson Gardens, Leamington Spa, England. The headquarters of the Czechoslovak military training camp during the Second World War were in Leamington.

The Slovak National Museum opened an exhibition in May 2007 to commemorate the heroes of the Czech and Slovak resistance, one of the most important resistance actions in the whole of German-occupied Europe.

The Anthropoid Operation Memorial, 2009, Prague, authors: sculptor David Mojescik and sculptor Michal Smeral; architects: M. Tumova and J. Gulbis.
Also, a memorial has been placed in Arisaig, Scotland, to the Czechoslovakian members of SOE who trained in that area, with a list of those killed and the missions in which they took part.

In October 2011, a memorial plaque was unveiled on residential block Porchester Gate (London), which housed the Czechoslovak military intelligence service and where the Operation Anthropoid was planned in October 1941.

==Portrayals in literature and popular culture==
===Literature===
Jiří Weil&#x27;s 1959 book &quot;Mendelssohn is on the Roof&quot; features the assassination of Reinhard Heydrich as a subplot.

The story of Operation Anthropoid is narrated in a short Czech comic book titled &quot;Atentát&quot; (&quot;The Assassination&quot;), created in 1976 by brothers Jan Saudek and Kája Saudek. It was published in 1976 in the Polish comic-book magazine &quot;Relax&quot;, as &quot;Zamach&quot; (&quot;The Assassination&quot;).

The alternate history novel &quot;The Man with the Iron Heart&quot; by Harry Turtledove is based on the premise that Heydrich survives the assassination attempt, and leads a postwar insurgency campaign, using the Werwolf.

Jiří Šulc&#x27;s novel &quot;Dva proti Říši&quot; (literally &quot;Two Men Against The Empire&quot;) describes the events long before the assassination, assassination itself, its consequences and a detailed look at the life of the Czech resistance and exiled paratroopers in the Protectorate.

Laurent Binet&#x27;s novel &quot;HHhH&quot; (&quot;Himmlers Hirn heißt Heydrich&quot;, or &quot;Himmler&#x27;s brain is called Heydrich&quot;), published in 2010 by Grasset &amp; Fasquelle, chronicles the lives of Reinhard Heydrich and his assassins Jozef Gabčík and Jan Kubiš.

===Movies===
The following movies depict Operation Anthropoid or portray the assassination as a crucial moment of the film&#x27;s plot:
* &quot;Hangmen Also Die!&quot; (1943)
* &quot;Hitler&#x27;s Madman&quot; (1943)
* &quot;Muži bez křídel&quot; (1946)
* &quot;Atentát&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Sokolovo&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Operation Daybreak&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Protector&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Lidice&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Bullet for Heydrich&quot; (2013 TV movie)
* &quot;Anthropoid&quot; (2016)
* &quot;The Man with the Iron Heart&quot; (2017)

===Songs===
There are two Czech songs about Operation Anthropoid - one is by Jan Vyčítal, from Czech country band Greenhorns, called Battledress (2006). The second song is by Daniel Landa, called Anička Malinová (2022; Anna Malinová was Gabčík&#x27;s girlfriend. She was executed by Nazis in Mauthausen).

==Gallery==
Church of Saints Cyril and Methodius is where the Czechoslovak paratroopers died after being cornered, and the memorial there is for those killed by the SS in retaliation for Operation Anthropoid.

==See also==

*Aston House - Station XII
*Czech resistance to Nazi occupation
*Occupation of Czechoslovakia
*Operation Kutschera – Polish assassination of the SS and Police Leader Franz Kutschera in 1944
*List of Nazi Party leaders and officials
*List of rulers of the Protectorate Bohemia and Moravia

== Notes ==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
*
*
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* National Memorial to the Heroes of the Heydrich Terror
* Radio Prague: Czechs in World War II
* Radio Prague: Exhibitions mark 60th anniversary of assassination of Nazi governor Heydrich
* Operation Anthropoid at Everything2
* Czechs in Exile website
* Exhibition on Operation Anthropoid at the Slovak Nation Museum
* The Prague Daily Monitor: Experts find wartime paratroopers&#x27; grave
* RCAHMS record for Arisaig memorial
* Highland HER entry for Arisaig memorial</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="0" end="17" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="47" end="73" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="109" end="144" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="174" end="187" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="217" end="233" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="268" end="280" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858950" start="331" end="351" title="Assassination of Reinhard Heydrich" label="Operation Anthropoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q432927" start="394" end="406" title="Jozef Gabčík" label="Jozef Gabčík"/>
<link wikidata="Q116589" start="411" end="420" title="Jan Kubiš" label="Jan Kubiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505574" start="579" end="596" title="Czechoslovak Army" label="Czechoslovak Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="642" end="670" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q430161" start="702" end="734" title="Czechoslovak government-in-exile" label="Czechoslovak government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="743" end="755" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Edvard Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="1074" end="1076" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q839710" start="1167" end="1182" title="Lidice massacre" label="Lidice massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036445" start="1451" end="1482" title="World War II in popular culture" label="World War II in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886745" start="1500" end="1522" title="Dramatic portrayals of Reinhard Heydrich" label="portrayals of Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="1583" end="1600" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="1627" end="1653" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="1707" end="1739" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protector of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153421" start="1756" end="1778" title="Konstantin von Neurath" label="Konstantin von Neurath"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="1798" end="1808" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1809" end="1821" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q162312" start="1840" end="1855" title="Reichsführer-SS" label="Reichsführer-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="1862" end="1878" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="1951" end="1957" title="Czech people" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="2071" end="2077" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q216541" start="2384" end="2393" title="chauffeur" label="chauffeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2710" end="2722" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="2748" end="2766" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="2803" end="2809" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2815" end="2821" title="Allied Powers of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2829" end="2835" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217901" start="2836" end="2848" title="Capitulation (surrender)" label="capitulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="2882" end="2896" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213514" start="2903" end="2912" title="President of Czechoslovakia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="2913" end="2925" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Edvard Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098380" start="2950" end="2970" title="British intelligence" label="British intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="3049" end="3056" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudeten"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="3158" end="3164" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="3172" end="3188" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="3412" end="3440" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="3482" end="3492" title="communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q15111616" start="3593" end="3607" title="Theresienstadt" label="Theresienstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="4133" end="4139" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="4141" end="4151" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358836" start="4156" end="4162" title="4th of August Regime" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="4257" end="4265" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="4418" end="4425" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q57328" start="4712" end="4730" title="Karl Hermann Frank" label="Karl Hermann Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q262103" start="5104" end="5121" title="František Moravec" label="František Moravec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967182" start="5292" end="5301" title="Brigadier (United Kingdom)" label="Brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739613" start="5302" end="5315" title="Colin Gubbins" label="Colin Gubbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="5379" end="5407" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q590490" start="5692" end="5700" title="codename" label="codename"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="5725" end="5730" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="5798" end="5805" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="6024" end="6032" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206041" start="6053" end="6060" title="Arisaig" label="Arisaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="6074" end="6089" title="Warrant Officer" label="Warrant Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q432927" start="6090" end="6102" title="Jozef Gabčík" label="Jozef Gabčík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337825" start="6116" end="6130" title="Staff Sergeant" label="Staff Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6131" end="6144" title="Karel Svoboda (soldier)" label="Karel Svoboda"/>
<link wikidata="Q116589" start="6329" end="6338" title="Jan Kubiš" label="Jan Kubiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056342" start="6607" end="6619" title="Cecil Vandepeer Clarke" label="Cecil Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="6734" end="6742" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="6854" end="6861" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5745709" start="6877" end="6887" title="Hesketh Hesketh-Prichard" label="his father"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="6902" end="6913" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515123" start="7199" end="7211" title="RAF Tangmere" label="RAF Tangmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="7217" end="7224" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494417" start="7228" end="7248" title="No. 138 Squadron RAF" label="No. 138 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123825" start="7421" end="7429" title="Nehvizdy" label="Nehvizdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="7498" end="7504" title="Plzeň" label="Pilsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q370701" start="7783" end="7820" title="Resistance in German-occupied Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak resistance organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11926304" start="8311" end="8325" title="Vojtěch Mastný" label="Vojtěch Mastný"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697962" start="8802" end="8814" title="Adolf Opálka" label="Adolf Opálka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489610" start="8831" end="8843" title="Out Distance" label="Out Distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529260" start="9039" end="9055" title="Panenské Břežany" label="Panenské Břežany"/>
<link wikidata="Q193369" start="9105" end="9118" title="Prague Castle" label="Prague Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q310732" start="9146" end="9161" title="Oberscharführer" label="Oberscharführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071681" start="9283" end="9291" title="Prague 8" label="Prague 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003486" start="9292" end="9297" title="Libeň" label="Libeň"/>
<link wikidata="Q12040654" start="9303" end="9319" title="Bulovka Hospital" label="Bulovka Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978320" start="9418" end="9430" title="Josef Valčík" label="Josef Valčík"/>
<link wikidata="Q800021" start="9585" end="9609" title="Mercedes-Benz W142" label="Mercedes 320 Cabriolet B"/>
<link wikidata="Q211782" start="9668" end="9672" title="Sten" label="Sten"/>
<link wikidata="Q178550" start="9673" end="9687" title="submachine gun" label="submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9825" end="9831" title="Firearm malfunction#Failure to feed" label="jammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q154199" start="9864" end="9876" title="Luger pistol" label="Luger pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774484" start="10009" end="10026" title="anti-tank grenade" label="anti-tank grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877588" start="10230" end="10239" title="Shrapnel (fragment)" label="fragments"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="10431" end="10440" title="thoracic diaphragm" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="10442" end="10448" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="10453" end="10457" title="human lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112073" start="11139" end="11149" title="Colt Model 1903 Pocket Hammerless" label="Colt M1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="11427" end="11436" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="12134" end="12141" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q531349" start="12494" end="12504" title="safe house" label="safe house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="12948" end="12962" title="emergency room" label="emergency room"/>
<link wikidata="Q663389" start="13049" end="13063" title="Sudeten Germans" label="Sudeten German"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="13161" end="13168" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="13208" end="13226" title="Charles University" label="Charles University"/>
<link wikidata="Q619800" start="13392" end="13399" title="surgical suture" label="sutured"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="13437" end="13445" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q58626" start="13592" end="13605" title="Karl Gebhardt" label="Karl Gebhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="13781" end="13789" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q411398" start="13838" end="13851" title="Sulfonamide (medicine)" label="sulfanilamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="13859" end="13872" title="antibacterial" label="antibacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q57490" start="13955" end="13969" title="Theodor Morell" label="Theodor Morell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178061" start="14916" end="14921" title="shock (circulatory)" label="shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="14951" end="14955" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q826119" start="15164" end="15179" title="Bernhard Wehner" label="Bernhard Wehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199705" start="15189" end="15204" title="Kriminalpolizei (Nazi Germany)" label="Kriminalpolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="15266" end="15273" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="15295" end="15301" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="15537" end="15555" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q950760" start="15568" end="15580" title="fat embolism" label="fat embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002035" start="15683" end="15698" title="right ventricle" label="right ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q206280" start="15703" end="15719" title="pulmonary artery" label="pulmonary artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q857667" start="15731" end="15737" title="pulmonary edema" label="oedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q754031" start="15808" end="15817" title="Atelectasis" label="collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q154865" start="15939" end="15947" title="botulism" label="botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q935307" start="16059" end="16070" title="Paul Fildes" label="Paul Fildes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232208" start="16074" end="16085" title="Porton Down" label="Porton Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="16699" end="16715" title="biological weapon" label="biological agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q270524" start="17070" end="17080" title="parenchyma" label="parenchyma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17316" end="17349" title="botulism#signs and symptoms" label="symptoms associated with botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="17447" end="17466" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q57267" start="18140" end="18167" title="Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski" label="Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="18738" end="18767" title="Mauthausen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152993" start="18911" end="18928" title="Abwehr" label="Nazi intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q154888" start="18988" end="18994" title="Lidice" label="Lidice"/>
<link wikidata="Q839710" start="19199" end="19214" title="Lidice massacre" label="Lidice massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q159483" start="19264" end="19294" title="Ravensbrück concentration camp" label="Ravensbrück concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152982" start="19368" end="19375" title="gas van" label="gas van"/>
<link wikidata="Q160152" start="19384" end="19410" title="Chełmno extermination camp" label="Chełmno extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q647287" start="19478" end="19484" title="Ležáky" label="Ležáky"/>
<link wikidata="Q956163" start="20362" end="20398" title="Ss. Cyril and Methodius Cathedral" label="Cathedral of Sts Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q475683" start="20459" end="20491" title="Czech and Slovak Orthodox Church" label="Czech and Slovak Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297760" start="20557" end="20568" title="Karel Čurda" label="Karel Čurda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372150" start="20701" end="20707" title="Bounty (reward)" label="bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q155009" start="20723" end="20733" title="Reichsmark" label="Reichsmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q378120" start="20842" end="20848" title="Žižkov" label="Žižkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="21051" end="21058" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q89703869" start="21187" end="21202" title="Petschek Palace" label="Petschek Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="21354" end="21360" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="21631" end="21640" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19007787" start="21823" end="21836" title="Gruppenführer" label="Gruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q91128" start="21843" end="21870" title="Karl Fischer von Treuenfeld" label="Karl Fischer von Treuenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="22272" end="22277" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="22337" end="22345" title="tear gas" label="tear gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q655534" start="22709" end="22715" title="Gorazd Pavlík" label="Gorazd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490678" start="22999" end="23022" title="Kobylisy Shooting Range" label="Kobylisy Shooting Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q388832" start="23105" end="23114" title="glorification" label="glorified"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="23120" end="23126" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="23134" end="23157" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="23379" end="23385" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q700630" start="23480" end="23492" title="German Order (distinction)" label="German Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q667167" start="23497" end="23508" title="Blood Order" label="Blood Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="23725" end="23737" title="treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="23817" end="23829" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q696606" start="24038" end="24052" title="void ab initio" label="void ab initio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985550" start="24197" end="24222" title="French National Committee" label="French National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q513126" start="24542" end="24552" title="Sippenhaft" label="Sippenhaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="24723" end="24731" title="Rationality" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="25088" end="25110" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="British Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="25111" end="25128" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q703583" start="25308" end="25324" title="Operation Foxley" label="Operation Foxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="25525" end="25543" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="25581" end="25599" title="General Government" label="General Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097219" start="25603" end="25622" title="Operation Kutschera" label="Operation Kutschera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18420947" start="25627" end="25642" title="Operation Bürkl" label="Operation Bürkl"/>
<link wikidata="Q77423" start="25644" end="25656" title="Wilhelm Kube" label="Wilhelm Kube"/>
<link wikidata="Q524778" start="25670" end="25679" title="Commissioner" label="kommissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150089" start="25683" end="25690" title="German occupation of Byelorussia during World War II" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477726" start="25742" end="25756" title="Yelena Mazanik" label="Yelena Mazanik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215985" start="26158" end="26174" title="Franta Belsky" label="František Bělský"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="26570" end="26578" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743112" start="26666" end="26681" title="Jephson Gardens" label="Jephson Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="26683" end="26697" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935239" start="26754" end="26767" title="training camp" label="training camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093925" start="26821" end="26843" title="Slovak National Museum" label="Slovak National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="27000" end="27022" title="German-occupied Europe" label="German-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12043646" start="27025" end="27058" title="The Anthropoid Operation Memorial" label="The Anthropoid Operation Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27092" end="27106" title=":cs:David Moješčík" label="David Mojescik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206041" start="27208" end="27215" title="Arisaig" label="Arisaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="27217" end="27225" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q551075" start="27648" end="27657" title="Jiří Weil" label="Jiří Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816596" start="27681" end="27707" title="Mendelssohn is on the Roof" label="Mendelssohn is on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q287703" start="27939" end="27949" title="Jan Saudek" label="Jan Saudek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453173" start="27954" end="27965" title="Kája Saudek" label="Kája Saudek"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="28105" end="28122" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750146" start="28135" end="28162" title="The Man with the Iron Heart" label="The Man with the Iron Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="28172" end="28188" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="28283" end="28293" title="insurgency" label="insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q316545" start="28314" end="28321" title="Werwolf" label="Werwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12025684" start="28324" end="28333" title="Jiří Šulc" label="Jiří Šulc"/>
<link wikidata="Q668506" start="28651" end="28655" title="HHhH" label="HHhH"/>
<link wikidata="Q758585" start="29041" end="29058" title="Hangmen Also Die!" label="Hangmen Also Die!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138634" start="29080" end="29100" title="Hitler&amp;#x27;s Madman" label="Hitler&amp;#x27;s Madman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280650" start="29122" end="29137" title="Muži bez křídel" label="Muži bez křídel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813104" start="29159" end="29166" title="Atentát" label="Atentát"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055283" start="29188" end="29196" title="Sokolovo (film)" label="Sokolovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q904826" start="29218" end="29236" title="Operation Daybreak" label="Operation Daybreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501523" start="29258" end="29267" title="Protector (2009 film)" label="Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009243" start="29289" end="29295" title="Lidice (film)" label="Lidice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29317" end="29336" title="Bullet for Heydrich" label="Bullet for Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q20814438" start="29367" end="29377" title="Anthropoid (film)" label="Anthropoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23003015" start="29399" end="29426" title="The Man with the Iron Heart (film)" label="The Man with the Iron Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12023241" start="29518" end="29529" title="Jan Vyčítal" label="Jan Vyčítal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159250" start="29616" end="29628" title="Daniel Landa" label="Daniel Landa"/>
<link wikidata="Q432927" start="29678" end="29691" title="Jozef Gabčík" label="Gabčík&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="29733" end="29744" title="Mauthausen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850226" start="29972" end="29997" title="Aston House" label="Aston House - Station XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q370701" start="29999" end="30034" title="Czech resistance to Nazi occupation" label="Czech resistance to Nazi occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="30036" end="30064" title="Occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="Occupation of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097219" start="30066" end="30085" title="Operation Kutschera" label="Operation Kutschera"/>
<link wikidata="Q655130" start="30116" end="30136" title="SS and Police Leader" label="SS and Police Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q78658" start="30137" end="30152" title="Franz Kutschera" label="Franz Kutschera"/>
<link wikidata="Q542459" start="30162" end="30202" title="List of Nazi Party leaders and officials" label="List of Nazi Party leaders and officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921792" start="30204" end="30258" title="List of rulers of the Protectorate Bohemia and Moravia" label="List of rulers of the Protectorate Bohemia and Moravia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577779" wikidata="Q741909" url="?curid=577779" title="Chris Kattan">
<text>Christopher Lee Kattan ( ; born October 19, 1970) is an American actor and comedian. First breaking through as a performer with the Los Angeles comedy troupe The Groundlings, Kattan found wider success during his tenure as a cast member on the NBC sketch comedy series &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; from 1996 to 2003. He also played Doug Butabi in &quot;A Night at the Roxbury&quot;, Bob on the first five seasons of &quot;The Middle&quot;, Bunnicula in &quot;Bunnicula,&quot; and the main antagonist Mr. Feather in &quot;Undercover Brother&quot;.

==Early life==
Kattan was born in Culver City, California. His father, Kip King ( Jerome Kattan; 1937–2010), was born to Jewish parents from Iraq and Poland and worked as an actor and voice artist. His mother, Hajnalka Biro (b. 1944), was once photographed for &quot;Playboy&quot; and worked as a model in London. She is a native of Budapest, Hungary, and is a Buddhist. His stepfather was a Buddhist therapist and monk. His half-brother, Andrew Joslyn, is a professional musician and composer.

Kattan was raised on a Zen retreat on Mount San Antonio, outside Los Angeles. He and his mother moved to Bainbridge Island, Washington, where he attended Bainbridge High School, graduating in 1989.

==Career==

Kattan was a member of several improvisational comedy (improv) and sketch comedy troupes, one of them being The Groundlings in Los Angeles. His father was an original member of the troupe. Kattan also did some minor roles on TV, including the second episode of the second season of &quot;NewsRadio&quot;, &quot;No, This Is Not Based Entirely on Julie&#x27;s Life&quot;, as a photo shop employee.

He moved to New York City to work on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; from 1996 to 2003. His recurring characters included Mr. Peepers, Mango, Azrael Abyss, Kyle DeMarco from The DeMarco Brothers, Gay Hitler, and, most notably, one half of the Butabi Brothers with fellow &quot;SNL&quot; (and Groundlings) cast member Will Ferrell, known for their trademark head-bobbing. Kattan and Ferrell continued the characters in the 1998 film &quot;A Night at the Roxbury&quot;.

===&quot;SNL&quot; celebrity impersonations===
* Clay Aiken
* Christiane Amanpour
* Antonio Banderas
* Andy Dick
* Larry Fine
* Bill Gates
* Ben Affleck
* David Gest
* Elián González
* Anne Heche
* Julio Iglesias Jr.
* Steve Irwin
* Chris Kirkpatrick
* Ricky Martin
* Al Pacino
* Kid Rock
* David Lee Roth
* Paul Shaffer
* David Spade
* Kerri Strug (also appeared in Weekend Update with Strug as her fictional brother, Kippy)
* Geraldo Rivera
* Robert Downey Jr.
* Anthony Fauci
===2007–present: post-&quot;SNL&quot; work===
Kattan appeared in a Diet Pepsi Max commercial during Super Bowl XLII in 2008 that featured the song &quot;What Is Love&quot; and had many actors in the commercial performing the head bob from &quot;A Night at the Roxbury&quot;.

In August 2009, Kattan starred in the Independent Film Channel (IFC) miniseries &quot;Bollywood Hero&quot;, where he portrays himself and the difficulties he faces after a career as a comic actor, trying to attain leading man status. Starting in late 2009, Kattan appeared in a supporting role in &quot;The Middle&quot;. Kattan played Bob, a colleague of Frankie Heck&#x27;s at Mr. Ehlert&#x27;s car dealership. Kattan appeared in an episode of &quot;How I Met Your Mother&quot; as a star in &quot;The Wedding Bride&quot;, a fictional movie within the show. He played himself portraying Jed Mosely, the film&#x27;s villain, which the screenwriter bases on his girlfriend&#x27;s ex-fiancé, series protagonist, Ted Mosby. He reappeared as the character in the fictional film&#x27;s sequel, &quot;Wedding Bride 2&quot;. On December 17, 2011, Kattan made a guest appearance on the &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; Christmas show, hosted by Jimmy Fallon, and again briefly on the final episode of &quot;SNL&quot;&#x27;s 37th season.

In June 2014, Kattan reprised his role as former &quot;SNL&quot; character Mango in a preview of the music video for Sharaya J&#x27;s &quot;Shut It Down&quot;, featured in a fashion campaign by Alexander Wang.

In 2017, Kattan was a contestant on season 24 of &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot; paired with professional dancer Witney Carson. He was the first celebrity dancer eliminated.

Kattan reunited with fellow &quot;SNL&quot; alumni Jimmy Fallon, Horatio Sanz, and Tracy Morgan during the December 18, 2018 cold open of &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon,&quot; which also featured Ariana Grande, in a reprisal of their performance of &quot;I Wish it Was Christmas Today&quot;. It was the first time since 2011 that Fallon, Sanz, Kattan, and Morgan were all present for a performance of the song.

In 2022, Kattan was announced as a HouseGuest competing on the third season of &quot;Celebrity Big Brother&quot;.

In 2023, Kattan did voice work in the film &quot;Leo&quot; as Alligator #1.

==Personal life==
Kattan married model Sunshine Deia Tutt on June 28, 2008, in Oakhurst, California, after proposing to her on Christmas Eve 2006. The couple separated forty-four days later on August 10, 2008, and divorced in February 2009.

On March 25, 2023, Kattan proposed to his girlfriend, Maria Libri, a writer and former on-air personality, in front of the stage at a Wilco concert held at the Riviera Theatre, while the Chicago band played &quot;I&#x27;m the Man Who Loves You.&quot; The band members knew about the proposal. Kattan and Libri had met eighteen months before the proposal when Kattan was performing a stand-up comedy show at Boondocks Pub in Springfield. They have since collaborated on writing projects, including a romantic comedy, and have also appeared together on the YouTube channel, Hey Kattan!

=== Neck injury ===
Kattan competed in &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot; in 2017, where judges criticized him for his stiff upper body movement. Afterward, Kattan revealed that he broke his neck while performing a stunt fourteen years prior and has had impaired mobility ever since. He further admitted the pain medication he began taking following his fourth surgery led to a 2014 DUI arrest. In his 2019 memoir, Kattan said he broke his neck while filming an &quot;SNL&quot; sketch parodying &quot;The Golden Girls&quot;, during which he threw himself backwards on a chair. Additionally, NBC paid for two of the five surgeries he underwent afterwards.

==Memoir==
In 2019, Kattan published a memoir, titled &quot;Baby Don’t Hurt Me: Stories and Scars from Saturday Night Live&quot;, which included the accident on &quot;SNL&quot;.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q741909" start="0" end="22" title="Chris Kattan" label="Christopher Lee Kattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000351" start="158" end="173" title="The Groundlings" label="The Groundlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="244" end="247" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="248" end="261" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="275" end="294" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q300502" start="356" end="378" title="A Night at the Roxbury" label="A Night at the Roxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138000" start="425" end="435" title="The Middle (TV series)" label="The Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21450445" start="462" end="471" title="Bunnicula (TV series)" label="Bunnicula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093198" start="524" end="542" title="Undercover Brother" label="Undercover Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="585" end="608" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505852" start="622" end="630" title="Kip King" label="Kip King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="692" end="696" title="History of the Jews in Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="701" end="707" title="History of the Jews in Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="735" end="747" title="Voice acting" label="voice artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="818" end="825" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="884" end="901" title="Budapest, Hungary" label="Budapest, Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="966" end="970" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278455" start="990" end="1003" title="Andrew Joslyn" label="Andrew Joslyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q128657" start="1085" end="1102" title="Mount San Antonio" label="Mount San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1112" end="1123" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q803903" start="1152" end="1181" title="Bainbridge Island, Washington" label="Bainbridge Island, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848539" start="1201" end="1223" title="Bainbridge High School (Washington)" label="Bainbridge High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="1289" end="1311" title="improvisational comedy" label="improvisational comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="1325" end="1338" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000351" start="1366" end="1381" title="The Groundlings" label="The Groundlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q427583" start="1546" end="1555" title="NewsRadio" label="NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1569" end="1620" title="NewsRadio season 2#No, This Is Not Based Entirely on Julie&amp;#x27;s Life" label="No, This Is Not Based Entirely on Julie&amp;#x27;s Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1777" end="1788" title="Saturday Night Live animal sketches#Mr. Peepers" label="Mr. Peepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749077" start="1790" end="1795" title="Mango (Saturday Night Live)" label="Mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303301" start="1797" end="1809" title="Goth Talk" label="Azrael Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303301" start="1829" end="1849" title="The DeMarco Brothers" label="The DeMarco Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303308" start="1851" end="1861" title="Gay Hitler" label="Gay Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1898" end="1913" title="Recurring Saturday Night Live characters and sketches introduced 1995–1996#The Roxbury Guys" label="Butabi Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q218503" start="1972" end="1984" title="Will Ferrell" label="Will Ferrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q300502" start="2093" end="2115" title="A Night at the Roxbury" label="A Night at the Roxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q347128" start="2173" end="2183" title="Clay Aiken" label="Clay Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q236939" start="2186" end="2205" title="Christiane Amanpour" label="Christiane Amanpour"/>
<link wikidata="Q41548" start="2208" end="2224" title="Antonio Banderas" label="Antonio Banderas"/>
<link wikidata="Q367094" start="2227" end="2236" title="Andy Dick" label="Andy Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q982177" start="2239" end="2249" title="Larry Fine" label="Larry Fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="2252" end="2262" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q483118" start="2265" end="2276" title="Ben Affleck" label="Ben Affleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264401" start="2279" end="2289" title="David Gest" label="David Gest"/>
<link wikidata="Q551503" start="2292" end="2306" title="Elián González" label="Elián González"/>
<link wikidata="Q234610" start="2309" end="2319" title="Anne Heche" label="Anne Heche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832274" start="2322" end="2340" title="Julio Iglesias Jr." label="Julio Iglesias Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q126513" start="2343" end="2354" title="Steve Irwin" label="Steve Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311525" start="2357" end="2374" title="Chris Kirkpatrick" label="Chris Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q128799" start="2377" end="2389" title="Ricky Martin" label="Ricky Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="2392" end="2401" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="2404" end="2412" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q313992" start="2415" end="2429" title="David Lee Roth" label="David Lee Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q963626" start="2432" end="2444" title="Paul Shaffer" label="Paul Shaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q298658" start="2447" end="2458" title="David Spade" label="David Spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q465671" start="2461" end="2472" title="Kerri Strug" label="Kerri Strug"/>
<link wikidata="Q14544" start="2491" end="2505" title="Weekend Update" label="Weekend Update"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368995" start="2552" end="2566" title="Geraldo Rivera" label="Geraldo Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="2569" end="2586" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q573246" start="2589" end="2602" title="Anthony Fauci" label="Anthony Fauci"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="2703" end="2718" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="Super Bowl XLII"/>
<link wikidata="Q550158" start="2756" end="2768" title="What Is Love" label="What Is Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q300502" start="2848" end="2870" title="A Night at the Roxbury" label="A Night at the Roxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="2917" end="2941" title="Independent Film Channel" label="Independent Film Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939832" start="2965" end="2979" title="Bollywood Hero" label="Bollywood Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138000" start="3182" end="3192" title="The Middle (TV series)" label="The Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q147235" start="3330" end="3351" title="How I Met Your Mother" label="How I Met Your Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774052" start="3377" end="3394" title="The Wedding Bride" label="The Wedding Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q775254" start="3588" end="3597" title="Ted Mosby" label="Ted Mosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="3814" end="3826" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749077" start="3982" end="3987" title="Mango (Saturday Night Live)" label="Mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489439" start="4024" end="4033" title="Sharaya J" label="Sharaya J"/>
<link wikidata="Q705844" start="4101" end="4115" title="Alexander Wang (designer)" label="Alexander Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q28863368" start="4154" end="4163" title="Dancing with the Stars (American TV series) season 24" label="season 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674710" start="4173" end="4195" title="Dancing with the Stars (U.S. TV series)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206289" start="4234" end="4247" title="Witney Carson" label="Witney Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q921470" start="4361" end="4373" title="Horatio Sanz" label="Horatio Sanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542" start="4379" end="4391" title="Tracy Morgan" label="Tracy Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303732" start="4440" end="4478" title="The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon" label="The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="4506" end="4519" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968370" start="4565" end="4594" title="I Wish It Was Christmas Today" label="I Wish it Was Christmas Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q108685437" start="4785" end="4797" title="Celebrity Big Brother 3 (American season)" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q42220583" start="4807" end="4828" title="Celebrity Big Brother (American TV series)" label="Celebrity Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q119260191" start="4886" end="4889" title="Leo (2023 American film)" label="Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008503" start="4993" end="5013" title="Oakhurst, California" label="Oakhurst, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q637771" start="5290" end="5295" title="Wilco" label="Wilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338878" start="5316" end="5331" title="Riviera Theatre" label="Riviera Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="5655" end="5670" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q499092" start="5786" end="5808" title="Dancing with the Stars" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q250062" start="6124" end="6127" title="DUI" label="DUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q912467" start="6242" end="6258" title="The Golden Girls" label="The Golden Girls"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577784" wikidata="Q1262185" url="?curid=577784" title="Mountain hawk-eagle">
<text>The mountain hawk-eagle (Nisaetus nipalensis) or Hodgson&#x27;s hawk-eagle, is a large bird of prey native to Asia. The latter name is in reference to the naturalist, Brian Houghton Hodgson, who described the species after collecting one himself in the Himalayas. A less widely recognized common English name is the feather-toed eagle. Like all eagles, it is in the family Accipitridae. Its feathered tarsus marks this species as a member of the subfamily Aquilinae. It is a confirmed breeding species in the northern part of the Indian subcontinent, from India, Nepal (hence the epithet &quot;nipalensis&quot;) through Bangladesh to Thailand, Taiwan, Vietnam and Japan, although its distribution could be wider still as breeding species. Like other Asian hawk-eagles, this species was earlier treated under the genera of &quot;Spizaetus&quot; but genetic studies have shown this group to be paraphyletic, resulting in the Old World members being placed in &quot;Nisaetus&quot; (Hodgson, 1836) and separated from the New World species. As is typical of hawk-eagles, the mountain hawk-eagle is a forest dwelling opportunistic predator who readily varies its prey selection between birds, mammals and reptiles along with other vertebrates. Although classified currently as a least-concern species due its persistence over a rather wide distribution, this species is often quite rare and scarce and seems to be decreasing, especially in response to large-scale habitat degradation and deforestation.

==Description==
===Size and taxonomy===

The mountain hawk-eagle is a large raptor and fairly large eagle. Although described not infrequently as &quot;slim&quot;, it is usually perceptibly bulkier and more massive than most other members of its genus. It is seemingly the largest member of the 10 currently recognized species in the genus &quot; Nisaetus&quot;, notwithstanding the recently recognized Flores hawk-eagle (&quot;Nisaetus floris&quot;) (which was separated from the changeable hawk-eagle). The latter critically endangered island hawk-eagle seems to be of broadly similar size (weight is unknown), albeit with shorter wings, however the Flores species seems to be linearly outmatched by and slimmer in build the largest mountain hawk-eagle. The mountain hawk-eagle attains a total length of and a wingspan of . Like most birds of prey, females are larger on average than the male, with a typical size difference of 3-8%, though it can rarely range up to a 21% difference. Although its wings are relatively short compared to eagles of open country, it has the longest wings of any of the hawk-eagles, even relative to their size. Mountain hawk-eagles have a short but strong bill, long and often erect crest (though can also be very short), short wings, a longish three-banded tail, feathered legs and powerful feet. It is usually rather unobtrusive, perching rather upright inside of canopy, with its wing-tips coming to less than one-fifth down the tail. There are two currently recognized races of the mountain hawk-eagle: the nominate subspecies (&quot;N. n. nipalensis&quot;) and the subspecies native to Japan (&quot;N. n. orientalis&quot;). The nominate race is found throughout mainland range and includes the likely dubious southeast Chinese races of &quot;N. n. fokiensis&quot; and &quot;N. n. whiteheadi&quot;. The average total length of the nominate subspecies is estimated to be . Among standard measurements in the nominate race, the wing chord of males ranges from while the female&#x27;s ranges from . In both sexes, the tail ranges from and the tarsus from . 9 males of the nominate race were found to average in wing length, in tail length, in hallux claw length (the large rear talon often utilized by accipitrids as a killing tool), in tarsus length and in bill length. 13 females of the nominate were found to average in wing length, in tail length, in hallux claw length, in tarsus length and in bill length. One unsexed mountain hawk-eagle from northern India was found to weigh . A single male from the Yangtze area of east-central China was found to have weighed while two females from there weighed , suggesting size increases further north in this subspecies in accordance with Bergmann&#x27;s rule.

The Japanese race averages about 9% larger than mainland race, and also has a proportionately longer tail and longer wings. The populations from Taiwan and the possible ones in Hainan are also probably part of this race. &quot;N. n. orientalis&quot; is generally paler than the nominate race with less heavy markings below. The underside in this race has a paler ground colour against much browner and darker barring, often showing less of the warmer or rufous tones typical of mainland mountain hawk-eagles. The throat often has reduced blackish streaking compared to mainland birds and the upper chest can be whitish and nearly unmarked. &quot;N. n. orientalis&quot; has black mottled or light streaked wing-linings and a small, often vestigial crest compared to the rather ample one of the mainland birds. Sometimes, &quot;N. n. orientalis&quot; is hypothesized to be a separate species. Among standard measurements wing chord of males ranges from while the female&#x27;s ranges from . In both sexes, the tail ranges from and the tarsus from . From a sample of unknown size from the Suzuka Mountains, males of &quot;N. n. orientalis&quot; were found to average and females in total length. From the same sample, males had a mean wing chord length of , tail length of , culmen length of and tarsus length of . Meanwhile, females had a mean wing chord length of , tail length of , culmen length of and tarsus length of . Perhaps most surprisingly, the Suzuka mountain birds were not noticeably discrepant in body mass from known weights of mainland mountain hawk-eagles, especially similar to that of the apparently larger hawk-eagles from east-central China. The Suzuka sample as above found males to weigh from , with an average of , while females were found to weigh from , with an average of . Another Japanese survey found the smallest male to weigh , the lightest known weight known anywhere for the species.

At one time largish hawk-eagles found in Sri Lanka and southwestern India was deemed to be part of the mountain hawk-eagle species under the subspecies &quot;N. n. kelaarti&quot;. A 2008 study based on the geographic isolation and differences in call suggest that this be treated as a full species, &quot;Nisaetus kelaarti&quot;, Legge&#x27;s hawk-eagle. The full species status of Legge&#x27;s hawk-eagle appears to be further supported by DNA studies, with an average difference in mitochondrial DNA of 4.3% (usually the minimum difference to differentiate species is considered to be 1.5%). Although extremely isolated in distribution from true mountain hawk-eagles, Legge&#x27;s hawk-eagle is physically distinct as well, often being much paler and less marked below with the throat stripes characteristics of the mountain species often absent (occasionally faint stripes may manifest) being instead largely plain buff about the throat. Like mainland mountain hawk-eagles, Legge&#x27;s hawk-eagles have a strong crest. The hand in flight on a Legge&#x27;s is often plain buff in colour (or with some very faint streaking) and the banded wing feathers are rather faded. Legge&#x27;s hawk-eagle appears to be about 10% smaller than mountain hawk-eagles and was found to differ in almost all bodily proportions from mountain hawk-eagle, with relatively smaller wings but the smaller species also has a larger bill and larger talons than the mountain hawk-eagle.
===Colouring and confusion species===

Adult mountain hawk-eagles are dark brown above with slightly paler edges, which tend to be clearest on median and greater coverts. On adults, the head is fairly rusty above with strong black streaks, though the volume of streaks tends to decrease on the neck, which in turn may suggest a rufous collar. The crest is largely black with a small buffy tip. Their tail is grey-brown, with a whitish tip and rather obscure blackish banding above. The malar area and throat are marked with blackish, ragged and sparse but rather bold stripes which contrast with the rest of their underside which is predominantly barred with rufous over a whitish ground colour. The barring continues, though the white base colour narrows and the rufous becomes a somewhat browner hue, down to the crissum and the legs. In some cases, the colour about the legs has appeared variously chestnut or even blackish. The underside of the tail is boldly banded with blackish and grey. The juvenile mountain hawk-eagle is also dark brown above but usually has clear cream to whitish feather edges causing the wing coverts to have a scaled effect; meanwhile, the feather bases of median and greater coverts form tawnier mid-wing patches. The juvenile&#x27;s tail is thinly banded alternately with lighter and darker brown but usually have a whitish tip like the tail of the adult. The juvenile mountain hawk-eagle&#x27;s underside is all plain buffy to tawny. The underside colour also extends to the head and part of the neck flanks while the crown, cheek, nape and hind-neck all streaked with dark brown. The crest is black with a small white tip. The juvenile leg feathers are whitish. The markings on the underside begin to develop by the 2nd year, starting from the flanks and gradually increasing inward to the breast, but the young hawk-eagles are still quite paler below until their 3rd year, which is also when the tail starts to resemble the adults. Full adult plumage is attained at no later than the 4th year. Adults have golden or even yellowish-orange eyes, with juveniles having pale bluish-grey to pale yellow eyes. In the adult the cere is blackish-grey, while in juveniles it is dull-grey. In all ages, the feet range from dull yellow to yellowish white. In flight, it is notable for its rather prominent head and relatively short rounded wings, an effect emphasized by their broad hands and bulging secondaries, which tend to pinch in at the rear bases. The mountain hawk-eagle is capable of fast, agile flight &quot;with astonishing maneuverability&quot;. They usually glide with powerful, shallow beats interspersed with glides on level wings, but soaring birds hold their wings in a shallow V, pressed slightly forward. The wing linings of adults are a rusty similar to flank coloring, becoming paler on forepart and marked with dusky mottling which becomes darker mid-wing. Blackish-brown bars are apparent over greyish ground colour on the secondaries, the feathers here relatively broadly barred with blackish while the primaries are whiter based and darker tipped. Flying juveniles are fairly heavily mottled with white above. Juveniles show more buff to tawny colour below extending to their wing linings while the wing-tips are black, in some cases extending to primary coverts form a vague carpal arc. Juvenile flight feathers are whitish grey with thin and rather faded looking dusky barring, with less white showing at the base of the primaries. Juveniles in flight usually evidence a less distinct subterminal band than do adults.

Confusion of mountain hawk-eagle in all plumages is possible with pale morph changeable hawk-eagles (&quot;Nisaetus cirrhatus&quot;). However, the latter species only has a vestigal crest in most areas of overlap from northern India to southeast Asia. Furthermore, the changeable is a slighter, more slender bird with a relatively longer tail. The latter species also has narrower wings with more even trailing edges. While soaring, changeable hawk-eagles tend to have flatter wing shape than mountain hawk-eagles. Changeable adults also have streaking rather than heavy rusty barring on their underside, apart from subtle parts of wing linings and flanks, and also have narrower tail bars. In flight, the changeable also has clear white base to their primaries and less whitish on the rump when seen from above. Juveniles of the two species are more easily mistaken but wing proportions always differ, the mountain juveniles usually appear perceptibly bulkier and changeable juveniles (of relevant races) are generally much paler, rather than warm buffy to tawny, on the head and underparts. The mountain hawk-eagle also overlaps somewhat in range, in southeast Asia, with Blyth&#x27;s hawk-eagle (&quot;Nisaetus alboniger&quot;) and Wallace&#x27;s hawk-eagles (&quot;Nisaetus nanus&quot;) but both are much smaller and different in multiple ways (especially the bold black-and-white of adult Blyth&#x27;s). Another, albeit unlikely, potential source of confusion for the mountain hawk-eagle is with Jerdon&#x27;s baza (&quot;Aviceda jerdoni&quot;), which is far smaller, and of a far more compact and chunky build. The baza is somewhat similar in marking to adult mountain hawk-eagles, but the baza lacks feathered legs and has relatively much longer and differently shaped wings. Mountain hawk-eagles can usually be told from the slighter, smaller crested honey buzzard (&quot;Pernis ptilorhynchus&quot;), beyond the latter being polymorphic, as even most similarly plumaged individual honey buzzards have bare legs, much smaller and slimmer head and bill with a longer neck and deeper wing beats on relatively longer, more slender wings.

===Vocalisation===
Mountain hawk-eagles are silent apart from their breeding season. Their call is a shrill treble note, with a quality often compared to a penny whistle. Their typical call is often likened to the &quot;klu-weet-weet&quot; of a green sandpiper (&quot;Tringa ochropus&quot;) or the &quot;kee-kikik&quot; of the common green magpie (&quot;Cissa chinensis&quot;). Sometimes the call is written in Japan as &quot;pie-pie-pie&quot; or &quot;pipipi&quot;. The hawk-eagles, including both members of a breeding pair, may call both in flight and while perched. Another call of a rapid bubbling quality, which is considered comparable to that of the little grebe (&quot;Tachybaptus ruficollis&quot;), is probably produced only during sky-dances. A study in Taiwan diagnosed seven call types consisting of different quality trills in Taiwan during the breeding cycle, including different calls emitted during flight or while perched and food-begging or alarm calls by nestlings. The calls of mountain hawk-eagles are said to be expertly mimicked by drongos in some parts of the range.

==Distribution and habitat==

Both the northern and southern limits of this widely found raptor are surprisingly poorly known to this day, with historic records suggesting that the species may take up residence hundreds of kilometers north of its accepted range and year-around reports of this species from areas formerly considered only to be visited by wintering migrant or vagrant hawk-eagles. The mountain hawk-eagle is distributed through the Himalayas, extending from northeastern Pakistan through north India in at least the states of central Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, continuing into Nepal, Bhutan to northern Assam thence southward into the north and east Burmese highlands, west and peninsular Thailand, also the northern parts of Laos and probably Vietnam. Their range continues eastward into southeastern China where they may be found in Yunnan, Guangxi and Guangdong Province northward in the east to the lower reaches of the Yangtze in Anhui and Zhejiang. Their range also extends to Hainan, an offshore island of China. Mountain hawk-eagles are additionally found in the island nations of Taiwan and Japan, with the highest concentration known on northern islands such Hokkaido but they may be found on nearly all the islands of Japan. The mountain hawk-eagle has been recorded under the status of &quot;rare breeder&quot; in areas much farther north than is conventionally accepted as part of their range, such as far eastern Mongolia and the landlocked, extreme southern part of the Russian Far East such as in Primorsky Krai. To this date, the IUCN has not updated the range maps for mountain hawk-eagles to reflect the species’ presence in these areas, although their status as continual breeders here may still need confirmation. Through much of their range, mountain hawk-eagles are typically sedentary but both adults and young hawk-eagles sometimes also disperse in descent from higher grounds in winter and it may be characterized as a partial migrant. There are several recorded cases of the species wandering in north India down into Indo-Gangetic plains. In Bhutan, fragmentary information suggest short-distance altitudinal movements are not infrequent. Relatively low volumes of migrant mountain hawk-eagles were detected in Nepal, however. With a fair amount of consistency, the hawk-eagles found in the northern part of southeast Asia range into more lowland areas of Burma, eastern Thailand and peninsular Malaysia. There are also similar movements to lowlands in Japan with some Japanese ones moving to the Korean peninsula. In some of the areas above such as Thailand and Malaysia (mainly far northern part of country), year-around reports of mountain hawk-eagles may suggest small, isolated pockets of residency and/or breeding occurring. Mountain hawk-eagles have been recorded as a vagrant in Hong Kong and Cambodia. Broader vagrancy has been reported in the case of a mountain hawk-eagle that turned up in the island of Borneo.

The mountain hawk-eagle tends to reside in dense hill and montane forests at any point up to the tree line. They are mainly found in various wooded foothills. Typically, primary evergreen or mixed forests are preferred, with the presence of nearby streams a plus. The central part of the range falls in subtropical broadleaf forest made cooler by their high elevations but they can range anywhere from temperate mixed forests to tropical rainforests. However, in some areas the species can range into second growth. In non-breeding times, mountain hawk-eagles may sometimes wander through wooded plains and briefly near fairly developed villages (though usually more secluded and primitive one) and even cities. In Japan, they reportedly entirely avoid woods near urban areas. Elevations the species has been known to live at in the Himalayas are mostly above sea-level. However, they&#x27;ve been recorded at elevations of up to in northern Yunnan. In Japan, they usually reside somewhat lower than in their mainland haunts, typical at between . Mostly only during winter, the species has been recorded (albeit seldom) down to or even lower as vagrant.

==Behaviour and ecology==

Mountain hawk-eagles are well adapted to living in forests. As is the case for all &quot;Nisaetus&quot; species, their physical form and flight style is typical of forest-dwelling raptors in general and is often found to be roughly comparable to the features of true hawks or &quot;Accipiters&quot; in particular larger species such as the occasionally sympatric Eurasian Goshawk (&quot;Accipiter Gentilis&quot;). Like most other forest raptors, mountain hawk-eagles (and &quot;Nisaetus&quot; species in general) have a long tail, short broad wings and relatively long but powerful legs, all of which impart greater maneuverability and quicker strike times in denser wooded hunting grounds than other raptorial body plans. The common name hawk-eagle is apparently in reference to their similar adaptations to true hawks. Contrary to the suggestion that, based on their physiology, especially their longer wings and tarsus but shorter talon and bill length, when physically compared to the Legge&#x27;s hawk-eagle implies that the mountain hawk-eagle is morphologically adapted to hunting birds more so than mammals, dietary studies indicate that the mountain hawk-eagle is not necessarily a specialized bird predator but rather a generalist and opportunist like many predators. In fact the small handful of dietary studies of the species show that the mountain hawk-eagle somewhat prefer small mammals as prey but readily takes both birds and reptiles given the opportunity. Typically, the mountain hawk-eagle tends to still-hunt from a concealed perch in foliage, stooping down to take prey. Most prey is taken on the ground. Mountain hawk-eagles have also been observed catching passerines on the wing by giving chase from an ambush or when the prey is flushed by flying low at the canopy level. They will also readily take arboreal mammals and birds from a perch or roost if they&#x27;re able to fly upon them in an ambush. While most of their prey are relatively small, well within typical prey size range for most raptorial birds, mountain hawk-eagles can take remarkably large prey. Therefore, Brown &amp; Amadon (1986) consider the species as markedly &quot;rapacious and powerful&quot;.

One study that reviewed 118 prey items in several nests from southern Taiwan, revealed a surprising preferred prey type for mountain hawk-eagles, giant flying squirrels. The Indian giant flying squirrel (&quot;Petaurista philippensis&quot;) and the red and white giant flying squirrel (&quot;Petaurista alborufus&quot;), both weighing about on average, accounted for 47.4% of the food items in Taiwan. How they capture these elusive and nocturnal rodents is not clear, but perhaps the flying squirrels’ relatively huge size makes them more conspicuous from the hawk-eagle&#x27;s lofty perch. A rather smaller true squirrel, the approximately Pallas&#x27;s squirrel (&quot;Callosciurus erythraeus&quot;), made up a further 19.5% of the mean diet here. In total, 78.3% of prey taken in the southern Taiwan study was mammalian. However, the fourth most often taken prey species here was the Swinhoe&#x27;s pheasant (&quot;Lophura swinhoii&quot;), constituting on average 6.7% of the prey. A study in the Hyōgo Prefecture of Japan reviewed 142 prey items of a single breeding pair. Quantitatively, most prey deliveries by this pair were rather (almost surprisingly) small in body size, whether this is typical of Japanese hawk-eagles is not clear given the lack of comprehensive study. About 17.5% of the nest prey deliveries were unidentified small birds, of an estimated mass of (mostly brought by the male), while 7.7% of prey deliveries were unidentified medium-sized birds, of an estimated mass of . These were followed by the merely Japanese shrew mole (&quot;Urotrichus talpoides&quot;) which constituted 7% of prey deliveries (again largely by male) . The most often delivered prey (18.2% of her 44 deliveries) by the female once she resumed hunting were larger class &quot;Elaphe&quot; snakes, in excess of length and . Overall, the estimated size of nest prey deliveries here ranged from a Japanese grass lizard (&quot;Takydromus tachydromoides&quot;) to several Japanese hares (&quot;Lepus brachyurus&quot;) weighing an estimated mean of , the latter presumably constituting a majority of the prey biomass. In another study, the mean size of Japanese hares caught was apparently estimated as somewhat larger at about . In Jim Corbett National Park, India, prey reportedly consisted largely of smallish or medium-sized birds (albeit probably larger than those in the above Japanese study) such as mynas, doves, parakeets, nightjars, owls and village poultry. In the Russian Far East, apparently the most important prey types were reported as Manchurian hares (&quot;Lepus mandshuricus&quot;), a close cousin and of the same size as the Japanese hare, and hazel grouse (&quot;Tetrastes bonasia&quot;), while most of the remainder of the diet consisted of a mixture of smallish mammals like (moles, hedgehogs and flying squirrels) and largish forest birds (woodpeckers, pheasants and owls). Quantitatively rare prey items that have been recorded have including amphibians and, recorded only once, fish.

While most of the prey mentioned above is of relatively modest size, the mountain hawk-eagle is not infrequently reported to attack prey of quite large sizes, including prey equal to their own size or larger. Mountain hawk-eagles have been reported to attack young ungulates but often relatively very young and small ones, probably close to a neonatal state. In Taiwan, they took the young of Formosan serow (&quot;Capricornis swinhoei&quot;) that were estimated to weigh on average under . Of similar size, in Japan, they took young piglets of the wild boar (&quot;Sus scrofa&quot;), averaging about . Reportedly, newborn sika deer (&quot;Cervus nippon&quot;), weighing at least , have been preyed upon in Japan as well. Scavenging of sika deer killed by human hunters has also been reported. Larger avian prey has been taken by mountain hawk-eagles, including adult Indian peafowl (&quot;Pavo cristatus&quot;) weighing up to an estimated . In Echizen-Kaga Kaigan Quasi-National Park, Japan, mountain hawk-eagles have been recorded attacking exclusively relatively large water birds on several occasions namely: the mallard (&quot;Anas platyrhynchos&quot;), the grey heron (&quot;Ardea cinerea&quot;), the greater white-fronted goose (&quot;Anser albifrons&quot;) and the bean goose (&quot;Anser fabalis&quot;).

Carnivorans taken by mountain hawk-eagles can also be relatively large as well as potentially dangerous. An estimated kit of a Japanese badger (&quot;Meles anakuma&quot;) was preyed upon by a female. Meanwhile, four adult Chinese ferret-badgers (&quot;Melogale moschata&quot;), weighing on average about , were taken in Taiwan, while a Japanese marten (&quot;Martes melampus&quot;) of the same estimated weight was taken there by a female hawk-eagle. Sable (&quot;Martes zibellina&quot;) are also likely at threat from these birds. More impressive carnivoran prey dispatched by this species included an adult yellow-throated marten (&quot;Martes flavigula&quot;) weighing an estimated , an adult red panda (&quot;Ailurus fulgens&quot;) weighing an estimated and reportedly adult raccoon dogs (&quot;Nyctereutes procyonoides&quot;), which weigh an average of , not to mention (in a similar size range) an occasional domestic cat (&quot;Felis silvestris catus&quot;) taken by this species. Of a similarly impressive nature in size and defensive temperament are primates, of which the mountain hawk-eagle is an occasional predator. However, a rather large portion of primate prey, such as monkeys, are taken as infants or juveniles, and most but not all adults killed by them are perhaps are likely to be previously injured or sickly. Taking even infant monkeys can be provide some risk for hunting hawk-eagles due to the protective nature of mothers as well as the overall monkey troops. For example, Formosan rock macaques (&quot;Macaca cyclopis&quot;) recorded to be taken in Taiwan were infants, weighing only an estimated . An Assam macaque (&quot;Macaca assamensis&quot;) juvenile taken by a mountain hawk-eagle weighed an estimated . Cases of possible predation have also involved rhesus macaques (&quot;Macaca mulatta&quot;) in the Indian subcontinent. The mountain hawk-eagle is also considered a potential or confirmed threat to some larger primates (though largely or entirely younger, more vulnerable members of their troops) including: the François&#x27; langur (&quot;Trachypithecus francoisi&quot;), the black snub-nosed monkey (&quot;Rhinopithecus bieti&quot;), the lar gibbon (&quot;Hylobates lar&quot;) and the eastern hoolock gibbon (&quot;Hoolock leuconedys&quot;). However, the most impressive primate kill was an adult Japanese macaque (&quot;Macaca fuscata&quot;), estimated to weigh somewhere between , that was taken alive and subsequently dismantled by a large (presumed female) mountain hawk-eagle.

===Interspecies predatory relationships===

The mountain hawk-eagle overlaps in distribution with several other eagles, including about three species of &quot;Aquila&quot; and three species of &quot;Haliaeetus&quot; that are broadly similar in size to them as well as one slightly (in Japan) to notably (mainland) larger &quot;Aquila&quot;, the golden eagle (&quot;Aquila chrysaetos&quot;), and two much larger &quot;Haliaeetus&quot; species. However, the mountain hawk-eagle is the largest eagle in its range to live mostly within the confines of forest habitats, thus habitat differences against other larger eagles would normally provide ample partitioning and lessen competition. Some writers have claimed in life history and dietary habits that the mountain hawk-eagle warrants comparison to the top African forest eagle, crowned eagle (&quot;Stephanoaetus coronatus&quot;). While the mountain hawk-eagle and crowned eagle do show similarities in their territorial display and primary hunting techniques, beyond being larger with proportionately larger feet and talons, the latter is significantly more prone to taking primates and to taking extremely large prey (both relative to itself and compared to other eagles). In some of its range, the mountain hawk-eagle overlaps and shares forests with three other &quot;Nisaetus&quot; species and, often, with various species of &quot;Accipiter&quot;, the latter of which lead a comparable lifestyle but are far smaller and more agile. However, usually these other forest raptors can co-exist with the larger raptor by focusing on more generalized and usually smaller prey, largely birds but also reptiles and amphibians, than the mammals seemingly preferred by the mountain hawk-eagle. Larger owls sometimes also occur in the mountain hawk-eagles range and are a potential source of competition (excluding the fish owls, which are more restricted by diet) despite the temporal partitioning implied in their nocturnal habits. Although the Eurasian eagle-owl (&quot;Bubo bubo&quot;) usually prefers more open and rockier environments, the little-known spot-bellied eagle owl (&quot;Bubo nipalensis&quot;) has a very similar central distribution and habitat preferences as the mountain hawk-eagle, and despite being slightly smaller, it goes after exceptionally large prey with perhaps even more aplomb.

In Japan, mountain hawk-eagles are regarded as the fourth largest eagle after the Steller&#x27;s sea eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus pelagicus&quot;), the white-tailed eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus albicilla&quot;) and the golden eagle. Despite the golden eagle race in Japan (&quot;A. c. japonica&quot;) being much smaller than other races and the larger size of Japanese mountain hawk-eagles, the golden eagle here still has a slight size advantage (about 7% larger) and much larger wings which gives them an advantage at fighting and hunting in open air but less maneuverability. While the golden is more a bird of open and rocky environments, the two species prey selection overlaps here (probably more so than mainland populations of the two species), with both taking Japanese hares supplemented by pheasants whenever possible, and this can cause a level of direct competition despite their different preferred habitats. In at least one case, a golden eagle attacked and may have preyed upon a mountain hawk-eagle. On the other hand, a mountain hawk-eagle may have preyed on the young of the black eagle (&quot;Ictinaetus malaiensis&quot;) in Taiwan. The mountain hawk-eagle is an occasional predator of a wide diversity of owls. Owl prey known to have been taken has included Asian barred owlet (&quot;Glaucidium cuculoides&quot;), jungle owlet (&quot;Glaucidium radiatum&quot;), brown boobook (&quot;Ninox scutulata&quot;), Eastern barn owl (&quot;Tyto javanica&quot;), Ural owl (&quot;Strix uralensis&quot;) and, once reportedly, even a Eurasian eagle-owl, a species of similar size and power to the hawk-eagle itself.

==Breeding==

The mountain hawk-eagle maintain their home range with a rather spectacular aerial display. Display activities tend to peak within the time period prior to breeding. Their aerial display includes conspicuous and often noisy high circling, both single and mutual, and undulating sky dance of steep dives and climbs with bubbling call uttered at each peak. Like many raptors, the display is likely largely to proclaim ownership to conspecifics but also probably has some function in reinforcing existing pair bonds. The breeding season falls between February and June in the Himalayas while in Japan, it falls from April to July. The laying dates largely correspond to early spring or colder dry season in most of their range. The pair builds a large stick nest, that can be up to across and deep (after repeated uses). Pairs may have as many as 2 to 3 nests but usually have just one. The male in the pair is said to bring most of the nest materials while female is said to primarily construct the nest. As in many accipitrids, active nests are more often than not lined with greenery, usually either green leaves or conifer sprigs. Nests are usually located at above the ground in a large forest tree, though also sometimes more isolated trees such as Deodar cedars (&quot;Cedrus deodara&quot;), which were popular in the Himalayas region. In the Indian subcontinent, sal trees (&quot;Shorea robusta&quot;) and red cedar (&quot;Toona ciliata&quot;) are favored at slightly lower elevation forests whereas deodar cedars, pines, holly, saj (&quot;Terminalia elliptica&quot;) and moru oak (&quot;Quercus floribunda&quot;) are often favored at higher elevations. Many nests are often near a steep-edged ravine, or alternately near a natural tree line, freshwater wetland or other environment that provides ample view of the surrounding area. Clutch size is usually 1 or 2 but up to 3 eggs in a clutch have been reported in Japan. It is claimed that one egg is considered the norm in most of the range, as is invariably the case in the related changeable hawk-eagle. The egg is pale clay-colored or reddish in colour with varied freckling of darker red or pure white, and often with blotches and spots of red at the large end. A sample of egg sizes in the nominate subspecies showed a range of in height, with an average of while the range in diameter was , with an average of . One egg from &quot;N. n. orientalis&quot; measured . It has been claimed that only the female will incubate and will be fed by the male. Hatching dates seem to peak around mid-March in the Indian subcontinent. At one nest, an immature male was recorded as the mate of an adult female. In another case, when the female in a pair died during nesting, the following year the male paired with another female and used a nest from the original nest.

As is typical of accipitrids, the female takes by far the primary role in brooding and protecting the young, while the male makes prey deliveries into the nest or the nearby nest vicinity. Reportedly, the female is very aggressive if nest is disturbed but male is less so or not at all. The aggressiveness of the female may rival that of the often co-occurring spot-bellied eagle-owl and even outrival the defensive attacks on human by the more powerful African crowned eagle. Cousins such as the Legge&#x27;s and changeable hawk-eagle do not typically display any aggression or, if so, are very mild in protective behaviour towards humans while nesting. Apparently, wood-cutters in particular often attract the ire of the female mountain hawk-eagle. Unlike attacks on humans by crowned eagles and northern goshawks, the attack of mountain hawk-eagle is unlikely to be deterred either by traveling in parties or counterattack. Even when struck with branches, machetes or fist and hit with buckshot by humans, apparently the female will still not cease her attack unless killed or grievously injured. In one case, a local woman in the Kumaon division of northern India fell victim to a &quot;particularly savage&quot; attack by a female mountain hawk-eagle and subsequently died from the injuries sustained. Cases have been observed in north India where rhesus macaques, northern plains gray langurs (&quot;Semnopithecus entellus&quot;) and yellow-throated martens, all known nest predators, have been driven off by the female hawk-eagle, in the case of the marten while repeatedly raking the back as it ran off. The males may make up to two prey deliveries each day but in the area of nests around disturbed village-side forest in India seemed to have problems procuring a sufficient amount of prey. Caches of food may be kept during incubation and the early nestling stage but generally cease thereafter. After about three weeks, the young are more active and may engage in wing stretching and flapping. At this point, the female takes to a perch about away but continues to watchfully protect the young. The young may soon also be able to feed themselves but are often apparently fed by the mother well after this. Reportedly family remains together for some time after young fly and the young eagle is fed until they can fly more strongly. In Japan, an eaglet that hatched in April flew by the end of June. In India, the minimum amount of time from hatching to leaving the nest was claimed as 53 days. The breeding cycle lasts for at least 80 days.

==Status==

Though it is not considered a globally threatened species, the mountain hawk-eagle is never more than uncommon to rare locally. It occurs over a rather large distributional range that apparently extends over 19 million square kilometers. However, in estimations from the late 1990s, it was considered doubtful that the density of mountain hawk-eagle was high enough to reach 10,000 individuals, even with the now-separated Legge&#x27;s hawk-eagle included at that time and all juveniles. High levels of various habitat degradation and deforestation is probably the primary driver of declines throughout the range. In particular, the increasing density of human populations in northern India, southeastern China and Japan are likely to continue to facilitate declines in forest quantity and quality. Likely more localized and minor threats from humans are persecution as occasional killers of domestic poultry. Despite their popularity in Asian falconry, it is unlikely gathering of hawk-eagles for this is a significant problem. Lead poisoning from consuming carcasses of sika deer, left there by human hunters using lead bullets, have resulted in the death of some mountain hawk-eagles. Mountain hawk-eagles may be vulnerable to viruses and helminths as well. Similar threats are faced by all &quot;Nisaetus&quot; hawk-eagles, with only the changeable hawk-eagle shown to be resilient to human interferences and not in decline at the species level. The Japanese population of mountain hawk-eagles is particularly showing signs of decline. In the 1990s, the Japanese population was estimated at 900–1,000 total individuals and may have reduced even more so today from that figure. As the species is a K-strategist like all eagles, it was feared that the ongoing population reduction of &quot;N. n. orientalis&quot; might lead to loss of genetic diversity, and consequently inbreeding depression. However, genetic diversity was shown to be still considerable at present.

==Notes==
==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1262185" start="4" end="23" title="Mountain hawk-eagle" label="mountain hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262185" start="49" end="74" title="Mountain hawk-eagle" label="Hodgson&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="87" end="99" title="bird of prey" label="bird of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="110" end="114" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="155" end="165" title="naturalist" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q735026" start="167" end="189" title="Brian Houghton Hodgson" label="Brian Houghton Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="253" end="262" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262185" start="316" end="334" title="Mountain hawk-eagle" label="feather-toed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="345" end="350" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="373" end="385" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q149957" start="456" end="465" title="Aquilinae" label="Aquilinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="530" end="549" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="556" end="561" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="563" end="568" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q908437" start="580" end="587" title="specific name (zoology)" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="620" end="630" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="634" end="642" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="644" end="650" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="652" end="659" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="664" end="669" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978121" start="756" end="766" title="Nisaetus" label="hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q254660" start="828" end="837" title="Spizaetus" label="Spizaetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="892" end="904" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="923" end="932" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978121" start="963" end="971" title="Nisaetus" label="Nisaetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1017" end="1026" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="1180" end="1184" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="1187" end="1193" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="1199" end="1206" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="1225" end="1235" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="1273" end="1294" title="least-concern species" label="least-concern species"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="1482" end="1495" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978121" start="1845" end="1853" title="Nisaetus" label="Nisaetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116302" start="1901" end="1918" title="Flores hawk-eagle" label="Flores hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q116670" start="1979" end="2000" title="changeable hawk-eagle" label="changeable hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="2014" end="2035" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3122" end="3127" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753079" start="3461" end="3471" title="Wing chord (biology)" label="wing chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059724" start="3575" end="3581" title="Tarsus (skeleton)" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217605" start="3675" end="3686" title="Claw" label="hallux claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="3790" end="3794" title="Beak" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="4040" end="4047" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4069" end="4074" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q143631" start="4218" end="4238" title="Bergmann&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Bergmann&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="4386" end="4392" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="4418" end="4424" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753079" start="5160" end="5170" title="Wing chord (biology)" label="wing chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059724" start="5274" end="5280" title="Tarsus (skeleton)" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651163" start="5327" end="5343" title="Suzuka Mountains" label="Suzuka Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="5513" end="5519" title="Beak" label="culmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="6199" end="6208" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="6213" end="6231" title="Western Ghats" label="southwestern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827839" start="6488" end="6511" title="Legge&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle" label="Legge&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="6642" end="6659" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q196139" start="8294" end="8301" title="countershading" label="whitish"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="9778" end="9782" title="Beak" label="cere"/>
<link wikidata="Q911907" start="10342" end="10343" title="Dihedral angle" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q116670" start="11270" end="11291" title="changeable hawk-eagle" label="changeable hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="11429" end="11443" title="southeast Asia" label="southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="12346" end="12360" title="southeast Asia" label="southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719771" start="12367" end="12390" title="Blyth&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle" label="Blyth&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q795547" start="12428" end="12453" title="Wallace&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle" label="Wallace&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q605698" start="12694" end="12712" title="Jerdon&amp;#x27;s baza" label="Jerdon&amp;#x27;s baza"/>
<link wikidata="Q605431" start="13044" end="13065" title="crested honey buzzard" label="crested honey buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q615403" start="13492" end="13505" title="Tin whistle" label="penny whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450" start="13581" end="13596" title="green sandpiper" label="green sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q795552" start="13663" end="13682" title="common green magpie" label="common green magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25421" start="13994" end="14006" title="little grebe" label="little grebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="14101" end="14107" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q839526" start="14392" end="14398" title="drongo" label="drongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="14877" end="14886" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="14916" end="14924" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="14933" end="14944" title="north India" label="north India"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="14979" end="14996" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="14998" end="15014" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="15019" end="15030" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="15048" end="15053" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="15055" end="15061" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="15074" end="15079" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="15121" end="15128" title="Burma" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="15160" end="15168" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="15197" end="15201" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="15215" end="15222" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="15273" end="15278" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="15306" end="15312" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="15314" end="15321" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="15326" end="15344" title="Guangdong Province" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="15395" end="15402" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="15406" end="15411" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="15416" end="15424" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="15454" end="15460" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="15560" end="15566" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="15571" end="15576" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="15640" end="15648" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="15898" end="15906" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="15956" end="15972" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341" start="15984" end="15998" title="Primorsky Krai" label="Primorsky Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="16018" end="16022" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="16516" end="16536" title="Indo-Gangetic plains" label="Indo-Gangetic plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="16541" end="16547" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="16710" end="16715" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="16807" end="16821" title="southeast Asia" label="southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="16855" end="16860" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="16870" end="16878" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="16894" end="16902" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="16952" end="16957" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="16996" end="17012" title="Korean peninsula" label="Korean peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="17049" end="17057" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="17062" end="17070" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="17286" end="17295" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="17300" end="17308" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="17414" end="17420" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="17520" end="17529" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354045" start="17571" end="17580" title="foothills" label="foothills"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="17593" end="17627" title="Primary forest" label="primary evergreen or mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="17671" end="17677" title="stream" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q158579" start="17726" end="17754" title="Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests" label="subtropical broadleaf forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="17825" end="17847" title="Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests" label="temperate mixed forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="17852" end="17871" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140056" start="17924" end="17937" title="Secondary forest" label="second growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="18012" end="18025" title="Plain" label="wooded plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="18060" end="18067" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="18138" end="18143" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412012" start="18176" end="18198" title="peri-urbanisation" label="woods near urban areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="18365" end="18371" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="18376" end="18381" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978121" start="18694" end="18702" title="Nisaetus" label="Nisaetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188737" start="18867" end="18903" title="Accipiter" label="true hawks or &amp;quot;Accipiters&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246431" start="18958" end="18967" title="Sympatry" label="sympatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q25353" start="18968" end="18984" title="Eurasian Goshawk" label="Eurasian Goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827839" start="19594" end="19617" title="Legge&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle" label="Legge&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="19999" end="20005" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="20038" end="20042" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="20048" end="20055" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="20389" end="20395" title="canopy (biology)" label="canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="20871" end="20877" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080535" start="20947" end="20968" title="Petaurista" label="giant flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767097" start="20975" end="21003" title="Indian giant flying squirrel" label="Indian giant flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094383" start="21050" end="21085" title="red and white giant flying squirrel" label="red and white giant flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q860603" start="21443" end="21465" title="Pallas&amp;#x27;s squirrel" label="Pallas&amp;#x27;s squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q715245" start="21689" end="21712" title="Swinhoe&amp;#x27;s pheasant" label="Swinhoe&amp;#x27;s pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q130290" start="21802" end="21818" title="Hyōgo Prefecture" label="Hyōgo Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="21822" end="21827" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769241" start="22336" end="22355" title="Japanese shrew mole" label="Japanese shrew mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924850" start="22579" end="22585" title="Elaphe" label="Elaphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q615871" start="22697" end="22718" title="Japanese grass lizard" label="Japanese grass lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355766" start="22770" end="22783" title="Japanese hare" label="Japanese hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q949297" start="23030" end="23055" title="Jim Corbett National Park" label="Jim Corbett National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="23057" end="23062" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295314" start="23204" end="23208" title="myna" label="myna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="23211" end="23215" title="dove" label="dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q518087" start="23218" end="23226" title="Psittacula" label="parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27244" start="23229" end="23237" title="nightjar" label="nightjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="23240" end="23243" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="23249" end="23264" title="Chicken" label="village poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="23273" end="23289" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467702" start="23349" end="23364" title="Manchurian hare" label="Manchurian hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q182761" start="23462" end="23474" title="hazel grouse" label="hazel grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189180" start="23597" end="23601" title="Mole (animal)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070063" start="23604" end="23612" title="Amur hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q243339" start="23618" end="23633" title="Siberian flying squirrel" label="flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207290" start="23662" end="23672" title="White-backed woodpecker" label="woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="23675" end="23683" title="Ring-necked pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q190083" start="23689" end="23692" title="Ural owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="23766" end="23775" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="23802" end="23806" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="24074" end="24082" title="ungulate" label="ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="24171" end="24177" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q715983" start="24202" end="24216" title="Formosan serow" label="Formosan serow"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="24320" end="24325" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="24358" end="24367" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190516" start="24432" end="24441" title="sika deer" label="sika deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61865" start="24677" end="24691" title="Indian peafowl" label="Indian peafowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069254" start="24754" end="24793" title="Echizen-Kaga Kaigan Quasi-National Park" label="Echizen-Kaga Kaigan Quasi-National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="24795" end="24800" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303681" start="24881" end="24891" title="water bird" label="water bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="24926" end="24933" title="mallard" label="mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25273" start="24972" end="24982" title="grey heron" label="grey heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q172093" start="25016" end="25043" title="greater white-fronted goose" label="greater white-fronted goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q14445301" start="25082" end="25092" title="bean goose" label="bean goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="25123" end="25132" title="Carnivora" label="Carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576038" start="25250" end="25265" title="Japanese badger" label="Japanese badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q332414" start="25345" end="25366" title="Chinese ferret-badger" label="Chinese ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052830" start="25459" end="25474" title="Japanese marten" label="Japanese marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q26423" start="25574" end="25579" title="Sable" label="Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q220248" start="25732" end="25754" title="yellow-throated marten" label="yellow-throated marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q41960" start="25819" end="25828" title="red panda" label="red panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900104" start="25902" end="25913" title="raccoon dog" label="raccoon dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="26038" end="26050" title="Cat" label="domestic cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="26182" end="26189" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182968" start="26309" end="26316" title="Old World monkey" label="monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q713841" start="26622" end="26643" title="Formosan rock macaque" label="Formosan rock macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="26699" end="26705" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q738925" start="26752" end="26765" title="Assam macaque" label="Assam macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q156606" start="26908" end="26922" title="rhesus macaque" label="rhesus macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="26960" end="26979" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q545897" start="27173" end="27194" title="François&amp;#x27; langur" label="François&amp;#x27; langur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204873" start="27239" end="27262" title="black snub-nosed monkey" label="black snub-nosed monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q208043" start="27302" end="27312" title="lar gibbon" label="lar gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q602511" start="27349" end="27371" title="eastern hoolock gibbon" label="eastern hoolock gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191781" start="27461" end="27477" title="Japanese macaque" label="Japanese macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q30085" start="27806" end="27812" title="Aquila (genus)" label="Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253080" start="27846" end="27856" title="Sea eagle" label="Haliaeetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="27932" end="27937" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="27992" end="28004" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q591640" start="28474" end="28487" title="crowned eagle" label="crowned eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="28771" end="28778" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978121" start="28968" end="28976" title="Nisaetus" label="Nisaetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188737" start="29033" end="29042" title="Accipiter" label="Accipiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="29295" end="29302" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="29308" end="29317" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q549291" start="29509" end="29517" title="fish owl" label="fish owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130933" start="29637" end="29655" title="Eurasian eagle-owl" label="Eurasian eagle-owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q729676" start="29749" end="29771" title="spot-bellied eagle owl" label="spot-bellied eagle owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q269896" start="30083" end="30107" title="Steller&amp;#x27;s sea eagle" label="Steller&amp;#x27;s sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="30148" end="30166" title="white-tailed eagle" label="white-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="30236" end="30248" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355766" start="30761" end="30774" title="Japanese hare" label="Japanese hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="30792" end="30800" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q795439" start="31085" end="31096" title="black eagle" label="black eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073416" start="31270" end="31288" title="Asian barred owlet" label="Asian barred owlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q912197" start="31326" end="31338" title="jungle owlet" label="jungle owlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q856009" start="31374" end="31387" title="brown boobook" label="brown boobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588297" start="31419" end="31435" title="Eastern barn owl" label="Eastern barn owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q190083" start="31465" end="31473" title="Ural owl" label="Ural owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130933" start="31533" end="31551" title="Eurasian eagle-owl" label="Eurasian eagle-owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="32203" end="32212" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="32222" end="32227" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q146935" start="32882" end="32895" title="Cedrus deodara" label="Deodar cedars"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="32977" end="32996" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="32998" end="33007" title="Shorea robusta" label="sal trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739400" start="33041" end="33050" title="Toona ciliata" label="red cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="33150" end="33155" title="Pinus" label="pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085" start="33157" end="33162" title="holly" label="holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595750" start="33164" end="33167" title="Terminalia elliptica" label="saj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595750" start="33175" end="33195" title="Terminalia elliptica" label="Terminalia elliptica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339679" start="33223" end="33241" title="Quercus floribunda" label="Quercus floribunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="33549" end="33554" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116670" start="33669" end="33690" title="changeable hawk-eagle" label="changeable hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="34193" end="34212" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q729676" start="34810" end="34832" title="spot-bellied eagle-owl" label="spot-bellied eagle-owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q591640" start="34911" end="34924" title="crowned eagle" label="crowned eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827839" start="34946" end="34958" title="Legge&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle" label="Legge&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q116670" start="34963" end="34984" title="changeable hawk-eagle" label="changeable hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076142" start="35247" end="35263" title="northern goshawk" label="northern goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299057" start="35583" end="35598" title="Kumaon division" label="Kumaon division"/>
<link wikidata="Q156606" start="35802" end="35816" title="rhesus macaque" label="rhesus macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q817180" start="35819" end="35846" title="northern plains gray langur" label="northern plains gray langur"/>
<link wikidata="Q220248" start="35889" end="35911" title="yellow-throated marten" label="yellow-throated marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="36180" end="36185" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197023" start="37053" end="37071" title="threatened species" label="threatened species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827839" start="37437" end="37460" title="Legge&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle" label="Legge&amp;#x27;s hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="37549" end="37562" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="37699" end="37704" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="37719" end="37724" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="37729" end="37734" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="37958" end="37966" title="falconry" label="falconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="38043" end="38057" title="Lead poisoning" label="Lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q190516" start="38086" end="38095" title="sika deer" label="sika deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978121" start="38314" end="38322" title="Nisaetus" label="Nisaetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q116670" start="38356" end="38377" title="changeable hawk-eagle" label="changeable hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139299" start="38715" end="38727" title="r/K selection theory" label="K-strategist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481109" start="38887" end="38908" title="inbreeding depression" label="inbreeding depression"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577789" wikidata="Q7647222" url="?curid=577789" title="Survive AIDS">
<text>Survive AIDS is the group formerly known as ACT UP/Golden Gate. In 1990, the ACT UP chapter in San Francisco split into two chapters, the San Francisco chapter and the Golden Gate chapter. The catalyst for this was over decision-making processes, although it also involved many larger issues. According to ACT UP/Golden Gate, &quot;ACT UP Golden Gate concentrated on issues involving treatment and treatment access while ACT UP San Francisco focused on broader social issues involving public policy and politics. Over the next several years the two ACT UP chapters worked separately and together on local and national AIDS issues.&quot; But in 1994, the two organizations stopped working together, and they grew further apart. 

The AIDS Survival project writes, &quot;By the late &#x27;90s, ACT UP San Francisco developed a very different philosophy concerning AIDS treatment and began to align itself with groups that believe HIV does not cause AIDS and that it is the use of anti-HIV medications which make people get sick and die. ACT UP San Francisco members are now called &#x27;AIDS dissidents&#x27; because of views like these: antiretroviral drugs are harmful; safer sex is unnecessary; animal testing of medical therapies is unethical; HIV is not the cause of AIDS. &quot;

In 2000, ACT UP/Golden Gate changed its name to Survive AIDS, to disavow any connection with ACT UP San Francisco. In their March 21, 2000 statement, they wrote: &quot;Over time ACT UP San Francisco became controlled by individuals who had a different philosophy concerning AIDS treatment. This in itself was not a problem. The problem was that any one who disagreed with them on this one issue was shouted down, intimidated and driven out of the group. Long term members, seeing the original ACT UP mission and philosophy destroyed, were forced out of the group in disgust. The statement read, in part, &quot;This new ACT UP San Francisco chapter harassed and stalked members of the AIDS community who disagreed with them about AIDS treatment strategy, first locally, then at national AIDS events. As time went on their tactics became more violent, culminating in physical assaults, which runs counter to the ACT UP philosophy of non-violent civil disobedience.&quot;

== External links ==
*ACT UP Golden Gate statement about their name change 
*AIDS survival project: along the latex highway
*AIDS Treatment News: ACT UP/San Francisco Splits
*Washington Blade: Name-dropping in San Francisco 
*ACT UP San Francisco 
*Men Behaving Viciously; How ACT UP San Francisco spreads spit, fake blood, used cat litter, and potentially deadly misinformation through the AIDS community </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7647222" start="0" end="12" title="Survive AIDS" label="Survive AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647222" start="44" end="62" title="Survive AIDS" label="ACT UP/Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q343047" start="77" end="83" title="AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power" label="ACT UP"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="95" end="108" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="618" end="622" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="928" end="931" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="1136" end="1150" title="Antiretroviral drug" label="antiretroviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="2227" end="2245" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577795" wikidata="Q5577376" url="?curid=577795" title="Gogi Grant">
<text>Myrtle Audrey Arinsberg (September 20, 1924 – March 10, 2016), known professionally as Gogi Grant, was an American pop singer. She is best known for her No. 1 hit in 1956, &quot;The Wayward Wind&quot;.

==Life and career==
Grant was born Myrtle Audrey Arinsberg in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the eldest of six children of Russian Jewish parents, Rose (née Jacobson) and Alexander Arinsberg. At the age of 12, she moved to Los Angeles, where she attended Venice High School. In California, she won a teenage singing contest and appeared on television talent shows.

She worked as a car saleswoman in the early 1950s. In 1952 she began to record, using first the name &quot;Audrey Brown&quot; and later &quot;Audrey Grant&quot;. She was given the name &quot;Gogi&quot; by Dave Kapp, the head of Artists and Repertory at RCA Victor, who liked to patronize a restaurant called Gogi&#x27;s LaRue. (Another source says that Grant asked Kapp, &quot;What is a Gogi?&quot; She continued, &quot;His answer was, &#x27;Darned if I know, I dreamed it last night.&#x27;&quot;)

In 1955 Grant signed with a small record company, Era Records, and had her first top ten hit with &quot;Suddenly There&#x27;s a Valley&quot;. The next year, she had an even bigger hit, reaching number 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Top 100 chart with &quot;The Wayward Wind,&quot; and holding there for six weeks. The song sold over one million copies in the United States alone, and peaked at No. 9 in the UK Singles Chart. She was voted the most popular female vocalist by &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine. This single returned to the Hot &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in 1961.

In 1957, she provided the vocals for Ann Blyth&#x27;s portrayal of Helen Morgan in the biographical film, &quot;The Helen Morgan Story&quot;. The soundtrack occasioned her return to RCA Victor (the soundtrack album climbed to No. 25 in the &quot;Billboard&quot; album chart), where she had a minor hit the following year with &quot;Strange Are the Ways of Love&quot;. 

Grant was given star billing in &quot;The Big Beat&quot; in the spring of 1957. The film featured musical performances by a long list of artists, including Fats Domino, The Diamonds, the Del Vikings, The Mills Brothers, the Cal Tjader Quintet, George Shearing, and Harry James. It was produced and directed by William Cowan and was released in February 1958.

In 1958, Grant was one of the three solo singers featured in the first stereo LP of the classic musical &quot;Show Boat&quot;. Also appearing were Howard Keel, who had starred in the 1951 film version of the show, and Anne Jeffreys.

In 1959, RCA Victor released Kiss Me, Kate, in which she was featured along with Howard Keel and Ann Jeffreys, the music arranged by Henri René.

Although Grant continued to make records and appeared on television into the 1960s, her popularity declined and she initially retired from singing in 1967 after a final US chart single, &quot;The Sea&quot; (top 20 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Easy Listening chart.

In 2004, at the age of 80, she sang &quot;The Wayward Wind&quot; on the PBS program &quot;Magic Moments&quot;.

Grant headlined with The Fabulous Palm Springs Follies in Palm Springs, California. One of her more notable appearances of her later years was with the Follies on December 31, 2006. She was still performing as late as 2013, at the age of 89.

==Personal life and death==
In 1959, Grant married attorney Robert Rifkind. The couple had two children.
Later in life, Grant underwent cancer surgery and was in remission.
She died in Los Angeles on March 10, 2016, at the age of 91. Her death was announced by her son, Joshua Beckett. She also had a daughter, Jeri Brown.

==Discography==
===Chart singles===
===Albums===
* &quot;Suddenly There&#x27;s Gogi Grant&quot; (Era, US; London UK, 1957)
* &quot;The Helen Morgan Story&quot; (RCA Victor, 1958)
* &quot;Welcome to My Heart&quot; (RCA Victor, 1958)
* &quot;Torch Time&quot; (RCA Victor, 1958)
* &quot;Show Boat&quot; &amp; Howard Keel, Anne Jeffreys (RCA Victor, 1958)
* &quot;Kiss Me Kate&quot; &amp; Howard Keel, Anne Jeffreys (RCA Victor 1959)
* &quot;Granted It&#x27;s Gogi&quot; (RCA Victor, 1959)
* &quot;If You Want to Get to Heaven, Shout&quot; (Liberty, 1960)
* &quot;City Girl in the Country&quot; (CRC-Charter, 1964)
* &quot;Gogi Grant&quot; (Pete, 1968)
* &quot;The Way a Woman Feels&quot; (Pete, 1970)
* &quot;With All My Heart&quot; (Jasmine, 2009)

==References==

==External links==
*Gogi Grant bio on The Iceberg site
*Gogi Grant bio on Tom Simon site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5577376" start="0" end="23" title="Gogi Grant" label="Myrtle Audrey Arinsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577376" start="87" end="97" title="Gogi Grant" label="Gogi Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="115" end="118" title="popular music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773970" start="178" end="194" title="The Wayward Wind" label="The Wayward Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="265" end="291" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368394" start="455" end="473" title="Venice High School (Los Angeles)" label="Venice High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="540" end="550" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="794" end="815" title="A&amp;amp;R" label="Artists and Repertory"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="819" end="829" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347948" start="1115" end="1126" title="Era Records" label="Era Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633654" start="1169" end="1199" title="Suddenly There&amp;#x27;s a Valley" label="Suddenly There&amp;#x27;s a Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1281" end="1290" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773970" start="1322" end="1338" title="The Wayward Wind" label="The Wayward Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1472" end="1488" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q255378" start="1681" end="1690" title="Ann Blyth" label="Ann Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q455116" start="1711" end="1723" title="Helen Morgan (singer)" label="Helen Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400422" start="1756" end="1778" title="The Helen Morgan Story" label="The Helen Morgan Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q48674056" start="2052" end="2064" title="The Big Beat (film)" label="The Big Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q209586" start="2170" end="2181" title="Fats Domino" label="Fats Domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410857" start="2183" end="2195" title="The Diamonds" label="The Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392684" start="2201" end="2212" title="Del Vikings" label="Del Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206839" start="2214" end="2232" title="The Mills Brothers" label="The Mills Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q491368" start="2238" end="2248" title="Cal Tjader" label="Cal Tjader"/>
<link wikidata="Q349346" start="2258" end="2273" title="George Shearing" label="George Shearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q163861" start="2279" end="2290" title="Harry James" label="Harry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166879" start="2484" end="2493" title="Show Boat" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q325427" start="2521" end="2532" title="Howard Keel" label="Howard Keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556456" start="2557" end="2586" title="Show Boat (1951 film)" label="1951 film version of the show"/>
<link wikidata="Q459973" start="2592" end="2605" title="Anne Jeffreys" label="Anne Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330969" start="2637" end="2650" title="Kiss Me, Kate" label="Kiss Me, Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q325427" start="2689" end="2700" title="Howard Keel" label="Howard Keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q459973" start="2705" end="2717" title="Ann Jeffreys" label="Ann Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q555826" start="2741" end="2751" title="Henri René" label="Henri René"/>
<link wikidata="Q848399" start="2997" end="3011" title="Easy Listening" label="Easy Listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733002" start="3153" end="3186" title="The Fabulous Palm Springs Follies" label="The Fabulous Palm Springs Follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347948" start="3796" end="3799" title="Era Records" label="Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="3860" end="3870" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q325427" start="4005" end="4016" title="Howard Keel" label="Howard Keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q459973" start="4018" end="4031" title="Anne Jeffreys" label="Anne Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392321" start="4236" end="4243" title="Liberty Records" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161787" start="4430" end="4437" title="Jasmine Records" label="Jasmine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577798" wikidata="Q3073760" url="?curid=577798" title="Flip Wilson">
<text>Clerow &quot;Flip&quot; Wilson Jr. (December 8, 1933 – November 25, 1998) was an American comedian and actor best known for his television appearances during the late 1960s and 1970s. From 1970 to 1974, Wilson hosted his own weekly variety series &quot;The Flip Wilson Show&quot;, and introduced viewers to his recurring character Geraldine. The series earned Wilson a Golden Globe and two Emmy Awards, and it was the second highest-rated show on network television for a time.

Wilson was the first African American to host a successful TV variety show. In January 1972, &quot;Time&quot; magazine featured Wilson&#x27;s image on its cover and named him &quot;TV&#x27;s first black superstar&quot;. He released a number of comedy albums in the 1960s and 1970s and won a Grammy Award for his 1970 album &quot;The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress&quot;.

Wilson kept performing and acting into the 1990s, though at a reduced schedule, until his death from cancer in 1998. He hosted a short-lived revival of &quot;People Are Funny&quot; in 1984, and he had the lead role in the 1985–1986 sitcom &quot;Charlie &amp; Co.&quot;

==Early life==
Born Clerow Wilson Jr. in Jersey City, New Jersey, he was one of ten children born to Cornelia Bullock and Clerow Wilson Sr. His father worked as a handyman but, because of the Great Depression, was often out of work. When Wilson was seven years old, his mother abandoned the family. His father was unable to care for the children alone and he placed many of them in foster homes.

After bouncing from foster homes to reform school, sixteen-year-old Wilson lied about his age and joined the United States Air Force. His outgoing personality and funny stories made him popular; he was even asked to tour military bases to cheer up other servicemen. Claiming that he was always &quot;flipped out&quot;, Wilson&#x27;s barracks mates gave him the nickname &quot;Flip&quot;, which he used as his stage name.

Discharged from the Air Force in 1954, Wilson started working as a bellhop in San Francisco&#x27;s Manor Plaza Hotel. At the Plaza&#x27;s nightclub, Wilson found extra work playing a drunken patron between regularly scheduled acts. His inebriated character proved popular and Wilson began performing it in clubs throughout California. At first Wilson would simply ad-lib onstage, but eventually he added written material and his act became more sophisticated.

==Career==
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Wilson toured regularly through nightclubs with a black clientele in the so-called &quot;Chitlin&#x27; Circuit&quot;. During the 1960s, Wilson became a regular at the Apollo Theater in Harlem. An unexpected break came in 1965, when comedian Redd Foxx was a guest on &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; and host Johnny Carson asked him who the funniest comedian at the time was; Foxx answered, &quot;Flip Wilson&quot;. Carson then booked Wilson to appear on &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; and Wilson became a favorite guest on that show as well as on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;. Wilson later singled out Sullivan as providing his biggest career boost. Wilson also made guest appearances on numerous TV comedies and variety shows, such as &quot;Here&#x27;s Lucy&quot; (in which he played the role of &quot;Prissy&quot; in a spoof of &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot; with Lucille Ball as Scarlett), &quot;Laugh-In&quot;, and &quot;The Dean Martin Show&quot;, among others.

Wilson&#x27;s warm and ebullient personality was infectious. Richard Pryor told Wilson, &quot;You&#x27;re the only performer that I&#x27;ve ever seen who goes on the stage and the audience hopes that &quot;you&quot; like &quot;them&quot;.&quot;

A routine titled &quot;Columbus&quot;, from the 1967 album &quot;Cowboys and Colored People&quot;, brought Wilson to Hollywood industry attention. In this bit, Wilson retells the story of Christopher Columbus from an anachronistic urbanized viewpoint in which Columbus convinces the Spanish monarchs to fund his voyage by noting that discovering America means that he can also discover Ray Charles. Hearing this, Queen &quot;Isabel Johnson&quot;, whose voice is an early version of Wilson&#x27;s eventual &quot;Geraldine&quot; character, says that &quot;Chris&quot; can have &quot;&quot;all&quot; the money you want, honey – You go &quot;find&quot; Ray Charles!&quot; When Columbus departs from the dock, an inebriated Isabella is there, testifying to one and all that &quot;Chris gonna &quot;find&quot; Ray Charles!&quot;

In 1970, Wilson won a Grammy Award for his comedy album &quot;The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress&quot;. He was also a regular cast member on &quot;Rowan &amp; Martin&#x27;s Laugh-In&quot;. DePatie-Freleng Enterprises featured Wilson in two animated TV specials, &quot;Clerow Wilson and the Miracle of P.S. 14&quot; and &quot;Clerow Wilson&#x27;s Great Escape&quot;.

===&quot;The Flip Wilson Show&quot;===

In 1970, Wilson&#x27;s variety series, &quot;The Flip Wilson Show&quot;, debuted on NBC. He performed in comedy sketches and played host to many African-American entertainers, including Lena Horne, Harry Belafonte, Diahann Carroll, the Supremes, the Jackson Five, Aretha Franklin, the Temptations, Gladys Knight &amp; the Pips, Melba Moore, Redd Foxx, boxer Muhammad Ali and basketball player Bill Russell. He greeted all his guests with the &quot;Flip Wilson Handshake&quot;: four hand slaps, two elbow bumps, finishing with two hip-bumps. George Carlin was one of the show&#x27;s writers, and Carlin also made frequent appearances on the show, as the two would expand Carlin&#x27;s news-weather-sports satire. Wilson&#x27;s characters included Reverend Leroy, the materialistic pastor of the &quot;Church of What’s Happnin&#x27; Now&quot;, and his most popular character, Geraldine Jones, who frequently referred to her unseen boyfriend, &quot;Killer&quot;, and whose lines &quot;&quot;The devil made me do it&quot; as well as &quot;What you see is what you get&quot;&quot; became national catchphrases.

&quot;The Flip Wilson Show&quot; aired through 1974, generating high ratings and popularity among viewers and winning strong critical acclaim, with 11 Emmy Award nominations during its run, winning two. Wilson also won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Series.
===Later years===
Wilson acted in TV and theatrical movies, including &quot;Uptown Saturday Night&quot; and &quot;The Fish that Saved Pittsburgh&quot;. In 1976, he appeared as the Fox in a television musical adaptation of &quot;Pinocchio&quot;, starring Sandy Duncan in the title role and Danny Kaye as Geppetto, with songs by &quot;Laugh-In&quot; composer Billy Barnes. In 1981, he made a guest appearance on &quot;The Love Boat&quot;. On December 10, 1983, Wilson hosted Saturday Night Live, giving what could be considered a master’s class in comedy for Eddie Murphy and Joe Piscopo, with his opening Geraldine sketch.

During March–July 1984, Wilson hosted a revival of &quot;People are Funny&quot;. In 1985–1986, Wilson played the lead role in the CBS sitcom &quot;Charlie &amp; Co.&quot; Two of his last TV appearances were cameos on the sitcoms &quot;Living Single&quot; in 1993, and &quot;The Drew Carey Show&quot; in 1996.

==Personal life==
Wilson was married twice. In 1957, he married Lavenia Patricia &quot;Peaches&quot; Wilson (née Dean); they divorced in 1967. He had four children with his common-law wife Blonell Pitman. After winning custody of his children in 1979, Wilson performed less in order to spend more time with them. In 1979, he married Tuanchai &quot;Cookie&quot; MacKenzie, with whom he had one child; they divorced in 1984.

In March 1981, Wilson was arrested and charged with possession of a small quantity of cocaine.

In 1993, a motorcycle accident left Wilson&#x27;s son David paralyzed.

During a 1997 visit to Howard Stern Show, Wilson divulged that he had a penile implant.

== Death ==
On November 25, 1998, Wilson died from metastatic liver cancer in Malibu, California. He was cremated at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery and his ashes were scattered off Malibu Beach.

==Discography==
* 1961 — &quot;Flippin&quot;&#x27; (Minit)
* 1964 — &quot;Flip Wilson&#x27;s Pot Luck&quot; (Scepter, reissued as &quot;Funny and Live at the Village Gate&quot;, Springboard)
* 1967 — &quot;Cowboys and Colored People&quot; (Atlantic)
* 1968 — &quot;You Devil You&quot; (Atlantic)
* 1970 — &quot;The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress&quot; (Little David)
* 1970 — &quot;The Flip Wilson Show&quot; (Little David)
* 1970 — &quot;Flipped Out&quot; (Sunset Records)
* 1972 — &quot;Geraldine&quot; (Little David)

==In popular culture==
Wilson popularized the phrase &quot;The devil made me do it.&quot; The catchphrase &quot;What you see is what you get,&quot; often used by Wilson&#x27;s Geraldine character, inspired researchers at PARC (and elsewhere) to create the acronym WYSIWYG for computer software.

==Footnotes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==

* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3073760" start="0" end="6" title="Flip Wilson" label="Clerow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073760" start="13" end="17" title="Flip Wilson" label="Flip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073760" start="24" end="34" title="Flip Wilson" label="Wilson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7734468" start="253" end="273" title="The Flip Wilson Show" label="The Flip Wilson Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006768" start="331" end="340" title="Geraldine Jones (character)" label="Geraldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="369" end="381" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="390" end="401" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="578" end="582" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991737" start="808" end="840" title="The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress" label="The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069591" start="1007" end="1023" title="People Are Funny" label="People Are Funny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084411" start="1094" end="1111" title="Charlie &amp;amp; Co." label="Charlie &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="1160" end="1171" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="1173" end="1183" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1311" end="1327" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1625" end="1648" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2016" end="2029" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2261" end="2271" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074909" start="2534" end="2555" title="Chitlin&amp;#x27; Circuit" label="Chitlin&amp;#x27; Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q619124" start="2612" end="2626" title="Apollo Theater" label="Apollo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="2630" end="2636" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q712024" start="2686" end="2695" title="Redd Foxx" label="Redd Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="2717" end="2733" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="2749" end="2762" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="2992" end="3012" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248145" start="3185" end="3201" title="Here&amp;#x27;s Lucy" label="Here&amp;#x27;s Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="3279" end="3297" title="Gone With the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="3309" end="3321" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235088" start="3342" end="3350" title="Laugh-In" label="Laugh-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993498" start="3368" end="3388" title="The Dean Martin Show" label="The Dean Martin Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q294912" start="3472" end="3485" title="Richard Pryor" label="Richard Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="3845" end="3865" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3940" end="3947" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="4043" end="4054" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="4070" end="4102" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Queen &amp;quot;Isabel Johnson&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006768" start="4162" end="4193" title="Geraldine Jones (character)" label="&amp;quot;Geraldine&amp;quot; character"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="4503" end="4515" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991737" start="4543" end="4575" title="The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress" label="The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235088" start="4626" end="4660" title="Rowan &amp;amp; Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh-In" label="Rowan &amp;amp; Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701539" start="4668" end="4695" title="DePatie-Freleng Enterprises" label="DePatie-Freleng Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734468" start="4931" end="4951" title="The Flip Wilson Show" label="The Flip Wilson Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4970" end="4973" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="5072" end="5082" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="5084" end="5099" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q240233" start="5101" end="5116" title="Diahann Carroll" label="Diahann Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q218837" start="5118" end="5130" title="the Supremes" label="the Supremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43267" start="5132" end="5148" title="the Jackson Five" label="the Jackson Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="5150" end="5165" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q846373" start="5167" end="5182" title="the Temptations" label="the Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529105" start="5184" end="5212" title="Gladys Knight &amp;amp; the Pips" label="Gladys Knight &amp;amp; the Pips"/>
<link wikidata="Q448876" start="5214" end="5225" title="Melba Moore" label="Melba Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q712024" start="5227" end="5236" title="Redd Foxx" label="Redd Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="5244" end="5256" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="5261" end="5271" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q242185" start="5279" end="5291" title="Bill Russell" label="Bill Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q150651" start="5427" end="5440" title="George Carlin" label="George Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006768" start="5760" end="5775" title="Geraldine Jones (character)" label="Geraldine Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="5921" end="5949" title="What you see is what you get" label="What you see is what you get"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="6144" end="6154" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="6214" end="6232" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q138996" start="6237" end="6270" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Musical or Comedy" label="Best Actor in a Television Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899447" start="6348" end="6369" title="Uptown Saturday Night" label="Uptown Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635914" start="6386" end="6416" title="The Fish that Saved Pittsburgh" label="The Fish that Saved Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130765" start="6500" end="6509" title="Pinocchio (1976 TV musical)" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q266825" start="6526" end="6538" title="Sandy Duncan" label="Sandy Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="6561" end="6571" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428120" start="6575" end="6583" title="Geppetto" label="Geppetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235088" start="6605" end="6613" title="Laugh-In" label="Laugh-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912155" start="6629" end="6641" title="Billy Barnes (composer)" label="Billy Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="6688" end="6701" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069591" start="6952" end="6968" title="People are Funny" label="People are Funny"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="7025" end="7028" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="7029" end="7035" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084411" start="7042" end="7059" title="Charlie &amp;amp; Co." label="Charlie &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="7102" end="7108" title="cameo appearance" label="cameos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835569" start="7130" end="7143" title="Living Single" label="Living Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258715" start="7169" end="7188" title="The Drew Carey Show" label="The Drew Carey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987626" start="7820" end="7837" title="Howard Stern Show" label="Howard Stern Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069010" start="7869" end="7883" title="penile implant" label="penile implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="7937" end="7947" title="metastasis" label="metastatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="7948" end="7960" title="liver cancer" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="7964" end="7982" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358639" start="8003" end="8042" title="Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991737" start="8402" end="8434" title="The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress" label="The Devil Made Me Buy This Dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="8831" end="8835" title="PARC (company)" label="PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="8874" end="8881" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577802" wikidata="Q497174" url="?curid=577802" title="Hak Ja Han">
<text>Hak Ja Han Moon (; born February 10, 1943 January 6, 1943, lunar calendar) is a Korean religious leader. Her late husband Sun Myung Moon was the founder of the Unification Church (UC). Han and Moon were married in April 1960 and have 10 living children and over 30 grandchildren. In 1992, she established the Women&#x27;s Federation for World Peace, and traveled the world speaking on its behalf. Since her husband&#x27;s death, she has assumed leadership of the Unification Church, whose followers call her &quot;True Mother&quot; and &quot;Mother of Peace&quot;.

==Personal life and family==
Han, whose mother later became a follower of Sun Myung Moon, was born on January 6, 1943 (lunar calendar). Han attended an all-girls high school in Korea but did not go on to college. She speaks Japanese and English as well as Korean. In April 1960, at the age of 17, Han, by then a member of the Unification Church, married 40 year-old Moon. 
Han has 14 children, 10 of whom are still living, and as of 2011 has 38 grandchildren. Her children are: 
*Ye Jin Moon (born 1960; daughter);
*Hyo Jin Moon (1962–2008; son);
*Hye Jin Moon (1964–1964; daughter);
*In Jin Moon (born 1965; daughter);
*Heung Jin Moon (1966–1984; son);
*Un Jin Moon (born 1967; daughter);
*Hyun Jin Moon (born 1969; son);
*Kook Jin Moon (born 1970; son);
*Kwon Jin Moon (born 1975; son);
*Sun Jin Moon (born 1976; daughter);
*Young Jin Moon (1978–1999; son);
*Hyung Jin Moon (born 1979; son);
*Yeon Jin Moon (born 1981; daughter);
*Jeung Jin Moon (born 1982; daughter). 
In Korean culture, a married woman keeps her original family name, with the children taking their father&#x27;s.

On July 19, 2008, Han along with her husband and 14 others, including several of their children and grandchildren, were slightly injured when a Sikorsky S-92 helicopter owned by the movement crashed during an emergency landing and burst into flames in Gapyeong. Han and all 15 others were treated at the nearby UC-affiliated Cheongshim Hospital.

==Role in the Unification Church==
Some Unification Church members believe that Han and Moon&#x27;s wedding established a &quot;holy marriage&quot; which Jesus was not able to establish, and also consider it to be a holy day, called &quot;True Parents Day,&quot; as well as what members refer to as the &quot;True Family.&quot; It is believed by the members to be the beginning of a new Completed Testament Age and to have fulfilled the prophesied Marriage of the Lamb in the Revelation of John.

According to Church Unification members, Han and Moon are together believed to be the new messiahs. The Moons are regarded by members to be the &quot;True Parents&quot; of humanity and are addressed by its followers as the True Father and True Mother. Members have also referred to Han as &quot;the Bride of Christ&quot; and the perfect woman. She is seen within the Unification Church as the Mother of humankind, the final chosen of God. Han and Moon are also seen as the exemplars of the God-centered existence by members. In Unification Church services, members bow down in respect for Moon and Han, when they are present, and to representative pictures of them when they are not.

In 1962, Moon and Han founded the Little Angels Children’s Folk Ballet of Korea, a girls Korean folk ballet company meant to promote a positive perception of South Korea. In 1984, Han spoke at a Unification Church sponsored academic conference in Washington, D.C. to a crowd of 240 which included professors from Harvard, Princeton, Stanford, University of Michigan and the Sorbonne in Paris.

In 1993, U.S. Senator Trent Lott supported the bill True Parents Day in the U.S. Senate and in 1995 U.S. President Bill Clinton signed a bill into law called Parents Day; according to this law, children are to honor their parents on this day. This showed the relationship of the Unification Church to the Republican and Democratic Parties of the United States, according to news media. In 1993, U.S. Senator Orrin Hatch introduced Han to a crowd at Capitol Hill; she stated at the event that she and Moon are the first True Parents. Moon was in the audience watching her speech, along with members of the United States Senate and United States House of Representatives.

===Wedding ceremonies===

Han and Moon together presided over the mass wedding ceremonies for which the Unification Church is noted. (&quot;See:&quot; Blessing ceremony of the Unification Church.) In 1997, they donned crowns and gold-trimmed robes to lead a mass wedding and marriage rededication ceremony in Washington, D.C. for 20,000 couples, 2,500 of them Unification Church members whose marriages had been arranged by Moon. Ministers of other religions acted as &quot;co-officiators.&quot; In 1997, Han presided with her husband over a marriage affirmation ceremony for 28,000 couples, some married and some newly engaged, in New York City. During the ceremony Han and Moon sprinkled holy water on the couples.

===Women&#x27;s Federation for World Peace===
In 1992, Han established the Women&#x27;s Federation for World Peace (WFWP) with the support of many Unification Church members, and traveled the world speaking at conventions on its behalf. The WFWP&#x27;s purpose is to encourage women to work more actively in promoting peace in their communities and greater society, and it includes 143 member countries. Han organized a conference in Tokyo in 1993, which was the first anniversary of the WFWP. The keynote speaker was former Vice President of the United States Dan Quayle&#x27;s wife Marilyn Tucker Quayle, and in a speech at the event Han spoke positively of Mrs. Quayle&#x27;s humanitarian work.

In 1993, Han traveled to 20 cities in the United States promoting WFWP, as well as to 12 countries. At a stop in Salt Lake City, Utah she told attendants: &quot;If a family is not centered on God&#x27;s ideal of love, there will be conflict among the members of that family. Without God&#x27;s love as an absolute center, such a family will ultimately break down. A nation of such families will also decline.&quot; Her 1993 speeches in the United States focused on increasing violence in the U.S., and the degradation of the family unit.

In 1995, Han spoke at a WFWP event in Japan with former United States president George H. W. Bush. Han spoke after Bush&#x27;s speech and praised Bush, crediting him for the decline of communism and saying that he must save America from &quot;the destruction of the family and moral decay.&quot;

===Increasing influence===
In 1992, Moon increased Han&#x27;s position of authority within the Unification Church and announced &quot;True Mother was elevated to True Father&#x27;s level horizontally.&quot; Hak Ja Han has been Moon&#x27;s successor, designated as leader of the Unification Church since 1993. Massimo Introvigne of the Center for Studies on New Religions writes in &quot;The Unification Church&quot; (2000):

The issue of succession is now of fundamental importance. The Reverend Moon will be eighty years old (by Korean age calculations, he turned eighty in 1999) in 2000. Mrs. Moon is fifty-seven years old. Since 1992 she has taken a more visible role, particularly in three world speaking tours in 1992, 1993, and 1999. Mrs. Moon has also spoken on Capitol Hill, at the United Nations, and in other parliaments around the world. Her relative youth and the respect with which she is held by the membership may be a point of stability for the Unification movement.

George D. Chryssides predicted, in his book &quot;Exploring New Religions&quot; (2001), that Han would lead the Unification Church and preside over Blessing ceremonies after Moon&#x27;s death, since she would then be &quot;the remaining True Parent.&quot;

In 2003, over 8,000 Unification Church members attended a ceremony in South Korea in which Han and Moon were remarried. This was said to be the fulfillment of the Marriage Supper of the Lamb written about in the Apocalypse of John. In 2010 National Public Radio reported that Unification Church services in the United States invoked the name of Han along with Moon in their opening greetings to congregants. In that same year, &quot;Forbes&quot; reported that Han was living in South Korea with her husband while their children took more responsibility for the day-to-day leadership of the Unification Church and its affiliated organizations.

After Sun Myung Moon&#x27;s death in 2012, Han became the leader of the Family Federation for World Peace and Unification.

===Family Federation for World Peace===
In 1996, Han went on a world tour, speaking on behalf of the Family Federation for World Peace. Her speeches were given in cities across the United States, as well as countries including Korea, Japan, Italy, and 16 other countries in South America and Central America. In July 1996 she spoke at the Family Federation for World Peace&#x27;s Inaugural World Convention at the National Building Museum in Washington, D.C. Han&#x27;s closing address, called the &quot;Founder&#x27;s Address&quot;, was the climax of the proceedings.

===Coronation ceremony===
On March 23, 2004, Moon and Han were honored at an Ambassadors for Peace awards banquet held by the Interreligious and International Federation for World Peace (which is sponsored by the Unification Church) in a United States federal office building in Washington, D.C. It was called a &quot;Crown of Peace&quot; ceremony. At the event Moon stated that he was the Messiah. Over 12 United States lawmakers were in attendance. The event was criticized by some as a possible violation of the principle of separation of church and state in the United States.

===Universal Peace Federation===
In 2006, Han spoke in New Zealand on behalf of the Universal Peace Federation and called for traditional families, religious and cross-cultural tolerance, and a &quot;peace tunnel&quot; across the Bering Strait (Bering Strait crossing) connecting Russia and the United States. In 2019 she spoke at a rally in Japan and called for greater understanding and cooperation between the Pacific Rim nations. In 2020 Han spoke at a UPF sponsored in-person and virtual rally for Korean unification which drew about one million attendees.

=== Peace Starts with Me ===
Hak Ja Han is the founder of the peace movement &quot;Peace Starts with Me.”

The Peace Starts With Me rallies are co-sponsored by the Family Federation for World Peace and Unity (FFWPU) and the American Clergy Leadership Conference (ACLC). The first rally was held in 2017 in Madison Square Garden.

=== Rally of hope ===
Rally of Hope is a series of summits, real and virtual, that began in August 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic made large in-person gatherings impossible. At each Rally of Hope, global leaders raised important topics, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, poverty, environmental pollution, religious freedom, honoring Korean War veterans, and international security.

Former U.S. President Trump spoke about the security situation on the Korean Peninsula at the Rally of Hope event, a conference organized by Hak Ja Han.

Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary General of the UN, Gingrich, former President of the U.S. House of Representatives, President of Senegal Sall, Niger Prime Minister Rafini, Cambodian Prime Minister Sen and other world leaders participated in the virtual Rally of Hope 2020 entitled &quot;&quot;World Rally of Hope: Building and Renewing Our Nations in the Post-Covid-19 World: Interdependence, Mutual Prosperity and Universal Values&quot;.&quot; 

=== Leadership and Good Governance Award ===
Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia, received the Leadership and Good Governance Award from the UPF at the 2nd Asia-Pacific Summit.

After the opening speech, the award was presented by Hak Ja Han, co-founder of UPF.

The Leadership and Good Governance Award is given to those who demonstrate excellence in leadership, along with moral and spiritual principles.

=== World Summit ===
The 2022 World Summit was sponsored by the UPF and the Kingdom of Cambodia. The Summit brought together world leaders to discuss peace on the Korean Peninsula. Hak Ja Han, co-founder of the UPF, hosted the 2022 World Summit, co-chaired by Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen and former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

At the 2022 International Summit organized by the UPF, international leaders supported global peace building, especially in Korea, the right to religious freedom and called for more education for young people in Africa.

More than 300 world leaders from more than 150 countries participated in the Summit, such as Senegalese President Sali, Nigerian President Buhari, former U.S. Vice President Pence, former Belgian Prime Minister Leterme, former Israeli Prime Minister Olmert, former European Commission President Barroso and others.

This summit was a continuation of the summit in February and the &quot;Seoul Resolution&quot; signed by former UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and Cambodian Prime Minister Sen, which called for the creation of a united Korea as one nation with two states.

=== Little Angels ===
Little Angels Children&#x27;s Folk Ballet of Korea is a world-famous children&#x27;s folklore ballet group of the Unification Church, founded 60 years ago by Sun Myung Moon and Hak Ja Han Moon.

Little Angels performed in many countries of the world, and among others they were invited to perform in the presence of the British Queen Elizabeth II.

They also gave a special performance for U.S. President Nixon.

=== Think Tank 2022 ===
In May 2021, world leaders and experts launched &quot;Think Tank 2022&quot; with the aim of promoting the peaceful unification of the Korean Peninsula.

Think Tank 2022 is a global network of more than 2,000 experts dedicated to finding practical solutions for building peace in Korea.

Former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, chairman of this new initiative, thanked Hak Ja Han, UPF, and Think Tank 2022 leaders for building a platform to promote peace between South Korea and North Korea.

Think Tank 2022 will form expert working groups connected with international UPF associations and lead peace-building initiatives such as the UN Peace Park in the demilitarized zone between the two Koreas, the construction of the Korea-Japan undersea tunnel, helping to reunite separated Korean families and other initiatives for peace.

=== International Association of Parliamentarians for Peace ===
Hak Ja Han founded the International Association of Parliamentarians for Peace (IAPP) with the aim of gathering parliamentarians from all over the world, who, together with representatives of religious organizations and the civil sector, should work to build peace in the world and solve local, national and global problems.

=== Sunhak Peace Prize ===
The Sunhak Peace Prize was established by Hak Ja Han to honor the legacy of her late husband, Sun Myung Moon.

According to the organizers, the Sunhak Peace Prize is not awarded on the basis of one&#x27;s popularity, but on the basis of the important contribution of &quot;individuals or organizations to the ideal of peace&quot;, and recognizes and encourages &quot;innovation in human development, peaceful conflict resolution and environmental preservation&quot;.

The first Sunhak laureates in 2015 were Kiribati President Anote Tong, for his efforts to raise awareness of the importance of climate change, and Indian aquaculture researcher Modadugu Vijay Gupta.

Laureates have included Afghani educator Sakena Yaccobi and international health care provider Gino Strada (2017); and Somali human rights activist Waris Dirie and Africa development leader Akinwumi Ayodeji Adesina (2019).

At the 2020 World Summit in South Korea, Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General of the United Nations, received the first Sunhak Peace Prize Founder’s Award for leadership on environmental issues and establishing the Sustainable Development Goals. In addition, that year, Lutheran Bishop Munib A. Younan and Senegal President Macky Sall were honored as Laureates for their work for peace and prosperity in Africa.

At the 2020 World Summit, the Sunhak Peace Prize was awarded to virologist and Oxford University Prof. Sarah Gilbert, and Gavi, The Vaccine Alliance, for their contributions to vaccine development and distribution, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen received the second Sunhak Peace Prize Founder’s Award for his achievements in building peace in the world.

==See also==
*List of Unification movement people
*Unification Church of the United States

==References==
==External links==

*The Birth and Childhood of Hak Ja Han Moon at website of Family Federation for World Peace and Unification in Oceania
*Speeches of Mrs. Hak Ja Han Moon, at www.unification.net
*Words and Speeches of Hak Ja Han Moon, at True Parents Legacy
*Biography of Mrs. Hak Ja Han Moon , at www.reverendsunmyungmoon.org
* at Legacy of Love</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q497174" start="0" end="15" title="Hak Ja Han" label="Hak Ja Han Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q296734" start="122" end="136" title="Sun Myung Moon" label="Sun Myung Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="160" end="178" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q296734" start="640" end="654" title="Sun Myung Moon" label="Sun Myung Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307062" start="1151" end="1162" title="In Jin Moon" label="In Jin Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057674" start="1187" end="1201" title="Heung Jin Moon" label="Heung Jin Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881979" start="1221" end="1232" title="Un Jin Moon" label="Un Jin Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q486569" start="1257" end="1270" title="Hyun Jin Moon" label="Hyun Jin Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307061" start="1290" end="1303" title="Kook Jin Moon" label="Kook Jin Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q562683" start="1427" end="1441" title="Hyung Jin Moon" label="Hyung Jin Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q599979" start="1541" end="1555" title="Culture of Korea" label="Korean culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q498782" start="1573" end="1603" title="Korean names" label="keeps her original family name"/>
<link wikidata="Q739040" start="1796" end="1809" title="Sikorsky S-92" label="Sikorsky S-92"/>
<link wikidata="Q50203" start="1904" end="1912" title="Gapyeong" label="Gapyeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="2308" end="2319" title="True Family" label="True Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="2447" end="2467" title="Marriage of the Lamb" label="Marriage of the Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="2475" end="2493" title="Revelation of John" label="Revelation of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004401" start="2795" end="2810" title="Bride of Christ" label="Bride of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4277668" start="3215" end="3260" title="Little Angels Children’s Folk Ballet of Korea" label="Little Angels Children’s Folk Ballet of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="3339" end="3350" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3428" end="3444" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3494" end="3501" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="3503" end="3512" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="3514" end="3522" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="3524" end="3546" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="3555" end="3563" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3567" end="3572" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q50608" start="3597" end="3607" title="Trent Lott" label="Trent Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="3690" end="3702" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q497023" start="3733" end="3744" title="Parents Day" label="Parents Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q381157" start="3983" end="3994" title="Orrin Hatch" label="Orrin Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305815" start="4024" end="4036" title="Capitol Hill" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4180" end="4200" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4205" end="4243" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146194" start="4312" end="4324" title="mass wedding" label="mass wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q835941" start="4397" end="4440" title="Blessing ceremony of the Unification Church" label="Blessing ceremony of the Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504498" start="4521" end="4551" title="marriage rededication ceremony" label="marriage rededication ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4878" end="4891" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q218198" start="4936" end="4946" title="holy water" label="holy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q497174" start="5039" end="5078" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Federation for World Peace" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Federation for World Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="5489" end="5524" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49214" start="5525" end="5535" title="Dan Quayle" label="Dan Quayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q442258" start="5548" end="5569" title="Marilyn Tucker Quayle" label="Marilyn Tucker Quayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="5776" end="5790" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="5792" end="5796" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6240" end="6245" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="6282" end="6299" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664204" start="6808" end="6826" title="Massimo Introvigne" label="Massimo Introvigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q514316" start="6834" end="6869" title="Center for Studies on New Religions" label="Center for Studies on New Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373193" start="7483" end="7503" title="George D. Chryssides" label="George D. Chryssides"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="7903" end="7930" title="Marriage Supper of the Lamb" label="Marriage Supper of the Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="7952" end="7970" title="Apocalypse of John" label="Apocalypse of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="7980" end="8001" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="8173" end="8179" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="8456" end="8505" title="Family Federation for World Peace and Unification" label="Family Federation for World Peace and Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="8609" end="8642" title="Family Federation for World Peace" label="Family Federation for World Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="8735" end="8740" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="8742" end="8747" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8749" end="8754" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="8782" end="8795" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="8800" end="8815" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q624008" start="8922" end="8946" title="National Building Museum" label="National Building Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8950" end="8966" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="9204" end="9263" title="Interreligious and International Federation for World Peace" label="Interreligious and International Federation for World Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="9357" end="9373" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="9468" end="9475" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="9606" end="9636" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="9715" end="9726" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="9890" end="9903" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q576118" start="9905" end="9927" title="Bering Strait crossing" label="Bering Strait crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301187" start="10073" end="10084" title="Pacific Rim" label="Pacific Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="10529" end="10550" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="10957" end="10962" title="Donald Trump" label="Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="11089" end="11100" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182788" start="11138" end="11146" title="Newt Gingrich" label="Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q57438" start="11224" end="11228" title="Macky Sall" label="Sall"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788" start="11284" end="11287" title="Hun Sen" label="Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="12029" end="12037" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="12676" end="12681" title="Mike Pence" label="Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15849" start="12797" end="12804" title="José Manuel Barroso" label="Barroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4277668" start="13098" end="13148" title="Little Angels Children&amp;#x27;s Folk Ballet of Korea" label="Little Angels Children&amp;#x27;s Folk Ballet of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="13503" end="13508" title="Richard Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="13669" end="13685" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="13814" end="13819" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="13998" end="14009" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="14014" end="14025" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q113070727" start="14453" end="14508" title="International Association of Parliamentarians for Peace" label="International Association of Parliamentarians for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="15291" end="15299" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q57456" start="15310" end="15320" title="Anote Tong" label="Anote Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="15378" end="15392" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="15475" end="15482" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="15570" end="15576" title="Somalia" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="15946" end="15954" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437725" start="16501" end="16536" title="List of Unification movement people" label="List of Unification movement people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884888" start="16538" end="16577" title="Unification Church of the United States" label="Unification Church of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577806" wikidata="Q6097927" url="?curid=577806" title="Ivana Bacik">
<text>Ivana Catherine Bacik 
(born 25 May 1968) is an Irish politician who has been the Leader of the Labour Party since 24 March 2022 and a Teachta Dála (TD) for the Dublin Bay South constituency since winning a by-election on 9 July 2021. Bacik previously served as Leader of the Labour Party in the Seanad from 2011 to 2021, and a Senator for the Dublin University constituency from 2007 to 2021. She previously served as Deputy leader of the Seanad from 2011 to 2016. Bacik came to prominence due to her abortion rights campaigning from the 1980s onwards.

==Personal life and education==
Bacik&#x27;s paternal grandfather, Charles Bacik, was a Czech factory owner who moved to Ireland in 1946. He eventually settled in Waterford and in 1947 was involved in the establishment of Waterford Crystal. Her mother&#x27;s side of the family are Murphys from County Clare. Her father was an astronomer and was employed in a number of locations. As a result, she lived in London and South Africa, before moving to Crookstown, County Cork, twenty miles west of Cork City, aged six, when he became a physics lecturer in the Cork Institute of Technology. She attended the nearby national school in Cloughduv. When Bacik was 11 years old, her family moved to the Sunday&#x27;s Well area of Cork City. At the age of 14, she moved to Dublin.

She won a scholarship to board at Alexandra College in Milltown, Dublin, and was awarded a sizarship at Trinity College Dublin. She has an LL.B. from Trinity and an LL.M. from the London School of Economics.

She lives with husband Alan Saul and their two daughters in Portobello, Dublin.

==University politics==
Bacik resigned as president of Trinity College Dublin Students&#x27; Union in 1990, after breaking the mandate from the Union membership regarding voting for candidates at a Union of Students in Ireland conference. Despite 13 TCD representatives being mandated to vote for one candidate, Martin Whelan, a former TCD SU president, it transpired that he received only 12 votes, Bacik&#x27;s vote instead being given to the feminist former UCD SU officer, Karen Quinlivan. A controversy erupted in the Students&#x27; Union and a subsequent internal investigation led to Bacik&#x27;s resignation.

She was taken to court by the anti-abortion group, the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child (SPUC), for providing information on abortion. SPUC were successful in the court case, although that success came in the 1990s, long after Bacik had graduated from Trinity College. A High Court injunction had been ordered against Bacik and other members of the TCD Students&#x27; Union in October 1989. In November 1989, Bacik was informed by the Gardaí that the Union of Students in Ireland (USI) and the TCD Students&#x27; Union were under investigation following complaints that &quot;they were corrupting the public morals by disseminating information on abortion.&quot; In an article she wrote for the International Planned Parenthood Federation, she said it was soon-to-be Irish President Mary Robinson that prevented her and students&#x27; union members from going to prison.

==Political career and campaigns==
Bacik contested the Seanad Éireann elections in 1997 and 2002 as an independent candidate for the Dublin University constituency but was not successful.

She ran as a Labour Party candidate at the 2004 election to the European Parliament in the Dublin constituency. She ran with sitting MEP Proinsias De Rossa, who was also the party president, on the same ticket. She polled 40,707 first preference votes (9.6%) but was not elected.

In 2004, her book &quot;Kicking and Screaming: Dragging Ireland into the 21st Century&quot;, was published by O&#x27;Brien Press.

In 2007, she contested the Seanad Éireann elections for the third time in the Dublin University constituency, and was elected to the third seat, behind sitting Independent senators Shane Ross and David Norris. She initially sat as an Independent senator.

In February 2009, Bacik was included in an &#x27;All Star Women&#x27;s Cabinet&#x27; in the &quot;Irish Independent&quot;. In March 2009, Bacik confirmed claims made on a TV programme that she had taken two voluntary pay cuts of 10% in addition to a pension levy. In June 2009, Bacik was the Labour Party candidate for the Dublin Central by-election she came in third with 17% of the first preference votes. She joined the Labour Party group in the Seanad in September 2009, and became Labour Party Seanad spokesperson for both Justice and Arts, Sports and Tourism. In November 2009, a feature by Mary Kenny of the &quot;Irish Independent&quot; included Bacik in a list of women who &quot;well deserved their iconic status.&quot;
In May 2010, she sought Labour&#x27;s nomination to contest the next election in the Dublin South-East constituency but was not selected. In December 2010, she was added to the ticket as the second candidate beside Labour Party leader, Eamon Gilmore, in the Dún Laoghaire constituency for the 2011 general election. Gilmore topped the poll, with Bacik receiving 10.1% of first preference votes but she was not elected. She was re-elected to Seanad Éireann at the subsequent election, after which she became Deputy leader of the Seanad. She held her seat in the Seanad in 2016 and in 2020.

On 27 April 2021, after the resignation of Eoghan Murphy from his Dáil seat in Dublin Bay South, Bacik announced her intention to stand in the upcoming by-election. She campaigned with an emphasis on providing affordable housing, as well as improving healthcare and childcare, tackling climate change, and achieving &quot;a true republic in which church and state are separated&quot;. During the campaign, she described herself as having &quot;more bills passed into law than any other Senator, on issues such as workers&#x27; conditions, women&#x27;s health rights, and LGBT equality&quot;. Bacik also campaigned on increasing the number of sports amenities for children in the area, calling for unused Defence Forces football fields at the Cathal Brugha Barracks to be freed up for local sports, with the suggestion rejected by Fine Gael Minister for Defence Simon Coveney. Fine Gael complained to RTÉ after she featured prominently on &quot;National Treasures&quot;, a prime-time TV show broadcast by RTÉ during the campaign. RTÉ has strict rules about fair coverage of candidates during campaigns. The national broadcaster blamed an &quot;inadvertent error&quot; for the programme being shown three days before the election. A steering group within the broadcaster told Fine Gael that &quot;the broadcast should not have happened.&quot; Consequentially, RTÉ had to show a special report on the by-election on &quot;Prime Time&quot; to &quot;ensure fair coverage is given to all candidates&quot;.

Bacik won this election, receiving 8,131 (30.2%) first-preference votes. It was her fourth attempt as a Labour candidate, and she expressed her delight at the success at the count centre in the RDS. Following the election, she was described by the &quot;Irish Times&quot; as &quot;a formidable activist and public intellectual&quot; and that Fine Gael&#x27;s perceived antipathy towards their former TD, Kate O&#x27;Connell, may have contributed to the surge in support to Bacik from women voters. The newspaper claimed that her election was &quot;a long overdue morale boost&quot; for Labour.

In August 2021, Bacik apologised for attending Katherine Zappone&#x27;s controversial party in the Merrion Hotel, Dublin, in July of that year. She stated that she believed that it took place within existing COVID-19 pandemic restrictions.

In March 2022, she confirmed she would run to succeed Alan Kelly as Labour Party leader. Kelly stated that he believed that Bacik would succeed him. On 24 March 2022 she was confirmed as Labour Party leader unopposed at a party conference in Dublin. In a speech, she said she would focus on the rising cost of living and the serious and global problems facing the country. Bacik pledged that Labour would fight the next election as a &quot;standalone party&quot; rather than joining any left-wing alliance.

At the 2024 general election, Bacik was re-elected to the Dáil.

== Political views ==
Bacik&#x27;s policies have been described as liberal and social democratic; In 2022, Bacik described herself as a &quot;socialist, a social democrat and as centre-left. That means that I stand for constructive politics, of seeking to deliver change by going into government&quot;.

===Social and domestic policy===
Since 2007 Bacik has spoken in support of the legalisation of cannabis. She has proposed that cannabis should be sold under license at music festivals in Ireland such as Electric Picnic, calling for a &quot;rational&quot; approach to drugs.

In May 2019, following the results of the Mother and Baby Homes Commission of Investigation which found that hundreds of children had died while in the care of homes run by the Catholic Church, Bacik called for the government to take financial action against the religious orders involved.

In 2020, she sponsored legislation in the Seanad to grant Irish citizenship to any child born on the island of Ireland, which resulted in the Irish citizenship laws being changed in March 2021.

In December 2020, she called for foreign frontline medical workers fighting against the COVID-19 pandemic in Ireland to be rewarded with fast-tracked citizenship applications, as has been done in France.

In 2022, Bacik called for a pay rise for workers and a windfall tax on energy companies, and an increase in the minimum wage.

Bacik has stated she is in favour of decriminalising sex work, though she is critical of the Nordic Model, which criminalises the purchase of sex. She has expressed support for the views of organisations like Amnesty International and the Sex Work Research Hub, which advocate for the total decriminalisation of sex work, while raising concerns about the growing exploitation in legalised systems, citing her research and discussions with those involved in the trade in Sweden. Bacik acknowledges that the term &quot;sex worker&quot; may be problematic for many survivors, but she maintains that &quot;the realities of sex work&quot; are undeniable, as described by former workers.

On economic issues, Bacik supports the redistribution of wealth through progressive taxation, including the introduction of property taxes and carbon taxes. She believes that Sinn Féin’s refusal to support a property tax is populist and contradictory to their left-wing stance. Bacik has long advocated for an inclusive, red-green alliance focused on environmental and economic equality, which she views as the key to addressing the climate emergency.

===Foreign policy===
Bacik is a supporter of Palestine, and has expressed a desire to see Irish support for Palestine &quot;reflected in government policies&quot;. In September 2006, Bacik was one of the 61 Irish academic signatories of a letter published in &quot;The Irish Times&quot; calling for an academic boycott of the state of Israel. In January 2009, she declared that she wants Ireland to break off diplomatic relations with Israel and in February 2009 called for a general boycott of Israeli goods. After the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip in 2023, Bacik called for a ceasefire in an &quot;Irish Independent&quot; opinion piece, and said the position of Israeli ambassador to Ireland, Dana Erlich, &quot;should now be under question&quot; following comments Erlich made.

In 2021 Bacik commended the Irish government for its response to Russian invasion of Ukraine, particularly for its intake of over 20,000 refugees. She has also called for stronger actions at the EU and UN levels, including the expulsion of the Russian ambassador, and condemned Putin’s aggressive foreign policy, drawing on her personal family history to underscore her opposition to Russian authoritarianism. 

===Housing===
In March 2023, she stated that the year&#x27;s eviction ban was intended to provide the government with breathing space to increase housing supply and that the government&#x27;s targets fell short.

==Legal work==
Bacik was appointed Reid Professor of Criminal Law, Criminology and Penology at Trinity College Dublin (TCD) Law School in 1996. She taught courses in criminal law; criminology and penology; and feminist theory and law at Trinity. Her research interests include criminal law and criminology, constitutional law, feminist theories and law, human rights and equality issues in law. Bacik was a made a Fellow of Trinity College Dublin in 2005. In 2022 she resigned her role as associate professor in the university. However, as of May 2024 she continues to be listed as Reid Professor and is currently designated as an adjunct assistant professor on the Trinity College website.

Bacik has also practiced as a barrister. In 2006, she acted as junior counsel in &quot;Zappone v. Revenue Commissioners&quot;, the unsuccessful High Court case brought by Katherine Zappone and Ann Louise Gilligan over the non-recognition of their Canadian same-sex marriage by the Revenue Commissioners.

==Awards==
In 2019, Bacik was chosen by the Irish Women Lawyers Association as Irish Woman Lawyer of the Year. In 2019, she was selected as &quot;Irish Tatler&#x27;s&quot; &#x27;Woman of the Year.&#x27;

==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==
*Ivana Bacik&#x27;s page on Labour Party website

resent</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6097927" start="0" end="21" title="Ivana Bacik" label="Ivana Catherine Bacik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508524" start="82" end="88" title="Leader of the Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="96" end="108" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="135" end="147" title="Teachta Dála" label="Teachta Dála"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310822" start="161" end="177" title="Dublin Bay South (Dáil constituency)" label="Dublin Bay South"/>
<link wikidata="Q106819343" start="207" end="233" title="2021 Dublin Bay South by-election" label="by-election on 9 July 2021"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="262" end="302" title="Labour Party (Ireland)#Seanad leader" label="Leader of the Labour Party in the Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="328" end="335" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895348" start="344" end="361" title="Dublin University (constituency)" label="Dublin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508580" start="419" end="446" title="Leader of the Seanad" label="Deputy leader of the Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="502" end="517" title="Abortion-rights movements" label="abortion rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075351" start="622" end="635" title="Charles Bacik" label="Charles Bacik"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="718" end="727" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057963" start="777" end="794" title="Waterford Crystal" label="Waterford Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="850" end="862" title="County Clare" label="County Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242129" start="1004" end="1027" title="Crookstown, County Cork" label="Crookstown, County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="1050" end="1059" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778182" start="1112" end="1140" title="Cork Institute of Technology" label="Cork Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224128" start="1185" end="1194" title="Cloughduv" label="Cloughduv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191792" start="1361" end="1378" title="Alexandra College" label="Alexandra College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566830" start="1382" end="1398" title="Milltown, Dublin" label="Milltown, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533398" start="1418" end="1423" title="sizar" label="sizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="1431" end="1453" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="1466" end="1471" title="Bachelor of Laws" label="LL.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q754848" start="1492" end="1497" title="Master of Laws" label="LL.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="1507" end="1533" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q649057" start="1596" end="1614" title="Portobello, Dublin" label="Portobello, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842702" start="1672" end="1715" title="Trinity College Dublin Students&amp;#x27; Union" label="Trinity College Dublin Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886728" start="1815" end="1843" title="Union of Students in Ireland" label="Union of Students in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="2265" end="2278" title="anti-abortion" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="2684" end="2690" title="Garda_Síochána" label="Gardaí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="3176" end="3190" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769254" start="3224" end="3235" title="Independent politician (Ireland)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895348" start="3254" end="3271" title="Dublin University (constituency)" label="Dublin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="3323" end="3335" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020923" start="3353" end="3366" title="2004 European Parliament election in Ireland" label="2004 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="3374" end="3393" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310805" start="3401" end="3420" title="Dublin (European Parliament constituency)" label="Dublin constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="3443" end="3446" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399396" start="3447" end="3465" title="Proinsias De Rossa" label="Proinsias De Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="3749" end="3763" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276876" start="3903" end="3913" title="Shane Ross" label="Shane Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175932" start="3918" end="3930" title="David Norris (politician)" label="David Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310841" start="4301" end="4327" title="2009 Dublin Central by-election" label="Dublin Central by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310970" start="4793" end="4810" title="Dublin South-East (Dáil constituency)" label="Dublin South-East"/>
<link wikidata="Q982225" start="4944" end="4957" title="Eamon Gilmore" label="Eamon Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320426" start="4966" end="4979" title="Dún Laoghaire (Dáil constituency)" label="Dún Laoghaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q767723" start="5001" end="5022" title="2011 Irish general election" label="2011 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="5149" end="5163" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381683" start="5341" end="5354" title="Eoghan Murphy" label="Eoghan Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="5364" end="5368" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310822" start="5377" end="5393" title="Dublin Bay South (Dáil constituency)" label="Dublin Bay South"/>
<link wikidata="Q106819343" start="5437" end="5461" title="2021 Dublin Bay South by-election" label="the upcoming by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="5584" end="5598" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q327063" start="6002" end="6016" title="Defence Forces (Ireland)" label="Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052024" start="6040" end="6062" title="Cathal Brugha Barracks" label="Cathal Brugha Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="6128" end="6137" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865781" start="6138" end="6158" title="Minister for Defence (Ireland)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670096" start="6159" end="6172" title="Simon Coveney" label="Simon Coveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="7053" end="7064" title="Irish Times" label="Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q23006334" start="7203" end="7222" title="Kate O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Kate O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376580" start="7441" end="7458" title="Katherine Zappone" label="Katherine Zappone"/>
<link wikidata="Q108147237" start="7466" end="7485" title="Merrion Hotel controversy" label="controversial party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820312" start="7493" end="7506" title="Merrion Hotel" label="Merrion Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q111940246" start="7674" end="7677" title="2022 Labour Party leadership election (Ireland)" label="run"/>
<link wikidata="Q86345233" start="8150" end="8171" title="2024 Irish general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="8287" end="8304" title="social democratic" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="8350" end="8359" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="8363" end="8378" title="social democrat" label="social democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="8386" end="8397" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135494" start="8591" end="8615" title="Legality of cannabis" label="legalisation of cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357459" start="8715" end="8730" title="Electric Picnic" label="Electric Picnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30644797" start="8829" end="8878" title="Mother and Baby Homes Commission of Investigation" label="Mother and Baby Homes Commission of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q87186365" start="9361" end="9389" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the Republic of Ireland" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q228177" start="9533" end="9545" title="windfall profits tax" label="windfall tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q26836223" start="9698" end="9710" title="Nordic model approach to prostitution" label="Nordic Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="9814" end="9835" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q562307" start="10609" end="10627" title="red-green alliance" label="red-green alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="11006" end="11021" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="11076" end="11082" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123036458" start="11261" end="11303" title="Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip (2023–present)" label="Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip in 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590833" start="11346" end="11363" title="Irish Independent" label="Irish Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080805" start="11410" end="11439" title="Ireland–Israel relations" label="Israeli ambassador to Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123238527" start="11441" end="11452" title="Dana Erlich" label="Dana Erlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="11593" end="11620" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q126415689" start="12188" end="12244" title="Reid Professor of Criminal Law, Criminology and Penology" label="Reid Professor of Criminal Law, Criminology and Penology"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="12248" end="12270" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432490" start="12277" end="12287" title="School of Law (Trinity College Dublin)" label="Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="12567" end="12573" title="Fellow" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313526" start="12908" end="12922" title="Junior barrister" label="junior counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070429" start="12932" end="12964" title="Zappone v. Revenue Commissioners" label="Zappone v. Revenue Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q671721" start="12989" end="12999" title="High Court (Ireland)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376580" start="13016" end="13033" title="Katherine Zappone" label="Katherine Zappone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957898" start="13038" end="13057" title="Ann Louise Gilligan" label="Ann Louise Gilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772277" start="13101" end="13118" title="Same-sex marriage in the Republic of Ireland" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317995" start="13126" end="13147" title="Revenue Commissioners" label="Revenue Commissioners"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577812" wikidata="Q44934" url="?curid=577812" title="Venantius Fortunatus">
<text>Venantius Honorius Clementianus Fortunatus ( 530 600/609 AD; ), known as Saint Venantius Fortunatus (, ), was a Latin poet and hymnographer in the Merovingian Court, and a bishop of the Early Church who has been venerated since the Middle Ages.

==Life==
Venantius Fortunatus was born between 530 and 540 at Duplavis (or Duplavilis), near Treviso in Veneto, Italy. He grew up during the Roman reconquest of Italy, but there is controversy concerning as to where Fortunatus spent his childhood. Some historians, such as D. Tardi, suggest that Fortunatus&#x27; family moved to Aquileia because of the turbulent political situation in Treviso after the death of King Theoderic. This theory is suggested because there is evidence of Fortunatus speaking warmly about one of the bishops there, Bishop Paul of Aquileia. Other scholars, such as Judith George, suggest that his family never moved to Aquileia, pointing out that the poet speaks more of Duplavis than any other place regarding his childhood. Sometime in the 550s or 60s, he travelled to Ravenna to study. While there, he was given a classical education, in the Roman style. His later work shows familiarity with not only classical Latin poets such as Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Statius, and Martial, but also Christian poets, including Arator, Claudian, and Coelius Sedulius, and bears their influence. In addition, Fortunatus likely had some knowledge of the Greek language and the classical Greek writers and philosophers, as he makes reference to them and Greek words at times throughout his poetry and prose.

Fortunatus eventually moved to Metz in the spring of 566, probably with the specific intention of becoming a poet at the Merovingian Court. It was there his successful career really began. To reach Metz, he took a winding route, passing through four modern countries: Italy, Austria, Germany and France. Fortunatus himself explains two entirely different reasons for this route. Describing the first reason, he &quot;portrays himself in the guise of a wandering minstrel, his journey just one in a series of adventures.&quot; The second reason is more religious, explaining in his &quot;Vita S. Martini&quot; that he took this route to worship at the shrine of St Martin in Tours, visiting other shrines as he went.

Fortunatus&#x27; arrival in Metz coincides with the marriage of King Sigibert and Queen Brunhild, and at the ceremony he performed a celebration poem for the entire court. After this incident, Fortunatus had many noble patrons, as well as bishops, who wished him to write poetry for them. About a year after he arrived in Metz, Fortunatus travelled to the court of King Charibert, Sigibert&#x27;s brother, in Paris, and stayed there until Charibert&#x27;s death in 567 or 568. Due to danger presented by King Chilperic, brother of Sigibert and Charibert, Fortunatus had to move south to Tours, returning to Sigibert&#x27;s lands. From there, he ventured to Poitiers where he met Radegund. They became close friends, and Fortunatus wrote many poems in her honour and in support of her political campaigns. Fortunatus had made another great friendship in Tours and Poitiers: with Gregory of Tours, who was installed as Bishop of Tours in 573, from whom Fortunatus also received patronage. In 580, Fortunatus wrote a poem defending Gregory against treasonous charges placed upon him at Chilperic&#x27;s court. After the death of Sigibert, and that of Chilperic, Fortunatus moved to Childebert&#x27;s court in Poitiers. Childebert was Sigibert&#x27;s son. Sometime around 576, he was ordained into the church. He stayed there until around the year 599-600, when he was appointed Bishop of Poitiers, to replace Plato, Bishop of Poitiers. Fortunatus died in the early 7th century. He was called a saint after his death, but was never formally canonized.

==Works==
Fortunatus is best known for two poems that have become part of the liturgy of the Catholic Church, the &quot;Pange lingua gloriosi proelium certaminis&quot; (&quot;Sing, O tongue, of the glorious struggle&quot;), a hymn that later inspired St Thomas Aquinas&#x27;s &quot;Pange Lingua Gloriosi Corporis Mysterium&quot;. He also wrote &quot;Vexilla Regis prodeunt&quot; (&quot;The royal banners forward go&quot;), which is sung at Vespers during Holy Week. This poem was written in honour of a large piece of the True Cross, which explains its association also with the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross. The relic had been sent from the Byzantine Emperor Justin II to Queen Radegund of the Franks, who after the death of her husband Chlotar I had founded a monastery in Poitiers. The Municipal Library in Poitiers houses an 11th-century manuscript on the life of Radegunde, copied from a 6th-century account by Fortunatus.

Venantius Fortunatus wrote eleven surviving books of poetry in Latin in a diverse group of genres including epitaphs, panegyrics, georgics, consolations, and religious poems. A major genre of Fortunatus&#x27; poetry is the panegyric. He wrote four major panegyrics to four Merovingian Kings: Sigibert and Brunhild, Charibert, Chilperic and Childebert II and Brunhild. The first was also his debut into the Merovingian Court in Gaul, at Metz, in honour of the marriage of Sigibert and Brunhild. It is a fanciful poem, telling the story of how the bride and groom were brought together by Cupid, recalling the style of the classical Latin poets. The second, for Charibert, celebrates his rule, and gives the impression that this Frankish king was descended from and had succeeded the Roman kings in an unbroken line and hence served to support the legitimacy of his rule. The third, addressed to King Chilperic, is full of controversy. Chilperic was known as a headstrong and hot-tempered ruler, however in this panegyric, Fortunatus depicts him as being gracious, compassionate and merciful, never making judgements too quickly, and even praises the king&#x27;s poetry. The poem was given on the occasion of the trial for treason of Gregory of Tours, Fortunatus&#x27; patron and friend. Some scholars have suggested that Fortunatus is simply trying to appease a new patron (Chilperic) because of Gregory&#x27;s uncertain future. However, other scholars, such as Brennan and George, disagree, postulating that Fortunatus was evoking more of a correctional and moralistic poem towards Chilperic, reminding him how the ideal king ruled, and gently suggesting that he act in that way as well. Thus, the poem becomes a plea for his friend Gregory of Tours, while avoiding an open disagreement with the king.

Fortunatus wrote panegyrics and other types of poems, including praise, eulogies, personal poems to bishops and friends alike, consolations and poems in support of political issues, particularly those presented by his friends Gregory of Tours and Radegunde. His eleven books of poetry contain his surviving poems, all ordered chronologically and by importance of subject. For instance, a poem about God will come before the panegyric to a king, which will come before a eulogy to a bishop. This collection of poems is the main primary source for writing about his life.

His verse is important in the development of later Latin literature, largely because he wrote at a time when Latin prosody was moving away from the quantitative verse of classical Latin and towards the accentual meters of medieval Latin. His style sometimes suggests the influence of Hiberno-Latin, in learned Greek coinages that occasionally appear in his poems.

Fortunatus&#x27; other major work was &quot;Vita S. Martini&quot; It is a long narrative poem, reminiscent of the classical epics of Greek and Roman cultures but replete with Christian references and allusions, depicting the life of Saint Martin.
He also wrote a verse hagiography of his patron Queen Radegund (continued by the nun Baudovinia).

His hymns are used extensively in the &quot;Hymnal 1982&quot; of the Episcopal Church. One of his hymns was set to music by the modern composer Randall Giles. Another hymn as translated from the Latin (Welcome, happy morning! age to age shall say) celebrates Easter with music by Sir Arthur Sullivan.

==Impact and contributions==
In his time, Fortunatus filled a great social desire for Latin poetry. He was one of the most prominent poets at this point, and had many contracts, commissions and correspondences with kings, bishops and noblemen and women from the time he arrived in Gaul until his death. He used his poetry to advance in society, to promote political ideas he supported, usually conceived of by Radegunde or by Gregory, and to pass on personal thoughts and communications. He was a master wordsmith and because of his promotion of the church, as well as the Roman tendencies of the Frankish royalty, he remained in favour with most of his acquaintances throughout his lifetime.

From the point of view of the present day, Fortunatus provides another window into the world of the Merovingian court. For much of this period, the only reliable source on the subject is Gregory of Tours&#x27; history, but as it is well known that Gregory had his own political and personal agendas, the objectivity of his accounts can sometimes come into question. While Fortunatus tends to embellish or even mock the happenings and truth of the situations he writes about, there is an element of inferred truth, whether it is his classical embellishments on the marriage panegyric for Sigibert, or his recalling the traits of the ideal ruler to correct a bad king. With this, he supplies an alternate view of everything going on at court, a view which at times differs from Gregory&#x27;s account.

His works have been set to music in settings which themselves have become prominent artworks. Anton Bruckner composed a motet based on &quot;Vexilla Regis&quot;, and Knut Nystedt a choral setting of &quot;O Crux Splendidior&quot;.

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Brennan, Brian. &quot;The career of Venantius Fortunatus&quot;, &quot;Traditio&quot;, Vol 41 (1985), 49–78.
* Brennan Brian. &quot;The image of Frankish Kings in the poetry of Venantius Fortunatus&quot;, &quot;Journal of Medieval History&quot; Vol. 3 (March 1984). 
* Brennan Brian. &quot;The image of the Merovingian Bishop in the poetry of Venantius Fortunatus&quot;, Journal of Medieval History Vol 6 (June 1992). 
* George, J. &quot;Venantius Fortunatus: Personal and Political Poems&quot;. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1995.
* George, J. &quot;Venantius Fortunatus: A Latin Poet in Merovingian Gaul.&quot; Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992.
* Heikkinen, Seppo. &quot;The Poetry of Venantius Fortunatus: The Twilight of Roman Metre,&quot; in Maria Gourdouba, Leena Pietilä-Castrén &amp; Esko Tikkala (edd), &quot;The Eastern Mediterranean in the Late Antique and Early Byzantine Periods&quot; (Helsinki, 2004) (Papers and Monographs of the Finnish Institute at Athens, IX),
* Reydellet, M. &quot;Venance Fortunat, Poèmes&quot;, 3 vols., Collection Budé, 1994–2004.
* Roberts, Michael. &quot;The Humblest Sparrow: The Poetry of Venantius Fortunatus&quot;. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan, 2009. 
* Roberts, Michael, ed. and trans., &quot;Venantius Fortunatus Poems.&quot; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017. 
*&quot;Venantius Fortunatus&quot;, in &quot;The Saints: A Concise Biographical Dictionary&quot; (1958), reprint, n.d., New York: Guild Press.

== External links ==
* MGH Auctores antiquissimi IV.1 - Friedrich Leo 1881 Venanti Honori Clementiani Fortunati - Presbyteri Italici, Opera Poetica; digitalized (Latin)
* MGH Auctores antiquissimi IV.2 - Bruno Krusch 1885 Venanti Honori Clementiani Fortunati - Presbyteri Italici, Opera Pedestria; digitalized (Latin)
* &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;: St. Venantius Fortunatus
* Poems at The Latin Library (Latin)
* orbilat.com Pange Lingua (Latin)
* 
* Review by William E. Klingshirn, The Catholic University of America - Judith W. George, &quot;Venantius Fortunatus: A Latin Poet in Merovingian Gaul&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992. Pp. xiii + 234. 
* PDF of Proprium Dioeceos Victoriensis Venetorum - Propers for the Mass on the Feast of St. Venantius, pp. 3–6 (Latin)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44934" start="0" end="42" title="Venantius Fortunatus" label="Venantius Honorius Clementianus Fortunatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44934" start="73" end="99" title="Venantius Fortunatus" label="Saint Venantius Fortunatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424456" start="127" end="139" title="hymnographer" label="hymnographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="147" end="158" title="Merovingian" label="Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="172" end="178" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="186" end="198" title="Early Church" label="Early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47428" start="308" end="332" title="Valdobbiadene" label="Duplavis (or Duplavilis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475" start="339" end="346" title="Treviso" label="Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="350" end="356" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q477973" start="387" end="412" title="Gothic War (535–554)" label="Roman reconquest of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="519" end="527" title="D. Tardi" label="D. Tardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53216" start="575" end="583" title="Aquileia" label="Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="659" end="673" title="Theoderic the Great" label="King Theoderic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="795" end="811" title="Paul of Aquileia" label="Paul of Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="837" end="850" title="Judith George" label="Judith George"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="1043" end="1050" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153503" start="1089" end="1108" title="Education in Ancient Rome" label="classical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1207" end="1213" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="1215" end="1221" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="1223" end="1227" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="1229" end="1236" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="1242" end="1249" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="1260" end="1269" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q39454" start="1287" end="1293" title="Arator" label="Arator"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="1295" end="1303" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q538564" start="1309" end="1325" title="Coelius Sedulius" label="Coelius Sedulius"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="1596" end="1600" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q309946" start="2346" end="2359" title="Sigebert I" label="King Sigibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q230639" start="2364" end="2378" title="Brunhilda of Austrasia" label="Queen Brunhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q243453" start="2647" end="2661" title="Charibert I" label="King Charibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q243118" start="2786" end="2800" title="Chilperic I" label="King Chilperic"/>
<link wikidata="Q288" start="2869" end="2874" title="Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616" start="2939" end="2947" title="Poitiers" label="Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q236974" start="2961" end="2969" title="Radegund" label="Radegund"/>
<link wikidata="Q67841" start="3160" end="3176" title="Gregory of Tours" label="Gregory of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q312606" start="3461" end="3471" title="Childebert II" label="Childebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="3909" end="3916" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3924" end="3939" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739386" start="3951" end="3992" title="Pange lingua gloriosi proelium certaminis" label="Pange lingua gloriosi proelium certaminis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="4085" end="4099" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q371617" start="4113" end="4153" title="Pange Lingua Gloriosi Corporis Mysterium" label="Pange Lingua Gloriosi Corporis Mysterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q88812" start="4181" end="4203" title="Vexilla Regis" label="Vexilla Regis prodeunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q827135" start="4271" end="4278" title="Vespers" label="Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="4286" end="4295" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="4353" end="4363" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4423" end="4451" title="Exaltation of the Holy Cross#September 14" label="Exaltation of the Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4486" end="4503" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183813" start="4504" end="4513" title="Justin II" label="Justin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q236974" start="4523" end="4531" title="Radegund" label="Radegund"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="4539" end="4545" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q28984" start="4582" end="4591" title="Chlotar I" label="Chlotar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="4606" end="4615" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616" start="4619" end="4627" title="Poitiers" label="Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="4881" end="4888" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q591055" start="4891" end="4900" title="panegyric" label="panegyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="6975" end="6978" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="7198" end="7214" title="Latin literature" label="Latin literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="7262" end="7269" title="Meter (poetry)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="7317" end="7332" title="classical Latin" label="classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="7369" end="7383" title="medieval Latin" label="medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215876" start="7431" end="7444" title="Hiberno-Latin" label="Hiberno-Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="7457" end="7462" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="7781" end="7792" title="hagiography" label="hagiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873443" start="7844" end="7854" title="Baudovinia" label="Baudovinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741206" start="7902" end="7913" title="Hymnal 1982" label="Hymnal 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="7927" end="7943" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291544" start="8002" end="8015" title="Randall Giles" label="Randall Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="8142" end="8157" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Arthur Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496542" start="8246" end="8258" title="Latin poetry" label="Latin poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="9749" end="9763" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164675" start="9773" end="9780" title="Vexilla regis (Bruckner)" label="a motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q515696" start="9821" end="9833" title="Knut Nystedt" label="Knut Nystedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246422" start="10973" end="10988" title="Collection Budé" label="Collection Budé"/>
<link wikidata="Q570837" start="11801" end="11818" title="The Latin Library" label="The Latin Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577815" wikidata="Q15525002" url="?curid=577815" title="Horace Cutler">
<text>Sir Horace Walter Cutler (28 July 1912 – 2 March 1997) was a British Conservative politician who served as leader of the Greater London Council from 1977 to 1981. He was noted for his showmanship and flair for publicity, and some of his right-wing economic views were seen as forerunners of Thatcherism.

==Early life==
Cutler was born in Tottenham, one of seven children born to a wealthy family. He went to Harrow County School for Boys and Hereford Cathedral School, later joining his father&#x27;s building business, which he helped lead after his father&#x27;s death in 1934. He spent World War II in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve.

==Local politics==
Cutler became involved in politics due to dissatisfaction with the strictness of building laws. In 1952, he first went into politics when he was elected as a Conservative member of Harrow Borough Council, where he became Leader of the Council in 1961. He was also elected to Middlesex County Council and was its last Leader, in 1963, before it was abolished to make way for the Greater London Council.

==Greater London Council==
Cutler took one of the Harrow seats on the GLC at its first election, switching to Harrow West from 1973. He remained a member of it throughout its existence, one of only eight people to do so. His prominence at Middlesex made him well-known and he served as Deputy Leader under Sir Desmond Plummer when the Conservatives were in control from 1967. Plummer gave Cutler the Chairmanship of the Housing Committee which gave him responsibility for the GLC&#x27;s hundreds of thousands of units of council housing.

Cutler believed that local authorities had no role in housing, and instituted a scheme to allow tenants to buy their own homes at a discounted price, which later became one of the tenets of Thatcherism. He also forcibly transferred much of the GLC housing stock to the London Boroughs. Cutler was for many years a member of the Conservative Monday Club, and wrote a booklet in 1970 entitled &quot;Rents – Chaos or Commonsense?&quot; for the club.

===Leader of the GLC===
When the Conservatives lost control of the GLC in 1973 and Sir Desmond Plummer resigned as their Leader in 1974, Cutler was chosen as his successor. When he won the 1977 GLC elections he became Leader. He was sceptical of the merits of the GLC, seeing it as &quot;too big, too remote and too shadowy&quot;, and set up an inquiry under Sir Frank Marshall into its powers and existence; Marshall found enough to justify the continuation of the GLC.

Cutler wanted to extend the Jubilee line into Docklands but was refused the money by the Labour Government. Investment on the London Underground was not substantial and decisions taken during his period of office have been criticised subsequently for leading to poor infrastructure in the long term. Cutler was also noted for meddling in detailed Underground management, which London Transport Chairman Peter Masefield had to persuade him to stop. He also made a bid to host the 1988 Summer Olympics, but the national government were not supportive of this.

Horace Cutler was knighted in the 1979 Birthday Honours with the support of Margaret Thatcher, whom he had deeply admired.

Cutler was the last Conservative leader of the GLC, and the last elected leader of the party in London-wide government until Boris Johnson in 2008.

===Loss of power===
In the 1981 GLC elections, Cutler made a great deal of the fact that if Labour won, its local leader, Andrew McIntosh, was likely to be replaced by the more left-wing Ken Livingstone. He concentrated on attacking Livingstone during the campaign, saying that he wished to establish a Marxist power-base in London. Nevertheless, Labour won, and McIntosh was duly voted out in favour of Livingstone. Cutler gave up the Conservative Leadership in 1982. The Conservatives added a pledge to abolish the GLC in their next election manifesto. Cutler was not informed of this before it was published; he viewed this as a profound betrayal by Thatcher, and a permanent rift formed between the two. After the GLC was abolished in 1986, he left politics.

==Personal life==
In 1934, Cutler married Betty Martin; they had one son and divorced in 1954. In 1957, he married Christine Muthesius, with whom he had four children.

In retirement, Cutler lived in Ibiza for many years, but returned to England at the end of his life, dying at a care home in Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire, on 2 March 1997, aged 84.

==References==



==External links==
* Extract from televised debate between Sir Horace Cutler and Ken Livingstone from 1982</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15525002" start="0" end="24" title="Horace Cutler" label="Sir Horace Walter Cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="61" end="81" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="British Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476542" start="121" end="143" title="Greater London Council" label="Greater London Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q877530" start="291" end="302" title="Thatcherism" label="Thatcherism"/>
<link wikidata="Q503375" start="339" end="348" title="Tottenham" label="Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666542" start="409" end="438" title="Harrow County School for Boys" label="Harrow County School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737962" start="443" end="468" title="Hereford Cathedral School" label="Hereford Cathedral School"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="590" end="602" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="610" end="639" title="Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve" label="Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q210476" start="842" end="864" title="London Borough of Harrow" label="Harrow Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841903" start="936" end="960" title="Middlesex County Council" label="Middlesex County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476542" start="1039" end="1061" title="Greater London Council" label="Greater London Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q123112319" start="1114" end="1120" title="Harrow (electoral division)" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600609" start="1145" end="1159" title="1964 Greater London Council election" label="first election"/>
<link wikidata="Q121297001" start="1174" end="1185" title="Harrow West (electoral division)" label="Harrow West"/>
<link wikidata="Q336846" start="1370" end="1389" title="Desmond Plummer" label="Sir Desmond Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600608" start="1434" end="1438" title="1967 Greater London Council election" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="1585" end="1600" title="council housing" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163053" start="1931" end="1955" title="Conservative Monday Club" label="Conservative Monday Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600611" start="2125" end="2129" title="1973 Greater London Council election" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600612" start="2240" end="2258" title="1977 Greater London Council election" label="1977 GLC elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488190" start="2410" end="2428" title="Frank Marshall, Baron Marshall of Leeds" label="Sir Frank Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="2551" end="2563" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041" start="2569" end="2578" title="London Docklands" label="Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="2649" end="2667" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530615" start="2926" end="2941" title="Peter Masefield" label="Peter Masefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="3002" end="3022" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="3100" end="3108" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949702" start="3116" end="3137" title="1979 Birthday Honours" label="1979 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="3158" end="3175" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="3331" end="3344" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993294" start="3382" end="3400" title="1981 Greater London Council election" label="1981 GLC elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q506257" start="3477" end="3492" title="Andrew McIntosh, Baron McIntosh of Haringey" label="Andrew McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="3542" end="3557" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q52631" start="4319" end="4324" title="Ibiza" label="Ibiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854684" start="4413" end="4427" title="Gerrards Cross" label="Gerrards Cross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577817" wikidata="Q384943" url="?curid=577817" title="Lamination">
<text>Lamination is the technique/process of manufacturing a material in multiple layers, so that the composite material achieves improved strength, stability, sound insulation, appearance, or other properties from the use of the differing materials, such as plastic. A laminate is a layered object or material assembled using heat, pressure, welding, or adhesives. Various coating machines, machine presses and calendering equipment are used.

Lamination may be applied to textiles, glass, wood, or other materials. Laminating paper in plastic makes it sturdy, waterproof, and erasable. Laminating metals and electronic components may provide electrical insulation and other benefits.

== Materials ==

There are different lamination processes, depending primarily on the type or types of materials to be laminated. The materials used in laminates can be identical or different, depending on the object to be laminated, the process and the desired properties.

=== Textile ===

Laminated fabric are widely used in different fields of human activity, including medical and military. Woven fabrics (organic and inorganic based) are usually laminated by different chemical polymers to give them useful properties like chemical resistance, dust, grease, photoluminescence (glowing and other light-effects e.g. in high-visibility clothing), tear strength, stiffness, thickness, and being wind proof . Coated fabrics may be considered as a subtype of laminated fabrics. Nonwoven fabrics (e.g. fiberglass) are also often laminated. According to a 2002 source, the nonwovens fabric industry was the biggest single consumer of different polymer binding resins.

Materials used in production of coated and laminated fabrics are generally subjected to heat treatment. Thermoplastics and thermosetting plastics (e.g. formaldehyde polymers) are equally used in laminating and coating textile industry.
In 2002 primary materials used included polyvinyl acetate, acrylics, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyurethanes, and natural and synthetic rubbers. Copolymers and terpolymers were also in use.

Thin-films of plastics were in wide use as well. Materials varied from polyethylene and PVC to kapton depending on application. In automotive industry for example the PVC/acrylonitrilebutadiene-styrene (ABS) mixtures were often applied for interiors by laminating onto a polyurethane foam to give a soft-touch properties. Specialty films were used in protective clothing, .e.g. polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polyurethane etc.

=== Glass ===
Plastic film can be used to laminate either side of a sheet of glass. Vehicle windshields are commonly made as composites created by laminating a tough plastic film between two layers of glass. This is to prevent shards of glass detaching from the windshield in case it breaks.

=== Wood ===

Plywood is a common example of a laminate using the same material in each layer combined with an adhesive. Glued and laminated dimensional timber is used in the construction industry to make beams (glued laminated timber, or &quot;Glulam&quot;), in sizes larger and stronger than those that can be obtained from single pieces of wood. Another reason to laminate wooden strips into beams is quality control, as with this method each and every strip can be inspected before it becomes part of a highly stressed component.

Examples of laminate materials include melamine adhesive countertop surfacing and plywood. Decorative laminates and some modern millwork components are produced with decorative papers with a layer of overlay on top of the decorative paper, set before pressing them with thermoprocessing into high-pressure decorative laminates (HPDL). A new type of HPDL is produced using real wood veneer or multilaminar veneer as top surface. High-pressure laminates consists of laminates &quot;molded and cured at pressures not lower than 1,000 lb per sq in.(70 kg per cm2) and more commonly in the range of 1,200 to 2,000 lb per sq in. (84 to 140 kg per cm2). Meanwhile, low pressure laminate is defined as &quot;a plastic laminate molded and cured at pressures in general of 400 pounds per square inch (approximately 27 atmospheres or 2.8 × 106 pascals).

=== Paper ===

Corrugated fiberboard boxes are examples of laminated structures, where an inner core provides rigidity and strength, and the outer layers provide a smooth surface. A starch-based adhesive is usually used.

Laminating paper products, such as photographs, can prevent them from becoming creased, faded, water damaged, wrinkled, stained, smudged, abraded, or marked by grease or fingerprints. Photo identification cards and credit cards are almost always laminated with plastic film. Boxes and other containers may be laminated using heat seal layers, extrusion coatings, pressure sensitive adhesives, UV coating, etc.

Lamination is also used in sculpture using wood or resin. An example of an artist who used lamination in his work is the American Floyd Shaman.

Laminates can be used to add properties to a surface, usually printed paper, that would not have them otherwise, such as with the use of lamination paper. Sheets of vinyl impregnated with ferro-magnetic material can allow portable printed images to bond to magnets, such as for a custom bulletin board or a visual presentation. Specially surfaced plastic sheets can be laminated over a printed image to allow them to be safely written upon, such as with dry erase markers or chalk. Multiple translucent printed images may be laminated in layers to achieve certain visual effects or to hold holographic images. Printing businesses that do commercial lamination keep a variety of laminates on hand, as the process for bonding different types is generally similar when working with thin materials.

Paper is normally laminated on particle or fiberboards giving a good-looking and resistant surface for use as furniture, decoration panels and flooring.

Paper laminations are also used in packaging. For example, juiceboxes are fabricated from liquid packaging board which is usually six layers of paper, polyethylene, and aluminum foil. Paper is used in the lamination to shape the product and give the juicebox an extra source of strength.

The base is most often particle- or fiberboards, then some layers of absorbent kraft paper. The last layers are a &quot;decor paper&quot; covered with an &quot;overlay&quot;. The lamination papers are covered with an inert resin, often melamine, which is cured to form a hard composite with the structure of paper. The laminates may also have a on the back side of &quot;laminating kraft&quot; to compensate for the tension created by the top side lamination. Cheaper particle boards may have only a lining of laminating kraft to give surface washability and resistance to wear.

The &quot;decor paper&quot; can also be processed under heat and low/high pressure to create a melamine laminated sheet, that has several applications. The absorbent kraft paper is a normal kraft paper with controlled absorbency, which means a high degree of porosity. It is made of clean low kappa hardwood kraft with good uniformity. The grammage is 80 - 120 g/m2 and normally 2-4 plies are used. The decor paper is the most critical of the lamination papers as it gives the visual appearance of the laminate. The impregnation resin and cellulose have about the same refraction index which means that the cellulose fibers of the paper appear as a shade and only the dyestuffs and pigments are visible. Due to this the decor paper demands extreme cleanness and is produced only on small paper machines with grammage 50 - 150 g/m2. The overlay paper have grammage of 18 – 50 m2 and is made of pure cellulose, thus it must be made of well delignified pulp. It becomes transparent after impregnation letting the appearance of the decor paper come through. The laminating kraft have a grammage of 70 - 150 g/m2 and is a smooth dense kraft paper.

=== Metal ===

Electrical equipment such as transformers and motors usually use an electrical steel laminate coatings to form the core of the coils used to produce magnetic fields. The thin lamination reduces the power loss due to eddy currents. Fiber metal laminate is an example of thin metal laminated by, a glass fiber-reinforced and epoxy-glued sheets.

=== Microelectronics ===

Lamination is widely used in production of electronic components such as PV solar cells.

== Film types ==

Laminate plastic film is generally categorized into these five categories:

* Standard thermal laminating films
* Low-temperature thermal laminating films
* Heat set (or heat-assisted) laminating films
* Pressure-sensitive films
* Liquid laminate

== Laminators ==
A laminator is a device which laminates pieces or rolls of paper or card stock, common in offices, schools, and homes.

=== Pouch ===

A pouch laminator uses a plastic pouch that is usually sealed on one edge. The inside of the lamination pouch is coated with a heat-activated film that adheres to the product being laminated as it runs through the laminator. The substrate side of the board contains a heat-activated adhesive that bonds the print to the substrate. This can be any of a number of board products or another sheet of laminate. The pouch containing the print, laminate, and substrate is passed through a set of heated rollers under pressure, ensuring that all adhesive layers bond to one another.

Pouch laminators are designed for moderate use in the office or home. For continuous, large-volume lamination projects, a roll laminator performs more efficiently.

Pouches can be bought with different thicknesses in micrometres. Standard home or office machines normally use 80–250 micrometre pouches, depending on the quality of the machine. The thicker the pouch, the higher the cost. Pouches can also measured in mil, which equals one thousandth of an inch. The most common pouch thicknesses are 3, 5, 7 and 10 mil (76, 127, 178 and 254 μm).

Certain pouches such as butterfly pouches can be used with a pouch laminator to form ID cards. Butterfly pouches are available with magnetic stripes embedded.

Many pouch laminators require the use of a carrier. A carrier holds the pouch as it is run through the laminator. This helps prevent the hot glue, some of which leaks from the sides of the pouches during the process, from gumming up the rollers. The carrier prevents the rollers from getting sticky, which helps to prevent the lamination pouch from wrapping around the rollers inside the laminator.

Many newer laminators claim that they can be used without a carrier. However the use of carriers will extend the laminator&#x27;s life.

=== Heated roll ===
A heated roll laminator uses heated rollers to melt glue extruded onto lamination film. This film is in turn applied to a substrate such as paper or card using pressure rollers. The primary purpose of laminating with such a machine is to embellish or protect printed documents or images. Heated roll laminators can vary in size from handheld or desktop pouch laminators to industrial sized machines. Such industrial laminators are primarily used for high quantity/quality output by printers or print finishers.

Such laminators are used to apply varying thicknesses of lamination film onto substrates such as paper or fabrics. The main advantage of the use of heated roll laminators is speed. Heated laminators use heated rollers or heated shoes to melt the glue which is applied to lamination film. The process of heating the glue prior to applying the film to a substrate allows for a faster application of the film. The laminates and adhesives used are generally cheaper to manufacture than cold roll laminates, often as much as half the cost depending on the comparison made. As the materials are non-adhesive until exposed to heat, they are much easier to handle. The glue is solid at room temperature, so lamination of this type is less likely to shift or warp after its application than pressure activated laminates, which rely on a highly viscous, adhesive fluid.

Roll laminators typically use two rolls to complete the lamination process, with one roll being on top and the other roll on the bottom. These rolls slide onto metal bars, known as mandrels, which are then placed in the machine and feed through it. In the United States, the most common core size found on lamination film is one inch (25- to 27-inch-wide film). Larger format laminators use a larger core, often 2 to 3 inches in diameter. Film is usually available in 1.5, 3, 5, 7, and 10 mil thicknesses. The higher the number, the thicker the film. A mil is one thousandth of an inch (.001&quot;).

Printers or print finishers often use industrial heated roll laminators to laminate such things as paperback book covers, magazine covers, posters, cards and postcards, in-shop displays as well as other applications.

=== Cold roll ===

Cold roll laminators use a plastic film which is coated with an adhesive and glossy backing which does not adhere to the glue. When the glossy backing is removed, the adhesive is exposed, which then sticks directly onto the item which needs to be laminated. This method, apart from having the obvious benefit of not requiring expensive equipment, is also suitable for those items which would be damaged by heat. Cold laminators range from simple two roller, hand-crank machines up to large and complex motor-driven machines with high precision rollers, adjustable roller pressure, and other advanced features.

Cold lamination increased in popularity with the rise of wide-format inkjet printers, which often used inks and papers incompatible with hot lamination. A large percentage of cold laminate for use in the print industry is PVC, although a wide range of other materials are available. Cold laminating processes are also used outside of the print industry, for example, coating sheet glass or stainless steel with protective films.

Cold roll laminators are also used for laying down adhesive films in the sign-making industry, for example mounting a large print onto a board. A practiced operator can apply a large adhesive sheet in a fraction of the time it takes to do so by hand.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Calender

== References ==
== External links ==

* Choosing the Right Type of Laminating Pouch</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q384943" start="0" end="10" title="Lamination" label="Lamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="55" end="63" title="Raw material" label="material"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="96" end="114" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q240553" start="133" end="141" title="strength of materials" label="strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q589260" start="154" end="170" title="sound insulation" label="sound insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936581" start="172" end="182" title="visual appearance" label="appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q384943" start="264" end="272" title="Lamination" label="laminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209233" start="321" end="325" title="thermal energy" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="327" end="335" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="337" end="344" title="welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="349" end="358" title="adhesives" label="adhesives"/>
<link wikidata="Q674484" start="386" end="399" title="machine press" label="machine press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365679" start="406" end="414" title="calender" label="calender"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="468" end="475" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="478" end="483" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="485" end="489" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="522" end="527" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="593" end="598" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="604" end="624" title="electronic component" label="electronic component"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="638" end="659" title="Insulator (electricity)" label="electrical insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481935" start="973" end="989" title="Laminated fabric" label="Laminated fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q614893" start="1245" end="1262" title="photoluminescence" label="photoluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16041252" start="1304" end="1328" title="high-visibility clothing" label="high-visibility clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691747" start="1331" end="1344" title="Tear resistance" label="tear strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q108195986" start="1391" end="1405" title="Coated fabrics" label="Coated fabrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638703" start="1459" end="1474" title="Nonwoven fabric" label="Nonwoven fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q380677" start="1752" end="1765" title="Thermoplastic" label="Thermoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q868477" start="1771" end="1784" title="Thermosetting polymer" label="thermosetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="1800" end="1812" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q146354" start="1924" end="1941" title="polyvinyl acetate" label="polyvinyl acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q342945" start="1943" end="1951" title="Acrylic resin" label="acrylics"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="1953" end="1971" title="polyvinyl chloride" label="polyvinyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="1979" end="1991" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="1998" end="2005" title="Natural rubber" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="2010" end="2026" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q421281" start="2029" end="2038" title="Copolymer" label="Copolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q143429" start="2146" end="2158" title="polyethylene" label="polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="2163" end="2166" title="Polyvinyl chloride" label="PVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192874" start="2170" end="2176" title="kapton" label="kapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q143496" start="2246" end="2276" title="Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene" label="acrylonitrilebutadiene-styrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q90733311" start="2346" end="2363" title="polyurethane foam" label="polyurethane foam"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="2453" end="2476" title="polytetrafluoroethylene" label="polytetrafluoroethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="2485" end="2497" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736298" start="2518" end="2530" title="Plastic film" label="Plastic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="2581" end="2586" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693" start="2596" end="2606" title="windshield" label="windshield"/>
<link wikidata="Q620529" start="2629" end="2639" title="Sandwich-structured composite" label="composites"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="2811" end="2818" title="Plywood" label="Plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q643449" start="3009" end="3031" title="glued laminated timber" label="glued laminated timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q212553" start="3371" end="3379" title="melamine" label="melamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="3414" end="3421" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249625" start="3423" end="3442" title="Decorative laminate" label="Decorative laminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141333" start="3460" end="3468" title="Millwork (building material)" label="millwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q477683" start="3709" end="3720" title="wood veneer" label="wood veneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934720" start="3724" end="3743" title="multilaminar veneer" label="multilaminar veneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463524" start="4191" end="4212" title="Corrugated fiberboard" label="Corrugated fiberboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q125191" start="4433" end="4444" title="photographs" label="photographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q120484254" start="4582" end="4602" title="Photo identification" label="Photo identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="4613" end="4624" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876098" start="4791" end="4801" title="UV coating" label="UV coating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462531" start="4939" end="4951" title="Floyd Shaman" label="Floyd Shaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="5119" end="5124" title="Polyvinyl chloride" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="5142" end="5156" title="magnetism" label="ferro-magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354" start="5408" end="5417" title="dry erase" label="dry erase"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="5544" end="5555" title="hologram" label="holographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="5781" end="5789" title="particleboard" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397443" start="5793" end="5803" title="fiberboard" label="fiberboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="5860" end="5869" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q55439" start="5882" end="5887" title="Panel painting" label="panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433006" start="5893" end="5901" title="flooring" label="flooring"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="5939" end="5948" title="packaging" label="packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411858" start="5963" end="5971" title="Juicebox (container)" label="juicebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520074" start="5994" end="6016" title="liquid packaging board" label="liquid packaging board"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="6216" end="6224" title="particleboard" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397443" start="6229" end="6239" title="fiberboard" label="fiberboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755609" start="6272" end="6283" title="kraft paper" label="kraft paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="6416" end="6421" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212553" start="6429" end="6437" title="melamine" label="melamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="6469" end="6478" title="Composite material" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755609" start="6963" end="6974" title="kraft paper" label="kraft paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q332828" start="6991" end="7001" title="Absorption (chemistry)" label="absorbency"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="7032" end="7040" title="porosity" label="porosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320409" start="7066" end="7071" title="Kappa number" label="kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q169336" start="7097" end="7107" title="Uniformity (chemistry)" label="uniformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706283" start="7113" end="7121" title="grammage" label="grammage"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="7302" end="7307" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="7312" end="7321" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="7342" end="7358" title="refraction index" label="refraction index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="7404" end="7409" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="7441" end="7449" title="dyestuff" label="dyestuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="7455" end="7462" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931541" start="7561" end="7574" title="paper machine" label="paper machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706283" start="7581" end="7589" title="grammage" label="grammage"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706283" start="7628" end="7636" title="grammage" label="grammage"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="7671" end="7680" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="7723" end="7727" title="pulp (paper)" label="pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706283" start="7855" end="7863" title="grammage" label="grammage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755609" start="7903" end="7914" title="kraft paper" label="kraft paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="7961" end="7972" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="7978" end="7984" title="electric motor" label="motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q528522" start="8000" end="8034" title="Electrical steel" label="electrical steel laminate coatings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981904" start="8059" end="8064" title="electromagnetic coil" label="coils"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="8081" end="8095" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q208598" start="8148" end="8160" title="eddy current" label="eddy current"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446422" start="8163" end="8183" title="Fiber metal laminate" label="Fiber metal laminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736298" start="8419" end="8431" title="plastic film" label="plastic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="8734" end="8739" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432723" start="8743" end="8753" title="card stock" label="card stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="9093" end="9101" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q384943" start="9509" end="9523" title="heated roll laminators" label="roll laminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q47988" start="10019" end="10027" title="ID cards" label="ID cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="10703" end="10707" title="Adhesive" label="glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q384943" start="10722" end="10732" title="Laminate" label="lamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q436625" start="10773" end="10782" title="Substrate (printing)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="10791" end="10796" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432723" start="10800" end="10804" title="Card stock" label="card"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="10910" end="10917" title="Printing" label="printed"/>
<link wikidata="Q384943" start="11004" end="11019" title="pouch laminator" label="pouch laminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="11260" end="11265" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="11269" end="11275" title="fabric" label="fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q193934" start="12724" end="12733" title="paperback" label="paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="12734" end="12738" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125338" start="12739" end="12745" title="Book cover" label="covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="12747" end="12755" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q429785" start="12764" end="12770" title="poster" label="poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q192425" start="12783" end="12791" title="postcard" label="postcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="12889" end="12896" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="12926" end="12934" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q900581" start="12939" end="12945" title="Gloss (material appearance)" label="glossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="13268" end="13272" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q95474715" start="13542" end="13548" title="inkjet" label="inkjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="13863" end="13878" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365679" start="14187" end="14195" title="Calender" label="Calender"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577821" wikidata="Q2864570" url="?curid=577821" title="Art TV">
<text>Art TV, headquartered in Belgrade on Vlade Kovačević Street in Senjak, was the first privately produced Serbian television program. Founded in December 1991 by Petar Pojć (director and technical manager), Andrija Pojić, and Milan Atanasković (artist, program director and Editor-in-chief), Art TV began broadcasting on July 31, 1992. Broadcasting continued until 2016 [1], with coverage spanning from the Belgrade metropolitan area, Vojvodina including Novi Sad, and several bigger towns in Serbia. Roughly 3,500,000 people were able to receive the program.

== The program ==
Art TV was conceived as a cultural channel, being the only such specialized program in the Yugoslavian territory. During the 1990s, amidst Serbian media content&#x27;s ongoing devaluation, Art TV&#x27;s program was important in preserving cultural values. Milan Atanasković created the program concept as an artistic work in progress, with culture and art as the medium. Art TV had newsrooms for film, music, art, theater, literature, science and authors program, along with dozens of permanent and part-time associates, editors, and authors of various shows including: Dragan Babić, Radoslav Rale Zelenović, Vladimir Jelenković, Miško Šuvaković, Maja Skovran, Miomir Grujić Fleka, Marina Stefanović, Ljiljana Pavlović, Draško Miletić, Dušan Varda, Dragana Kanjevac, Andrej Aćin, Ljubomir Vučkovic, Ljiljana Sađilj, Maša Mileusnic, Ljiljana Simić, Zorica Milivojević, Jasmina Ninkov, Radoslav Pušić, Vuk Bojović, Goran Malić, Vladimir Đurić, Milan Delčić &quot;Delča&quot;, Aleksandar Jerkov, Boško Milin, Zoran Bogdanović, Ivon Jafali, Dragana Šarić, Milica Ivanović, Vlada Jelić, Jovan Bojanić, Mira Tomić, Aleksandar Radivojević, Nenad Bekvalac, Voki Kostic, Zoran Bogdanović, Dejan Jelača and many others.

Art TV hosted famous films, Art Cinema, and thematic shows. These included: Art Theater by Ljiljana Pavlovic, a show about classical music Fantasy by Marina Stefanovic, Video Glossary of 20th Century Art by Miško Šuvaković, Panotikum, Shock Corridor, Cult Detectives, Line EX, Passport Geography, The actor is Actor and many others.

From 1995 to 2000, under the direction of Milan Atanasković, Art TV hosted the work and programs of the cult art club Akademija at the Faculty of Fine Arts in Belgrade. Art TV further worked alongside the Faculty of Dramatic Arts, the Library of the City of Belgrade, the Kolarac Endowment, FEST, BITEF, and many other cultural institutions and events.

== Production ==
In the 1990s, Art TV was the only private television with a live broadcast vehicle and other production and technical capacities, such as an up-link for satellite broadcasting. With this, Art TV frequently aired live broadcasts of important cultural and artistic events, concerts, and festivals. Other television stations, productions and artists used these capacities, leveraging Art TV&#x27;s financial independence. Throughout its time, Art TV remained internally funded via marketing and production. Prominent managers were the director of the production Danijela Jevtić and the director of marketing Mileva Mijatović.

== History ==
The program&#x27;s broadcast started from a house on Senjak, Belgrade&#x27;s library department was also located at that time. Dedicated exclusively to art and culture, Art TV immediately attracted a large cultural and intellectual interest. However, government authorities did not support the new cultural channel. Over the years, Art TV expanded its broadcasting network with great efforts and maintained a high program content level using alternative internal funding methods. The programs&#x27; participants were almost all-important cultural representatives, artists, and creators who had little or no media coverage from other sources during that period. During the great social crises and disintegration of the Yugoslav community in the 1990s, Art TV was the only media protector of art and culture.

During the NATO bombing in 1999, after the destruction of the RTS city studio and the death of sixteen employees, Art TV broadcast the national television program until the broadcast was re-established.

In the second half of its existence, new market conditions and a large departure of the editorial staff forced Art TV to reduce its programming gradually. Until the closure, Art TV remained staffed with four full-time employees and five part-time associates, financed from the previous 25 years&#x27; revenues. As the director, Sladjana Pojić, pointed out, the shutdown was due to a bad financial situation and the house&#x27;s debts. [2]

In 2004, former editor-in-chief Milan Atanasković and Slobodan Atanasković launched an alternative international satellite program from Paris, specializing in video-art known as &quot;Art Channel&quot;, later O Art TV. Art Channel broadcast on Eutelsat satellites and French and European networks. From 2011 on, oart.tv became available online.

== Awards ==
Art TV received the Golden Award of Belgrade in 2001 for a lasting contribution to culture and has further received numerous recognitions and letters of thanks.

Last program was aired on 31 October 2016, then television shuts down after 25 years of operation.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2864570" start="0" end="6" title="Art TV" label="Art TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="25" end="33" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183106" start="63" end="69" title="Senjak" label="Senjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="104" end="110" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="405" end="413" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="414" end="431" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="433" end="442" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="453" end="461" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="491" end="497" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="668" end="678" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11120247" start="1519" end="1549" title="Milan Delčić" label="Milan Delčić &amp;quot;Delča&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577824" wikidata="Q6433008" url="?curid=577824" title="Kosava">
<text>Kosava may refer to:

* Kosava, Belarus, a town
* Kosava castle, in Kosava, Belarus

== See also ==
* Košava (disambiguation)
* Koshava (disambiguation)
* Kosova (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6433008" start="0" end="6" title="Kosava" label="Kosava"/>
<link wikidata="Q956635" start="24" end="39" title="Kosava, Belarus" label="Kosava, Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656838" start="50" end="63" title="Kosava castle" label="Kosava castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4236920" start="102" end="125" title="Košava (disambiguation)" label="Košava (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126935917" start="128" end="152" title="Koshava (disambiguation)" label="Koshava (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559733" start="155" end="178" title="Kosova (disambiguation)" label="Kosova (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577826" wikidata="Q1754759" url="?curid=577826" title="One from the Heart (album)">
<text>One from the Heart is a soundtrack album of Tom Waits compositions for the Francis Ford Coppola film of the same name. It was recorded from October 1980 to September 1981. It was during this period that Waits met his wife Kathleen Brennan, an employee at the studio where it was recorded. While the film was released in February, the soundtrack album release was delayed until October of 1982 due to a dispute between Columbia Records and Coppola&#x27;s Zoetrope Studios.

Crystal Gayle sings on the record, performing either solo or in duets with Waits. The soundtrack was nominated for an Academy Award for Original Music Score.

The movie was re-released on DVD on January 27, 2004, and the DVD contains remixed and remastered Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround Sound of the soundtrack from Waits&#x27; original studio sessions, a documentary on the making of the soundtrack, as well as previously unreleased demo recordings and alternate takes.

== Production ==
The album was the last in an almost decade-long collaboration between Waits and producer Bones Howe. Howe recounts how Waits broke the news to him: &quot;He called me up and said &#x27;Can we have a drink?&#x27; He told me he realised one night that as he was writing a song, he found himself asking &#x27;If I write this, will Bones like it?&#x27; I said to him that we were getting to be kind of like an old married couple. I said I don&#x27;t want to be the reason that an artist can&#x27;t create. It was time for him to find another producer. We shook hands and that was it. It was a great ride.&quot;

==Critical reception==
&quot;The Austin Chronicle&quot; wrote: &quot;Of course Waits fans might chafe at the Crystal clarity of the country music siren&#x27;s ringing cry, but like the last and best duet on the soundtrack explains, &#x27;This One&#x27;s From the Heart&#x27;.&quot;

== Track listing ==



==Personnel==
*Tom Waits - vocals, piano, orchestral arrangements
* Crystal Gayle – vocals
===Musicians===
* Bob Alcivar – piano, orchestral arrangement, conductor
* Ronnie Barron – organ on &quot;Little Boy Blue&quot;
* Dennis Budimir – guitar on &quot;Opening Montage&quot; and &quot;Old Boyfriends&quot;
* Larry Bunker – drums on &quot;The Tango&quot;
* Gene Cipriano – tenor saxophone on &quot;The Tango&quot;
* Greg Cohen – bass
* Teddy Edwards – tenor saxophone
* Victor Feldman – timpani on &quot;You Can&#x27;t Unring a Bell&quot;
* Chuck Findley – trumpet on &quot;Circus Girl&quot;
* Dick Hyde – trombone on &quot;Circus Girl&quot;
* Pete Jolly – piano, accordion, celeste
* Gayle Levant – harp
* John Lowe – woodwind on &quot;Circus Girl&quot;
* Shelly Manne – drums on &quot;Opening Montage&quot;, &quot;Is There Any Way Out of This Dream?&quot; and &quot;Old Boyfriends&quot;
* Lonny Morgan – woodwind
* Joe Porcaro – glockenspiel on &quot;Presents&quot;
* Emil Richards – vibes on &quot;I Beg Your Pardon&quot;
* Jack Sheldon – trumpet
* John Thomassie – percussion on &quot;Little Boy Blue&quot;
* Leslie Thompson – harmonica on &quot;Circus Girl&quot;
* Don Waldrop – tuba on &quot;Instrumental Montage&quot;

===Technical personnel===
* Bones Howe – producer, sound, engineer, remixer
* Biff Dawes – engineer
* Tim Boyle – second engineer
* Dave Demore – second engineer
* Bob Winder – second engineer
* Richard Beggs – sound montages
* Kathy Morton – sound assistant

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="44" end="53" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="75" end="95" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307044" start="96" end="117" title="One from the Heart" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q434943" start="222" end="238" title="Kathleen Brennan" label="Kathleen Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q467348" start="454" end="470" title="American Zoetrope" label="Zoetrope Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q434512" start="473" end="486" title="Crystal Gayle" label="Crystal Gayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q488651" start="591" end="629" title="Academy Award for Original Music Score" label="Academy Award for Original Music Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="661" end="664" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q622624" start="730" end="762" title="Dolby Digital" label="Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941750" start="1048" end="1058" title="Bones Howe" label="Bones Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519844" start="1596" end="1616" title="The Austin Chronicle" label="The Austin Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931643" start="1982" end="1993" title="Bob Alcivar" label="Bob Alcivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1996" end="2001" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="2027" end="2036" title="Conductor (music)" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365794" start="2039" end="2052" title="Ronnie Barron" label="Ronnie Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189006" start="2094" end="2108" title="Dennis Budimir" label="Dennis Budimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369977" start="2182" end="2194" title="Larry Bunker" label="Larry Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="2197" end="2202" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="2246" end="2261" title="tenor saxophone" label="tenor saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q960319" start="2289" end="2299" title="Greg Cohen" label="Greg Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q322308" start="2309" end="2322" title="Teddy Edwards" label="Teddy Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q719533" start="2343" end="2357" title="Victor Feldman" label="Victor Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="2360" end="2367" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967593" start="2414" end="2427" title="Chuck Findley" label="Chuck Findley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="2430" end="2437" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273046" start="2467" end="2476" title="Dick Hyde (musician)" label="Dick Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="2479" end="2487" title="trombone" label="trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q330844" start="2517" end="2527" title="Pete Jolly" label="Pete Jolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="2537" end="2546" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q320341" start="2548" end="2555" title="celesta" label="celeste"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="2573" end="2577" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="2592" end="2600" title="woodwind" label="woodwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q246618" start="2630" end="2642" title="Shelly Manne" label="Shelly Manne"/>
<link wikidata="Q346555" start="2790" end="2801" title="Joe Porcaro" label="Joe Porcaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="2804" end="2816" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q507558" start="2843" end="2856" title="Emil Richards" label="Emil Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q206987" start="2859" end="2864" title="Vibraphone" label="vibes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677210" start="2900" end="2912" title="Jack Sheldon" label="Jack Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="3004" end="3013" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q131168" start="3057" end="3061" title="tuba" label="tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941750" start="3127" end="3137" title="Bones Howe" label="Bones Howe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577830" wikidata="Q3699705" url="?curid=577830" title="Titration curve">
<text>Titrations are often recorded on graphs called titration curves, which generally contain the volume of the titrant as the independent variable and the pH of the solution as the dependent variable (because it changes depending on the composition of the two solutions). 

The equivalence point on the graph is where all of the starting solution (usually an acid) has been neutralized by the titrant (usually a base). It can be calculated precisely by finding the second derivative of the titration curve and computing the points of inflection (where the graph changes concavity); however, in most cases, simple visual inspection of the curve will suffice. In the curve given to the right, both equivalence points are visible, after roughly 15 and 30 mL of NaOH solution has been titrated into the oxalic acid solution. To calculate the logarithmic acid dissociation constant (pKa), one must find the volume at the half-equivalence point, that is where half the amount of titrant has been added to form the next compound (here, sodium hydrogen oxalate, then disodium oxalate). Halfway between each equivalence point, at 7.5 mL and 22.5 mL, the pH observed was about 1.5 and 4, giving the pKa.

In weak monoprotic acids, the point halfway between the beginning of the curve (before any titrant has been added) and the equivalence point is significant: at that point, the concentrations of the two species (the acid and conjugate base) are equal. Therefore, the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation can be solved in this manner:
:formula_1
:formula_2
:formula_3

Therefore, one can easily find the pKa of the weak monoprotic acid by finding the pH of the point halfway between the beginning of the curve and the equivalence point, and solving the simplified equation. In the case of the sample curve, the acid dissociation constant &quot;Ka&quot; = 10-pKa would be approximately 1.78×10−5 from visual inspection (the actual &quot;K&quot;a2 is 1.7×10−5)

For polyprotic acids, calculating the acid dissociation constants is only marginally more difficult: the first acid dissociation constant can be calculated the same way as it would be calculated in a monoprotic acid. The pKa of the second acid dissociation constant, however, is the pH at the point halfway between the first equivalence point and the second equivalence point (and so on for acids that release more than two protons, such as phosphoric acid).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="0" end="9" title="Titration" label="Titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699705" start="47" end="63" title="Titration curve" label="titration curves"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="107" end="114" title="titrant" label="titrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="122" end="142" title="independent variable" label="independent variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="151" end="153" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="177" end="195" title="dependent variable" label="dependent variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q256289" start="274" end="291" title="equivalence point" label="equivalence point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="355" end="359" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="408" end="412" title="Base (chemistry)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932744" start="461" end="478" title="second derivative" label="second derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699705" start="486" end="501" title="Titration curve" label="titration curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q212794" start="520" end="540" title="point of inflection" label="points of inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914302" start="566" end="575" title="concave function" label="concavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q448889" start="609" end="626" title="visual inspection" label="visual inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="748" end="750" title="milliliter" label="mL"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="754" end="767" title="Sodium hydroxide" label="NaOH solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="795" end="806" title="oxalic acid" label="oxalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="846" end="872" title="acid dissociation constant" label="acid dissociation constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q420127" start="1055" end="1071" title="disodium oxalate" label="disodium oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="1199" end="1214" title="monoprotic acid" label="monoprotic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q601818" start="1457" end="1487" title="Henderson-Hasselbalch equation" label="Henderson-Hasselbalch equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="1947" end="1957" title="polyprotic" label="polyprotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="2384" end="2399" title="phosphoric acid" label="phosphoric acid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577835" wikidata="Q213067" url="?curid=577835" title="Svir">
<text>The Svir (; ; Karelian and Finnish: ) is a river in Podporozhsky, Lodeynopolsky, and Volkhovsky districts in the north-east of Leningrad Oblast, Russia. It flows westwards from Lake Onega to Lake Ladoga, thus connecting the two largest lakes of Europe. It is the largest river flowing into Lake Ladoga. The length of the Svir is , whereas the area of its drainage basin is . The towns of Podporozhye and Lodeynoye Pole, as well as urban-type settlements Voznesenye, Nikolsky, Vazhiny, and Svirstroy are located at the banks of the Svir.

After Peter the Great connected the Svir with the Neva by the Ladoga Canal in the 18th century, the river has been part of the Mariinsk Canal System, currently the Volga–Baltic Waterway. The Onega Canal is a bypass of Lake Onega from the south, which connects the Svir with the Vytegra. The Svir is heavily used for navigation, with both cargo traffic and cruise ships. There are two dams with hydroelectric power plants on the river. The Lower Svir Hydroelectric Station, in Svirstroy, sits from the river&#x27;s mouth while the Upper Svir Hydroelectric Station, located in Podporozhye, is away. Above the Upper Svir Hydroelectric Station, the Svir is built as the Ivinsky Razliv Reservoir. Locks are built around both dams.

Since the Svir flows out of Lake Onega, its drainage basin occupies a vast area, spanning the south of the Republic of Karelia, the north and the east of Leningrad Oblast, the northwest of Vologda Oblast, and also includes minor areas in Arkhangelsk Oblast (the basin of the Ileksa). The main tributaries of Svir proper are the Vazhinka (right), the Oyat (left), and the Pasha (left). The main rivers in the basin of the Svir are the Suna (the longest in the Svir basin), the Shuya, the Vodla, and the Vytegra. The basin of the Svir also includes an enormous amount of freshwater lakes, the biggest of which, behind Lake Onega, are Lake Vodlozero, Lake Syamozero, Lake Gimolskoye, Lake Lizhmozero, and Lake Shotozero. The city of Petrozavodsk and the towns of Suoyarvi, Kondopoga, Medvezhyegorsk, Pudozh, Vytegra, Podporozhye, and Lodeynoye Pole, as well as a number of urban-type settlements, are located within the catchment area of the Svir.

The river flows past the Alexander-Svirsky Monastery, which housed Svirlag (one of the most infamous gulags). The area around the river saw heavy fighting during the Continuation War 1941–1944.

The right bank of the lower Svir is occupied by the Nizhnesvirsky Nature Reserve, established in 1980.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213067" start="4" end="8" title="Svir" label="Svir"/>
<link wikidata="Q33557" start="14" end="22" title="Karelian language" label="Karelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="27" end="34" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969" start="52" end="64" title="Podporozhsky District" label="Podporozhsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945" start="66" end="79" title="Lodeynopolsky District" label="Lodeynopolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663" start="85" end="95" title="Volkhovsky District" label="Volkhovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191" start="127" end="143" title="Leningrad Oblast" label="Leningrad Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="145" end="151" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166162" start="177" end="187" title="Lake Onega" label="Lake Onega"/>
<link wikidata="Q15288" start="191" end="202" title="Lake Ladoga" label="Lake Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="245" end="251" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="355" end="369" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15301" start="388" end="399" title="Podporozhye, Leningrad Oblast" label="Podporozhye"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275" start="404" end="418" title="Lodeynoye Pole" label="Lodeynoye Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q406805" start="454" end="464" title="Voznesenye" label="Voznesenye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828" start="466" end="474" title="Nikolsky, Leningrad Oblast" label="Nikolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q195945" start="476" end="483" title="Vazhiny" label="Vazhiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q543008" start="489" end="498" title="Svirstroy" label="Svirstroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="544" end="559" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q645" start="588" end="592" title="Neva" label="Neva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551825" start="600" end="612" title="Ladoga Canal" label="Ladoga Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q31263" start="702" end="723" title="Volga–Baltic Waterway" label="Volga–Baltic Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807230" start="729" end="740" title="Onega Canal" label="Onega Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492910" start="816" end="823" title="Vytegra (river)" label="Vytegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="922" end="925" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="932" end="945" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="946" end="957" title="power plant" label="power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195691" start="977" end="1009" title="Lower Svir Hydroelectric Station" label="Lower Svir Hydroelectric Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q776827" start="1068" end="1100" title="Upper Svir Hydroelectric Station" label="Upper Svir Hydroelectric Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1204" end="1228" title="Ivinsky Razliv Reservoir" label="Ivinsky Razliv Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914" start="1372" end="1391" title="Republic of Karelia" label="Republic of Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015" start="1454" end="1468" title="Vologda Oblast" label="Vologda Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875" start="1503" end="1521" title="Arkhangelsk Oblast" label="Arkhangelsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658399" start="1540" end="1546" title="Ileksa" label="Ileksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q501681" start="1593" end="1601" title="Vazhinka" label="Vazhinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q299994" start="1615" end="1619" title="Oyat" label="Oyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087477" start="1636" end="1641" title="Pasha (river)" label="Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q226862" start="1699" end="1703" title="Suna (river)" label="Suna"/>
<link wikidata="Q779982" start="1741" end="1746" title="Shuya (Karelia)" label="Shuya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458500" start="1752" end="1757" title="Vodla" label="Vodla"/>
<link wikidata="Q200818" start="1897" end="1911" title="Lake Vodlozero" label="Lake Vodlozero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519853" start="1913" end="1927" title="Lake Syamozero" label="Lake Syamozero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1929" end="1944" title="Lake Gimolskoye" label="Lake Gimolskoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q11876049" start="1946" end="1961" title="Lake Lizhmozero" label="Lake Lizhmozero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1967" end="1981" title="Lake Shotozero" label="Lake Shotozero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895" start="1995" end="2007" title="Petrozavodsk" label="Petrozavodsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q196514" start="2025" end="2033" title="Suoyarvi" label="Suoyarvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q155108" start="2035" end="2044" title="Kondopoga" label="Kondopoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q158411" start="2046" end="2060" title="Medvezhyegorsk" label="Medvezhyegorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184225" start="2062" end="2068" title="Pudozh" label="Pudozh"/>
<link wikidata="Q105392" start="2070" end="2077" title="Vytegra" label="Vytegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271910" start="2236" end="2263" title="Alexander-Svirsky Monastery" label="Alexander-Svirsky Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506367" start="2278" end="2285" title="Svirlag" label="Svirlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="2312" end="2317" title="gulag" label="gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="2377" end="2393" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079739" start="2458" end="2486" title="Nizhnesvirsky Nature Reserve" label="Nizhnesvirsky Nature Reserve"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577837" wikidata="Q22147632" url="?curid=577837" title="Svir (disambiguation)">
<text>Svir can refer to:

*Svir, a river in Leningrad Oblast, Russia 
*Svir, Belarus, town in Myadzyel District, Belarus
*, lake in Myadzyel District, Belarus
*9M119 Svir anti tank missile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213067" start="21" end="25" title="Svir" label="Svir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659511" start="65" end="78" title="Svir, Belarus" label="Svir, Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637855" start="88" end="105" title="Myadzyel District" label="Myadzyel District"/>
<link wikidata="Q298605" start="154" end="164" title="9M119 Svir" label="9M119 Svir"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577842" wikidata="Q2012846" url="?curid=577842" title="Oblong">
<text>An oblong is an object longer than it is wide, especially a non-square rectangle. 

Oblong may also refer to:

==Places==
* Oblong, Illinois, a village in the United States
* Oblong Township, Crawford County, Illinois, United States
* A strip of land on the New York-Connecticut border in the United States nicknamed the &quot;Oblong&quot;, running north from the Connecticut panhandle

==Other uses==
* Oblong (company), an American a cloud-based communication service provider 
* Oblong Industries, a spin-off of the MIT Media Lab
* Angus Oblong, American author and actor born David Walker (born 1976)
* &quot;The Oblongs&quot;, a short-lived 2001 American animated television program co-created by Angus Oblong
* Bob Oblong, a character in &quot;The Shapies&quot;, an Australian animated children&#x27;s television series
* Oblong, a leaf shape</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2012846" start="3" end="9" title="Oblong" label="oblong"/>
<link wikidata="Q209" start="71" end="80" title="rectangle" label="rectangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012846" start="84" end="90" title="Oblong" label="Oblong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180935" start="124" end="140" title="Oblong, Illinois" label="Oblong, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075226" start="175" end="217" title="Oblong Township, Crawford County, Illinois" label="Oblong Township, Crawford County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q608636" start="364" end="385" title="Connecticut panhandle" label="Connecticut panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994200" start="404" end="420" title="Oblong (company)" label="Oblong (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="519" end="532" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT Media Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764223" start="535" end="547" title="Angus Oblong" label="Angus Oblong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368074" start="613" end="624" title="The Oblongs" label="The Oblongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763680" start="750" end="761" title="The Shapies" label="The Shapies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="838" end="848" title="Glossary of leaf shapes#oblong" label="leaf shape"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577843" wikidata="Q12844800" url="?curid=577843" title="Ghaznavids">
<text>The Ghaznavid dynasty ( &quot;Ġaznaviyān&quot;) was a Persianate Muslim dynasty of Turkic &quot;mamluk&quot; origin. It ruled the Ghaznavid Empire or the Empire of Ghazni from 977 to 1186, which at its at its greatest extent, extended from the Oxus to the Indus Valley. The dynasty was founded by Sabuktigin upon his succession to the rule of Ghazna after the death of his father-in-law, Alp Tigin, who was an ex-general of the Samanid Empire from Balkh. 

Sabuktigin&#x27;s son, Mahmud of Ghazni, expanded the Ghaznavid Empire to the Amu Darya, the Indus River and the Indian Ocean in the east and to Rey and Hamadan in the west. Under the reign of Mas&#x27;ud I, the Ghaznavid dynasty began losing control over its western territories to the Seljuk Empire after the Battle of Dandanaqan in 1040, resulting in a restriction of its holdings to modern-day Afghanistan, Pakistan and Northern India.

In 1151, Sultan Bahram Shah lost Ghazni to the Ghurid sultan Ala al-Din Husayn. The Ghaznavids retook Ghazni, but lost the city to the Ghuzz Turks who in turn lost it to Muhammad of Ghor. In response, the Ghaznavids fled to Lahore, their regional capital. In 1186, Lahore was conquered by the Ghurid sultan, Muhammad of Ghor, with its Ghaznavid ruler, Khusrau Malik, imprisoned and later executed.
==Rise to power==

Two military families arose from the Turkic slave-guards of the Samanid Empire, the Simjurids and Ghaznavids, who ultimately proved disastrous to the Samanids. The Simjurids received an appanage in the Kohistan region of eastern Khorasan. The Samanid generals Alp Tigin and Abu al-Hasan Simjuri competed for the governorship of Khorasan and control of the Samanid Empire by placing on the throne emirs they could dominate after the death of Abd al-Malik I in 961. His death created a succession crisis between his brothers.

A court party instigated by men of the scribal class – civilian ministers rather than Turkic generals – rejected the candidacy of Alp Tigin for the Samanid throne. Mansur I was installed instead, and Alp Tigin prudently retired to south of the Hindu Kush, where he captured Ghazna and became the ruler of the city as a Samanid authority. The Simjurids enjoyed control of Khorasan south of the Amu Darya but were hard-pressed by a third great Iranian dynasty, the Buyid dynasty, and were unable to survive the collapse of the Samanids and the subsequent rise of the Ghaznavids.
The struggles of the Turkic slave generals for mastery of the throne with the help of shifting allegiance from the court&#x27;s ministerial leaders both demonstrated and accelerated the Samanid decline. Samanid weakness attracted into Transoxiana the Karluks, a Turkic people who had recently converted to Islam. They occupied Bukhara in 992, establishing in Transoxania the Kara-Khanid Khanate.

Alp Tigin&#x27;s died in 963, and after two ghulam governors and three years, his slave Sabuktigin became the governor of Ghazna.

==Domination==

===Sabuktigin===
Sabuktigin lived as a mamluk, Turkic slave-soldier, during his youth and later married the daughter of his master Alptigin, who fled to Ghazna following a failed coup attempt, and conquered the city from the local Lawik rulers in 962. After Alptigin death, his son Abu Ishaq Ibrahim governed Ghazna for three years. His death was followed by the reign of a former ghulam of Alptigin, Bilgetigin. Bilgetigin&#x27;s rule was so harsh the populace invited Abu Bakr Lawik back. It was through Sabuktigin&#x27;s military ability that Lawik was removed, Bilgetigin was exiled, and Sabuktigin gained the governorship.

Once established as governor of Ghazna, Sabuktigin was asked to intervene in Khurasan, at the insistence of the Samanid emir, and after a victorious campaign received the governorships of Balkh, Tukharistan, Bamiyan, Ghur and Gharchistan. Sabuktigin inherited a governorship in turmoil. In Zabulistan, the typical military fief system(&quot;mustaghall&quot;) were being changed into permanent ownership(&quot;tamlik&quot;) which resulted in the Turkic soldiery unwilling to take up arms. Sabuktigin reformed the system making them all a &quot;mustaghall&quot;-type fief. In 976, he ended the conflict between two Turkic ghulams at Bust and restored the original ruler. Later that same year, Sabuktigin campaigned against Qusdar, catching the ruler(possibly Mu&#x27;tazz b. Ahmad) off guard and obtaining an annual tribute from him.

After the death of Sabuktigin, his son by Alptigin&#x27;s daughter, Ismail, was given Ghazna. Another son, Abu&#x27;l-Muzaffar Nasr, was given the governorship of Bust, while in Khorasan, the eldest son Mahmud, was given command of the army. Sabuktigin&#x27;s intent was to ensure governorships for his family, despite the decaying influence of the Samanid Empire, and did not consider his dynasty as independent. Ismail, upon gaining his inheritance, quickly traveled to Bust and did homage to Emir Abu&#x27;l-Harith Mansur b. Nuh. Mahmud, who had been left out of any significant inheritance, proposed a division of power, to which Ismail refused. Mahmud marched on Ghazna and subsequently Ismail was defeated and captured in 998 at the Battle of Ghazni.

===Mahmud, son of Sabuktigin===
In 998, Mahmud, son of Sebuktigin, succeeded to the governorship, and Ghazni and the Ghaznavid dynasty became perpetually associated with him. He emphasized his loyalty in a letter to the caliph, saying that the Samanids had only been replaced because of their treason. Mahmud received the governorship of Khurasan and titles of Yamin al-Dawla and Amin al-Milla. As a representative of caliphal authority, he championed Sunni Islam by campaigning against the Ismaili and Shi&#x27;ite Buyids. He completed the conquest of the Samanid and Shahi territories, including the Ismaili Kingdom of Multan, Sindh, as well as some Buwayhid territory.

By all accounts, the rule of Mahmud was the golden age and height of the Ghaznavid Empire. Mahmud carried out seventeen expeditions through northern India to establish his control and set up tributary states, and his raids also resulted in the looting of a great deal of plunder. He established his authority from the borders of Ray to Samarkand, from the Caspian Sea to the Yamuna.

During Mahmud&#x27;s reign (997–1030), the Ghaznavids settled 4,000 Turkmen families near Farana in Khorasan. By 1027, due to the Turkmen raiding neighbouring settlements, the governor of Tus, Abu l&#x27;Alarith Arslan Jadhib, led military strikes against them. The Turkmen were defeated and scattered to neighbouring lands. Still, as late as 1033, Ghaznavid governor Tash Farrash executed fifty Turkmen chiefs for raids into Khorasan.

====Indian conquests====

Mahmud of Ghazni led incursions deep into India, as far as Mathura, Kannauj and Somnath. In 1001, he defeated the Hindu Shahi in the Battle of Peshawar. In 1004-5, he invaded the Principality of Bhatiya and in 1006 the neighbouring Emirate of Multan. In 1008-9, he again vanquished the Hindu Shahis at the Battle of Chach, and established Governors in the conquered areas. In India, the Ghaznavids were called &quot;Turushkas&quot; (&quot;Turks&quot;) or &quot;Hammiras&quot; (from the Arabic &quot;Amir&quot; &quot;Commander&quot;).

In 1018, he laid waste the city of Mathura, which was &quot;ruthlessly sacked, ravaged, desecrated and destroyed&quot;. According to Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah, writing an &quot;History of Hindustan&quot; in the 16th-17th century, the city of Mathura was the richest in India. When it was attacked by Mahmud of Ghazni, &quot;all the idols&quot; were burnt and destroyed during a period of twenty days, gold and silver was smelted for booty, and the city was burnt down. In 1018 Mahmud also captured Kanauj, the capital of the Pratiharas, and then confronted the Chandelas, from whom he obtained the payment of tribute. In 1026, he raided and plundered the Somnath temple, taking away a booty of 20 million dinars.

The wealth brought back from Mahmud&#x27;s Indian expeditions to Ghazni was enormous, and contemporary historians (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Abolfazl Beyhaghi, Ferdowsi) give glowing descriptions of the magnificence of the capital and of the conqueror&#x27;s munificent support of literature. Mahmud died in April 1030 and had chosen his son, Mohammed, as his successor.

==Decline==
===Twin sons of Mahmud===

Mahmud left the empire to his son Mohammed, who was mild, affectionate and soft. His brother, Mas&#x27;ud, asked for three provinces that he had won by his sword, but his brother did not consent. Mas&#x27;ud had to fight his brother, and he became king, blinding and imprisoning Mohammed as punishment. Mas&#x27;ud was unable to preserve the empire and following a disastrous defeat at the Battle of Dandanaqan in 1040, he lost all the Ghaznavid lands in Persia and Central Asia to the Seljuks, plunging the realm into a &quot;time of troubles&quot;. His last act was to collect all his treasures from his forts in hope of assembling an army and ruling from India, but his own forces plundered the wealth and he proclaimed his blind brother as king again. The two brothers now exchanged positions: Mohammed was elevated from prison to the throne, while Mas&#x27;ud was consigned to a dungeon after a reign of ten years and was assassinated in 1040. Mas&#x27;ud&#x27;s son, Madood, was governor of Balkh, and in 1040, after hearing of his father&#x27;s death, he came to Ghazni to claim his kingdom. He fought with the sons of the blind Mohammed and was victorious. However, the empire soon disintegrated and most kings did not submit to Madood. In a span of nine years, four more kings claimed the throne of Ghazni.

===Ibrahim===
In 1058, Mas&#x27;ud&#x27;s son Ibrahim, a great calligrapher who wrote the Koran with his own pen, became king. Ibrahim re-established a truncated empire on a firmer basis by arriving at a peace agreement with the Seljuks and a restoration of cultural and political linkages. Under Ibrahim and his successors the empire enjoyed a period of sustained tranquility. Shorn of its western land, it was increasingly sustained by riches accrued from raids across Northern India, where it faced stiff resistance from Indian rulers such as the Paramara of Malwa and the Gahadvala of Kannauj. He ruled until 1098.

===Mas&#x27;ud III===
Mas&#x27;ud III became king for sixteen years, with no major event in his lifetime. Mas&#x27;ud built the Palace of Sultan Mas&#x27;ud III and one of the Ghazni Minarets. Signs of weakness in the state became apparent when he died in 1115, with internal strife between his sons ending with the ascension of Sultan Bahram Shah as a Seljuk vassal. Bahram Shah defeated his brother Arslan for the throne at the Battle of Ghazni in 1117.

===Sultan Bahram Shah===
Sultan Bahram Shah was the last Ghaznavid King, ruling Ghazni, the first and main Ghaznavid capital, for thirty-five years. In 1148 he was defeated in Ghazni by Sayf al-Din Suri, but he recaptured the capital the next year. Ala al-Din Husayn, a Ghorid King, conquered the city in 1151, in revenge for his brother Kutubbuddin&#x27;s death, who was son-in-law of the king but was publicly punished and killed for a minor offence. Ala al-Din Husayn then razed the city, burning it for 7 days, after which he became known as &quot;Jahānsuz&quot; (&quot;World Burner&quot;). Ghazni was restored to the Ghaznavids by the intervention of the Seljuks, who came to the aid of Bahram. Ghaznavid struggles with the Ghurids continued in subsequent years as they nibbled away at Ghaznavid territory, and Ghazni and Zabulistan were lost to a group of Oghuz Turks before being captured by the Ghurids. Ghazni fell to the Ghurids around 1170.

===Late Ghaznavids===
After the fall of Ghazni in 1163, the Ghaznavids established themselves in Lahore, their regional capital for Indian territories since its conquest by Mahmud of Ghazni, which became the new capital of the Late Ghaznavids. Ghaznavid power in northwestern India continued until the Ghurid conquest of Lahore by Muhammad of Ghor in 1186, deposing the last Ghaznavid ruler Khusrau Malik. Both Khusrau Malik and his son were imprisoned and summarily executed in Firozkoh in 1191, extinguishing the Ghaznavid lineage.

==Military and tactics==
The core of the Ghaznavid army was primarily made up of Turks, as well as thousands of native Afghans who were trained and assembled from the area south of the Hindu Kush in what is now Afghanistan. During the rule of Sultan Mahmud, a new, larger military training center was established in Bost (now Lashkar Gah). This area was known for blacksmiths where war weapons were made. After capturing and conquering the Punjab region, the Ghaznavids began to employ Hindus in their army.

The Indian soldiers, whom Romila Thapar presumed to be Hindus, were one of the components of the army with their commander called &quot;sipahsalar-i-Hinduwan&quot; and lived in their own quarter of Ghazna practicing their own religion. Indian soldiers under their commander Suvendhray remained loyal to Mahmud. They were also used against a Turkic rebel, with the command given to a Hindu named Tilak according to Baihaki.

Like the other dynasties that rose out of the remains of the Abbasid Caliphate, the Ghaznavid administrative traditions and military practice came from the Abbasids. The Arabian horses, at least in the earliest campaign, were still substantial in Ghaznavid military incursions, especially in dashing raids deep into hostile territory. There is a record of &#x27;6000 Arab horse&#x27; being sent against king Anandapala in 1008, and evidence of this Arabian cavalry persists until 1118 under the Ghaznavid governor in Lahore.

Due to their access to the Indus-Ganges plains, the Ghaznavids, during the 11th and 12th centuries, developed the first Muslim army to use war elephants in battle. The elephants were protected by armour plating on their fronts. The use of these elephants was a foreign weapon in other regions that the Ghaznavids fought in, particularly in Central Asia.

==State and culture==
Although the dynasty was of Central Asian Turkic origin, it was thoroughly Persianised in terms of language, culture, literature and habits and has been regarded as a &quot;Persian dynasty&quot;.

According to Clifford Edmund Bosworth:

Persian literary culture enjoyed a renaissance under the Ghaznavids during the 11th century. The Ghaznavid court was so renowned for its support of Persian literature that the poet Farrukhi traveled from his home province to work for them. The poet Unsuri&#x27;s short collection of poetry was dedicated to Sultan Mahmud and his brothers Nasr and Yaqub. Another poet of the Ghaznavid court, Manuchehri, wrote numerous poems about the merits of drinking wine.

Sultan Mahmud, modelling the Samanid Bukhara as a cultural center, made Ghazni into a center of learning, inviting Ferdowsi and al-Biruni. He even attempted to persuade Avicenna, but was refused. Mahmud preferred that his fame and glory be publicized in Persian and hundreds of poets assembled at his court. He brought whole libraries from Rayy and Isfahan to Ghazni and even demanded that the Khwarizmshah court send its men of learning to Ghazni. Due to his invasion of Rayy and Isfahan, Persian literary production was inaugurated in Azerbaijan and Iraq.

The Ghaznavids continued to develop historical writing in Persian that had been initiated by their predecessors, the Samanid Empire. The historian Abu&#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi&#x27;s &quot;Tarikh-e Beyhaqi&quot;, written in the latter half of the 11th century, is an example.

Although the Ghaznavids were Turkic and their military leaders were generally of the same stock, as a result of the original involvement of Sebuktigin and Mahmud of Ghazni in Samanid affairs and in the Samanid cultural environment, the dynasty became thoroughly Persianized, so that in practice one cannot consider their rule over Iran one of foreign domination. They also copied their administrative system from the Samanids. In terms of cultural championship and the support of Persian poets, they were more Persian than their ethnically-Iranian rivals, the Buyid dynasty, whose support of Arabic letters in preference to Persian is well known.

The 16th century Persian historian, Firishta, records Sabuktigin&#x27;s genealogy as descended from the Sasanian kings: &quot;Subooktu-geen, the son of Jookan, the son of Kuzil-Hukum, the son of Kuzil-Arslan, the son of Ferooz, the son of Yezdijird, king of Persia.&quot; However, modern historians believe this was an attempt to connect himself with the history of old Persia.

Historian Bosworth explains: &quot;In fact with the adoption of Persian administrative and cultural ways the Ghaznavids threw off their original Turkish steppe background and became largely integrated with the Perso-Islamic tradition.&quot; As a result, Ghazni developed into a great centre of Arabic learning.

With Sultan Mahmud&#x27;s invasions of North India, Persian culture was established at Lahore, which later produced the famous poet, Masud Sa&#x27;d Salman. Lahore, under Ghaznavid rule in the 11th century, attracted Persian scholars from Khorasan, India and Central Asia and became a major Persian cultural centre. One of the most significant early works on Sufism, the Kashf al-mahjub, was written in Lahore by Abu al-Hasan Hujwiri al-Ghaznawi. It was also during Mahmud&#x27;s reign that Ghaznavid coinage began to have bilingual legends consisting of Arabic and Devanagari script. The entire range of Persianate institutions and customs that would come to characterize the political economy of most of India would be implemented by the later Ghaznavids.

The Persian culture established by the Ghaznavids in Ghazna and Eastern Afghanistan survived the Ghurid invasion in the 12th century and endured until the invasion of the Mongols.

==Legacy==

At its height, the Ghaznavid empire grew from the Oxus to the Indus Valley and was ruled from 977 to 1186. The history of the empire was written by Abu Nasr al-Utbi, who documented the Ghaznavid&#x27;s achievements, including regaining lost territory from their rivals, the Kara-Khanids, in present-day Iran and Afghanistan.
In addition to the wealth accumulated through raiding Indian cities, and exacting tribute from Indian rajas, the Ghaznavids also benefited from their position as an intermediary along the trade routes between China and the Mediterranean. The Ghaznavid rulers are generally credited with spreading Islam into the Indian subcontinent.

They were, however, unable to hold power for long and by 1040 the Seljuk Empire had taken over their Persian domains and a century later the Ghurids took over their remaining sub-continental lands.

The Ghaznavid conquests facilitated the beginning of the Turko-Afghan period into India, which would be further conducted by the Ghurids until the Turko-Afghans successfully established themselves in the Delhi Sultanate.

==List of rulers==
==Family tree of the Ghaznavid sultans==
==See also==

*List of battles involving the Ghaznavid Empire
*History of Afghanistan
*History of Pakistan
*List of Sunni Muslim dynasties

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*

==Further reading==
* Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1963) &quot;The Ghaznavids: Their Empire in Afghanistan and Eastern Iran 994–1040&quot; Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, 
* Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1977) &quot;The Later Ghaznavids: Splendour and Decay, The Dynasty in Afghanistan and Northern India 1040–1186&quot; Columbia University Press, New York, 
* M. Ismail Marcinkowski (2003) &quot;Persian Historiography and Geography: Bertold Spuler on Major Works Produced in Iran, the Caucasus, Central Asia, India and Early Ottoman Turkey&quot; Pustaka Nasional, Singapore, 

==External links==
* Mahmud of Ghazna – &quot;Columbia Encyclopedia&quot; (Sixth Edition)
* Mahmud – &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; (Online Edition)
* Ghaznavid Dynasty – &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; (Online Edition)
* Ghaznavids and Ghurids – &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; (Online Edition)
* Mahmud Ghaznavi&#x27;s 17 invasions of India (archived 11 March 2007)
* &quot;The History of India, as Told by Its Own Historians. The Muhammadan Period&quot;by Sir H. M. Elliot; Edited by John Dowson; London Trubner Company 1867–1877 Elliot, Sir H. M., Edited by Dowson, John. &quot;The History of India, as Told by Its Own Historians. The Muhammadan Period&quot;, published by London Trubner Company 1867–1877 (Online Copy: – Online version posted by: The Packard Humanities Institute; Persian Texts in translation).
* Afghan secrets revealed on Google Earth</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="4" end="21" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170270" start="54" end="64" title="Persianate" label="Persianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="65" end="71" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="83" end="89" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="96" end="102" title="mamluk" label="mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="130" end="146" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="154" end="170" title="Ghaznavids" label="Empire of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="244" end="248" title="Oxus" label="Oxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="256" end="268" title="Indus Valley" label="Indus Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="297" end="307" title="Sabuktigin" label="Sabuktigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180415" start="343" end="349" title="Ghazni Province" label="Ghazna"/>
<link wikidata="Q555219" start="388" end="397" title="Alp Tigin" label="Alp Tigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="428" end="442" title="Samanid Empire" label="Samanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182159" start="448" end="453" title="Balkh" label="Balkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="480" end="496" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="535" end="544" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="550" end="561" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="570" end="582" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q636188" start="602" end="605" title="Rey, Iran" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28587" start="610" end="617" title="Hamadan" label="Hamadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q936594" start="650" end="663" title="Mas&amp;#x27;ud I of Ghazni" label="Mas&amp;#x27;ud I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="744" end="757" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26493" start="768" end="788" title="Battle of Dandanaqan" label="Battle of Dandanaqan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="945" end="951" title="Ghurid dynasty" label="Ghurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702602" start="959" end="976" title="Ala al-Din Husayn" label="Ala al-Din Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="1033" end="1044" title="Ghuzz Turks" label="Ghuzz Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647182" start="1068" end="1084" title="Muhammad of Ghor" label="Muhammad of Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q114232321" start="1163" end="1183" title="Siege of Lahore (1186)" label="Lahore was conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q140973" start="1250" end="1263" title="Khusrau Malik" label="Khusrau Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="1379" end="1393" title="Samanid Empire" label="Samanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822447" start="1399" end="1408" title="Simjurids" label="Simjurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q617593" start="1501" end="1509" title="appanage" label="appanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q266641" start="1517" end="1525" title="Quhistan" label="Kohistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822447" start="1589" end="1609" title="Abu al-Hasan Simjuri" label="Abu al-Hasan Simjuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="1711" end="1715" title="emir" label="emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670959" start="1756" end="1770" title="Abd al-Malik I (Samanid emir)" label="Abd al-Malik I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717231" start="2004" end="2012" title="Mansur I" label="Mansur I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="2084" end="2094" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="2233" end="2242" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q273874" start="2303" end="2316" title="Buyid dynasty" label="Buyid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q815677" start="2668" end="2675" title="Karluks" label="Karluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764" start="2744" end="2751" title="Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="2792" end="2811" title="Kara-Khanid Khanate" label="Kara-Khanid Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="2902" end="2912" title="Sabuktigin" label="Sabuktigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="3000" end="3006" title="mamluk" label="mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q555219" start="3092" end="3100" title="Alp Tigin" label="Alptigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="3114" end="3120" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazna"/>
<link wikidata="Q96387084" start="3192" end="3204" title="Lawik dynasty" label="Lawik rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16159204" start="3431" end="3445" title="Abu Bakr Lawik" label="Abu Bakr Lawik"/>
<link wikidata="Q32617" start="4491" end="4497" title="Ismail of Ghazni" label="Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224206" start="5162" end="5178" title="Battle of Ghazni (998)" label="Battle of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="5221" end="5227" title="Mahmud of Ghaznavid" label="Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="5750" end="5755" title="Hindu Shahi" label="Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="5783" end="5790" title="Ismaili" label="Ismaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442854" start="5791" end="5808" title="Emirate of Multan" label="Kingdom of Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="5810" end="5815" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q273874" start="5833" end="5841" title="Buyid dynasty" label="Buwayhid"/>
<link wikidata="Q636188" start="6183" end="6186" title="Ray, Iran" label="Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="6190" end="6199" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="6210" end="6221" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="6229" end="6235" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="6306" end="6313" title="Turkmen people" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388040" start="6606" end="6618" title="Tash Farrash" label="Tash Farrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6743" end="6748" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="6760" end="6767" title="Mathura" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="6769" end="6776" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237228" start="6781" end="6788" title="Somnath" label="Somnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="6815" end="6826" title="Hindu Shahi" label="Hindu Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872019" start="6834" end="6852" title="Battle of Peshawar (1001)" label="Battle of Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777358" start="6880" end="6903" title="Bhera" label="Principality of Bhatiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442854" start="6933" end="6950" title="Emirate of Multan" label="Emirate of Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="6987" end="6999" title="Hindu Shahis" label="Hindu Shahis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23043477" start="7007" end="7022" title="Battle of Chach" label="Battle of Chach"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="7271" end="7278" title="Mathura" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319050" start="7369" end="7394" title="Firishta" label="Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q28173968" start="7554" end="7604" title="Art of Mathura" label="&amp;quot;all the idols&amp;quot; were burnt and destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="7734" end="7740" title="Kanauj" label="Kanauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324" start="7761" end="7771" title="Pratihara dynasty" label="Pratiharas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039087" start="7797" end="7806" title="Chandelas of Jejakabhukti" label="Chandelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143887" start="7891" end="7905" title="Somnath temple" label="Somnath temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7993" end="7998" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620460" start="8083" end="8100" title="Abolfazl Beyhaghi" label="Abolfazl Beyhaghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43459" start="8102" end="8110" title="Ferdowsi" label="Ferdowsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q936594" start="8447" end="8458" title="Mas&amp;#x27;ud I of Ghazni" label="Mas&amp;#x27;ud"/>
<link wikidata="Q26493" start="8743" end="8763" title="Battle of Dandanaqan" label="Battle of Dandanaqan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8808" end="8814" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q141055" start="9716" end="9723" title="Ibrahim of Ghazna" label="Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135130" start="10220" end="10228" title="Paramara dynasty" label="Paramara"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="10232" end="10237" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147823" start="10246" end="10255" title="Gahadvala" label="Gahadvala"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="10259" end="10266" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q140966" start="10312" end="10327" title="Mas&amp;#x27;ud III of Ghazni" label="Mas&amp;#x27;ud III"/>
<link wikidata="Q105360438" start="10418" end="10450" title="Palace of Sultan Mas&amp;#x27;ud III" label="Palace of Sultan Mas&amp;#x27;ud III"/>
<link wikidata="Q58333357" start="10466" end="10481" title="Ghazni Minarets" label="Ghazni Minarets"/>
<link wikidata="Q141094" start="10626" end="10637" title="Bahram-Shah of Ghazna" label="Bahram Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q141105" start="10691" end="10697" title="Arslan ibn Mas&amp;#x27;ud" label="Arslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207166" start="10720" end="10736" title="Battle of Ghazni (1117)" label="Battle of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q141094" start="10772" end="10790" title="Bahram-Shah of Ghazna" label="Sultan Bahram Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="10827" end="10833" title="Ghazna" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207176" start="10911" end="10929" title="Battle of Ghazni (1148)" label="defeated in Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q11947891" start="10933" end="10949" title="Sayf al-Din Suri" label="Sayf al-Din Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702602" start="10996" end="11013" title="Ala al-Din Husayn" label="Ala al-Din Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="11017" end="11023" title="Ghorid" label="Ghorid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207187" start="11030" end="11048" title="Battle of Ghazni (1151)" label="conquered the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q139125" start="11574" end="11584" title="Zabulistan" label="Zabulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="11609" end="11620" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Oghuz Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="11659" end="11665" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="11797" end="11803" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="12021" end="12027" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647182" start="12031" end="12047" title="Muhammad of Ghor" label="Muhammad of Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q114232321" start="12057" end="12104" title="Siege of Lahore (1186)" label="deposing the last Ghaznavid ruler Khusrau Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q140973" start="12111" end="12124" title="Khusrau Malik" label="Khusrau Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856199" start="12179" end="12187" title="Firozkoh" label="Firozkoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007968" start="12354" end="12360" title="Afghans" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="12420" end="12430" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q476800" start="12561" end="12572" title="Lashkar Gah" label="Lashkar Gah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="12599" end="12609" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="12675" end="12688" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab region"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="12721" end="12727" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744161" start="12770" end="12783" title="Romila Thapar" label="Romila Thapar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="12799" end="12805" title="Hindu" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15267557" start="12880" end="12890" title="sipahsalar" label="sipahsalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620460" start="13158" end="13165" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi" label="Baihaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="13229" end="13246" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184138" start="13338" end="13351" title="Arabian horse" label="Arabian horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="13685" end="13691" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="13721" end="13740" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indus-Ganges plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="13833" end="13846" title="war elephants" label="war elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="13890" end="13904" title="armour plating" label="armour plating"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="14099" end="14112" title="Central Asian" label="Central Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170273" start="14146" end="14157" title="Persianised" label="Persianised"/>
<link wikidata="Q40315" start="14281" end="14305" title="Clifford Edmund Bosworth" label="Clifford Edmund Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q734383" start="14489" end="14497" title="Farrukhi Sistani" label="Farrukhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="14615" end="14628" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Sultan Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340001" start="14699" end="14709" title="Manuchehri" label="Manuchehri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="14937" end="14945" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q274536" start="15305" end="15315" title="Azerbaijan (Iran)" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17043605" start="15320" end="15324" title="Persian Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="15444" end="15458" title="Samanid Empire" label="Samanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620460" start="15474" end="15497" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi" label="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686082" start="15511" end="15527" title="Tarikh-e Beyhaqi" label="Tarikh-e Beyhaqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="15739" end="15749" title="Sebuktigin" label="Sebuktigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="15754" end="15770" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q273874" start="16159" end="16172" title="Buyid dynasty" label="Buyid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319050" start="16283" end="16291" title="Firishta" label="Firishta"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="16319" end="16328" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="16351" end="16365" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q208463" start="16486" end="16495" title="Yazdegerd III" label="Yezdijird"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="16880" end="16886" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="16977" end="16988" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647943" start="17071" end="17093" title="Masud Sa&amp;#x27;d Salman" label="Masud Sa&amp;#x27;d Salman"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="18164" end="18176" title="Kara-Khanid Khanate" label="Kara-Khanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="18317" end="18321" title="raja" label="raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="18438" end="18451" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="18527" end="18546" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="18615" end="18628" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="18650" end="18657" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="18690" end="18697" title="Ghurid dynasty" label="Ghurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="18877" end="18884" title="Ghurid dynasty" label="Ghurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="18952" end="18967" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056650" start="19045" end="19091" title="List of battles involving the Ghaznavid Empire" label="List of battles involving the Ghaznavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188872" start="19093" end="19115" title="History of Afghanistan" label="History of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q726994" start="19117" end="19136" title="History of Pakistan" label="History of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816926" start="19138" end="19168" title="List of Sunni Muslim dynasties" label="List of Sunni Muslim dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="19935" end="19958" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42274" start="20687" end="20699" title="Google Earth" label="Google Earth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577846" wikidata="Q900206" url="?curid=577846" title="Redox titration">
<text>A redox titration is a type of titration based on a redox reaction between the analyte and titrant. It may involve the use of a redox indicator and/or a potentiometer. A common example of a redox titration is the treatment of a solution of iodine with a reducing agent to produce iodide using a starch indicator to help detect the endpoint. Iodine (I2) can be reduced to iodide (I−) by, say, thiosulfate (), and when all the iodine is consumed, the blue colour disappears. This is called an iodometric titration.

Most often, the reduction of iodine to iodide is the last step in a series of reactions where the initial reactions convert an unknown amount of the solute (the substance being analyzed) to an equivalent amount of iodine, which may then be titrated. Sometimes other halogens (or haloalkanes) besides iodine are used in the intermediate reactions because they are available in better measurable standard solutions and/or react more readily with the solute. The extra steps in iodometric titration may be worthwhile because the equivalence point, where the blue turns a bit colourless, is more distinct than in some other analytical or volumetric methods. 

The main redox titration types are:

== Sources ==

==See also==
*Oxidizing agent
*Reducing agent</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q900206" start="2" end="17" title="Redox titration" label="redox titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="31" end="40" title="titration" label="titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="52" end="66" title="redox reaction" label="redox reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282401" start="79" end="86" title="analyte" label="analyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q900774" start="128" end="143" title="redox indicator" label="redox indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="240" end="246" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="280" end="286" title="iodide" label="iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q899258" start="295" end="311" title="starch indicator" label="starch indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="341" end="347" title="Iodine" label="Iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="371" end="377" title="iodide" label="iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q410739" start="392" end="403" title="thiosulfate" label="thiosulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q899190" start="491" end="501" title="iodometry" label="iodometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="663" end="669" title="solute" label="solute"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="780" end="787" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q377109" start="908" end="925" title="standard solution" label="standard solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q256289" start="1040" end="1057" title="equivalence point" label="equivalence point"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="1236" end="1251" title="Oxidizing agent" label="Oxidizing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="1253" end="1267" title="Reducing agent" label="Reducing agent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577847" wikidata="Q3039" url="?curid=577847" title="Cassoulet">
<text>Cassoulet (, ,; ) is a rich, slow-cooked stew originating in southern France. The food writer Elizabeth David described it as &quot;that sumptuous amalgamation of haricot beans, sausage, pork, mutton and preserved goose, aromatically spiced with garlic and herbs&quot;. It originated in the town of Castelnaudary in the Aude department in the Occitanie region. Variants of the dish are local to other towns and cities in the Aude.

==History and etymology==
According to tradition, cassoulet was invented in 1355 in the town of Castelnaudary, under siege by the English during the Hundred Years&#x27; War. In medieval times the dish was referred to as an &quot;estouffet&quot;. The &quot;Dictionnaire de l&#x27;Académie française&quot; dates the term cassoulet to no earlier than the 19th century. The current name is a diminutive of the Languedoc &quot;cassolo&quot; – a cooking pot – according to the &quot;Dictionnaire de l&#x27;Académie française&quot;; Elizabeth David states that it comes from &quot;Cassol d&#x27;Issel&quot;, the original clay baking pot made in the small town of Issel, near Castelnaudary.

In cassoulets, the haricot bean is now always the principal ingredient. In the medieval period, broad beans (), fresh or dried, were used in stews of the cassoulet type. Sources differ on when haricots were first used instead of &quot;favolles&quot;: the &quot;Oxford Companion to Food&quot; states that haricots arrived in France via Spain from the New World in the 16th century; according to &quot;Larousse Gastronomique&quot; they were not used in France until the 19th century.

==Method==
Traditionally, the dish is cooked in an earthenware pot, which Jane Grigson notes is correctly called a cassole or toupin; she adds that any earthenware or stoneware casserole will do, &quot;provided it is deep and wide&quot;. The authors of &quot;Mastering the Art of French Cooking&quot;, Simone Beck, Louisette Bertholle and Julia Child, write, &quot;The composition of a cassoulet is, in typical French fashion, the subject of infinite dispute ... arguments about what should go into this famous dish seem based on local traditions&quot;. Although haricot beans are common to all varieties, the meats vary considerably. The &quot;Michelin Guide&quot; comments that every town brings its own personal touch to the recipe, all claiming the title of the one and only stronghold of authentic cassoulet. 

Beck, Bertholle and Child comment that regardless of local custom, an extremely good cassoulet can be made anywhere out of beans with &quot;whatever traditional meats are available: goose, game, pork, sausages, lamb, mutton&quot;. To this list, David adds turkey legs or wings, and Grigson adds partridges. In 1996, the &quot;Etats généraux de la gastronomie traditionnelle française&quot;, a professional body dedicated to promoting regional products and traditional cuisine, specified the following proportions for cassoulet: at least 30 per cent pork (which can include sausage and Toulouse sausage), mutton or preserved goose; and up to 70 per cent haricot beans and stock, fresh pork rind, herbs and flavourings.

The editor of the original &quot;Larousse Gastronomique&quot;, Prosper Montagné, divided the main varieties of cassoulet into &quot;the Trinity&quot;, according to the meats used, the &quot;Father&quot; being the cassoulet from Castelnaudary, the &quot;Son&quot; the cassoulet from Carcassonne and the &quot;Holy Ghost&quot; that from Toulouse. The Castelnaudary cassoulet contains pork (loin, ham, leg, sausages and fresh rind) and in some recipes preserved goose. The Carcassonne version uses leg of mutton and, when in season, partridge. The Toulouse cassoulet uses smaller quantities of the same meats used in Castelnaudary but adds Toulouse sausage and mutton and also duck or goose, according to &quot;Larousse&quot;, or partridge, according to Grigson. 

Other variants include the Montaubon cassoulet, spiced with tomato purée; the food historian Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat observes that it &quot;would be sacrilege to make cassoulet in Corbières without lightly salted pig&#x27;s tail and ears&quot;; and &quot;Larousse&quot; records a fish cassoulet, made with salt cod replacing the duck or goose. Common to most recipes for cassoulet is a sprinkling of breadcrumbs, to form a crust on the surface of the dish.

Although recipes have been published for haute cuisine versions of cassoulet in which roast meats are mixed with beans that have been simmered separately with aromatic vegetables, Beck, Bertholle and Child comment that cassoulet is not &quot;a kind of rare ambrosia&quot; but rather &quot;nourishing country fare&quot;. David calls it a &quot;sumptuous amalgamation of haricot beans, sausage, pork, mutton and preserved goose, aromatically spiced with garlic and herbs&quot;. In the process of preparing the dish, it is traditional to deglaze the pot from the previous cassoulet to give a base for the next one. This has led to stories, such as the one given by David, citing Anatole France, of a single original cassoulet being extended for years or even decades.

==La Grande confrérie==

In 1970, &quot;La Grande confrérie du cassoulet de Castelnaudary&quot; – The Grand Brotherhood of the Cassoulet of Castelnaudary – was established to increase the prestige and spread and defend the traditions and quality of cassoulet. Together with the town council and other bodies, the confrérie set up the Fête du Cassoulet in 2000, a three-day annual festival celebrating cassoulet, offering tastings along with free concerts, a flower parade and other attractions.

==See also==
* Cassolette
* Cholent
* Cozido
* Fabada asturiana
* Feijoada
* Guernsey bean jar
* List of casserole dishes
* List of French dishes
* List of sausage dishes
* List of stews
* Occitan cuisine
* Perpetual stew
* Pork and beans
==Notes, references and sources==
===Notes===
===References===
===Sources===
*
* 
*
*

== External links ==

* Sylvie Girard, La route du cassoulet, L&#x27;Express, 30 décembre 1988, https://archive.org/details/cassoulet-lexpress-30-dec-1988-contribution-2-its-history-and-tradition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3039" start="0" end="9" title="Cassoulet" label="Cassoulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="61" end="76" title="southern France" label="southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944293" start="94" end="109" title="Elizabeth David" label="Elizabeth David"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141829" start="163" end="176" title="haricot beans" label="haricot beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="193" end="199" title="mutton" label="mutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193861" start="299" end="312" title="Castelnaudary" label="Castelnaudary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207" start="320" end="324" title="Aude" label="Aude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="325" end="335" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q18678265" start="343" end="352" title="Occitania (administrative region)" label="Occitanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="353" end="359" title="Regions of France" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q193861" start="528" end="541" title="Castelnaudary" label="Castelnaudary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="581" end="604" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428961" start="688" end="729" title="Dictionnaire de l&amp;#x27;Académie française" label="Dictionnaire de l&amp;#x27;Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="838" end="847" title="Occitan language" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944293" start="958" end="973" title="Elizabeth David" label="Elizabeth David"/>
<link wikidata="Q819319" start="1088" end="1093" title="Issel, Aude" label="Issel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="1212" end="1223" title="broad beans" label="broad beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115298" start="1377" end="1401" title="Oxford Companion to Food" label="Oxford Companion to Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1466" end="1475" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102359" start="1516" end="1538" title="Larousse Gastronomique" label="Larousse Gastronomique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377111" start="1650" end="1661" title="earthenware" label="earthenware"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152315" start="1673" end="1685" title="Jane Grigson" label="Jane Grigson"/>
<link wikidata="Q830894" start="1766" end="1775" title="stoneware" label="stoneware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808021" start="1858" end="1893" title="Mastering the Art of French Cooking" label="Mastering the Art of French Cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288042" start="1901" end="1912" title="Simone Beck" label="Simone Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689034" start="1914" end="1933" title="Louisette Bertholle" label="Louisette Bertholle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214477" start="1938" end="1949" title="Julia Child" label="Julia Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="2244" end="2258" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q732775" start="2710" end="2719" title="partridge" label="partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474165" start="3000" end="3016" title="Toulouse sausage" label="Toulouse sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q152113" start="3197" end="3213" title="Prosper Montagné" label="Prosper Montagné"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="3416" end="3427" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="3469" end="3477" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q430351" start="3923" end="3932" title="Montaubon" label="Montaubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q857193" start="4079" end="4088" title="Corbières, Aude" label="Corbières"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428509" start="4205" end="4213" title="salt cod" label="salt cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q249277" start="4398" end="4411" title="haute cuisine" label="haute cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q322444" start="4892" end="4899" title="Deglazing (cooking)" label="deglaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="5033" end="5047" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169555" start="5086" end="5120" title="Perpetual stew" label="extended for years or even decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049502" start="5634" end="5644" title="Cassolette" label="Cassolette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433558" start="5647" end="5654" title="Cholent" label="Cholent"/>
<link wikidata="Q868158" start="5657" end="5663" title="Cozido" label="Cozido"/>
<link wikidata="Q995376" start="5666" end="5682" title="Fabada asturiana" label="Fabada asturiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q878189" start="5685" end="5693" title="Feijoada" label="Feijoada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118928" start="5696" end="5713" title="Guernsey bean jar" label="Guernsey bean jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716867" start="5716" end="5740" title="List of casserole dishes" label="List of casserole dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q111982662" start="5743" end="5764" title="List of French dishes" label="List of French dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099031" start="5767" end="5789" title="List of sausage dishes" label="List of sausage dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641477" start="5792" end="5805" title="List of stews" label="List of stews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392376" start="5808" end="5823" title="Occitan cuisine" label="Occitan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169555" start="5826" end="5840" title="Perpetual stew" label="Perpetual stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543811" start="5843" end="5857" title="Pork and beans" label="Pork and beans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577858" wikidata="Q1131737" url="?curid=577858" title="Imitation">
<text>Imitation (from Latin &quot;imitatio&quot;, &quot;a copying, imitation&quot;) is a behavior whereby an individual observes and replicates another&#x27;s behavior. Imitation is also a form of learning that leads to the &quot;development of traditions, and ultimately our culture. It allows for the transfer of information (behaviors, customs, etc.) between individuals and down generations without the need for genetic inheritance.&quot; The word &quot;imitation&quot; can be applied in many contexts, ranging from animal training to politics. The term generally refers to conscious behavior; subconscious imitation is termed mirroring.

==Anthropology and social sciences==
In anthropology, some theories hold that all cultures imitate ideas from one of a few original cultures or several cultures whose influence overlaps geographically. Evolutionary diffusion theory holds that cultures influence one another, but that similar ideas can be developed in isolation.

Scholars as well as popular authors have argued that the role of imitation in humans is unique among animals. However, this claim has been recently challenged by scientific research which observed social learning and imitative abilities in animals.

Psychologist Kenneth Kaye showed that the ability of infants to match the sounds or gestures of an adult depends on an interactive process of turn-taking over many successive trials, in which adults&#x27; instinctive behavior plays as great a role as that of the infant. These writers assume that evolution would have selected imitative abilities as fit because those who were good at it had a wider arsenal of learned behavior at their disposal, including tool-making and language.

However, research also suggests that imitative behaviors and other social learning processes are only selected for when outnumbered or accompanied by asocial learning processes: an over-saturation of imitation and imitating individuals leads humans to collectively copy inefficient strategies and evolutionarily maladaptive behaviors, thereby reducing flexibility to new environmental contexts that require adaptation. Research suggests imitative social learning hinders the acquisition of knowledge in novel environments and in situations where asocial learning is faster and more advantageous.

In the mid-20th century, social scientists began to study how and why people imitate ideas. Everett Rogers pioneered innovation diffusion studies, identifying factors in adoption and profiles of adopters of ideas. Imitation mechanisms play a central role in both analytical and empirical models of collective human behavior.

==Neuroscience==
Humans are capable of imitating movements, actions, skills, behaviors, gestures, pantomimes, mimics, vocalizations, sounds, speech, etc. and that we have particular &quot;imitation systems&quot; in the brain is old neurological knowledge dating back to Hugo Karl Liepmann. Liepmann&#x27;s model 1908 &quot;Das hierarchische Modell der Handlungsplanung&quot; (the hierarchical model of action planning) is still valid. On studying the cerebral localization of function, Liepmann postulated that planned or commanded actions were prepared in the parietal lobe of the brain&#x27;s dominant hemisphere, and also frontally. His most important pioneering work is when extensively studying patients with lesions in these brain areas, he discovered that the patients lost (among other things) the ability to imitate. He was the one who coined the term &quot;apraxia&quot; and differentiated between ideational and ideomotor apraxia. It is in this basic and wider frame of classical neurological knowledge that the discovery of the mirror neuron has to be seen. Though mirror neurons were first discovered in macaques, their discovery also relates to humans.

Human brain studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) revealed a network of regions in the inferior frontal cortex and inferior parietal cortex which are typically activated during imitation tasks. It has been suggested that these regions contain mirror neurons similar to the mirror neurons recorded in the macaque monkey. However, it is not clear if macaques spontaneously imitate each other in the wild.

Neurologist V. S. Ramachandran argues that the evolution of mirror neurons were important in the human acquisition of complex skills such as language and believes the discovery of mirror neurons to be a most important advance in neuroscience. However, little evidence directly supports the theory that mirror neuron activity is involved in cognitive functions such as empathy or learning by imitation.

Evidence is accumulating that bottlenose dolphins employ imitation to learn hunting and other skills from other dolphins.

Japanese monkeys have been seen to spontaneously begin washing potatoes after seeing humans washing them.

==Mirror neuron system==
Research has been conducted to locate where in the brain specific parts and neurological systems are activated when humans imitate behaviors and actions of others, discovering a mirror neuron system. This neuron system allows a person to observe and then recreate the actions of others. Mirror neurons are premotor and parietal cells in the macaque brain that fire when the animal performs a goal directed action and when it sees others performing the same action.&quot; Evidence suggests that the mirror neuron system also allows people to comprehend and understand the intentions and emotions of others. Problems of the mirror neuron system may be correlated with the social inadequacies of autism. There have been many studies done showing that children with autism, compared with typically-developing children, demonstrate reduced activity in the frontal mirror neuron system area when observing or imitating facial emotional expressions. Of course, the higher the severity of the disease, the lower the activity in the mirror neuron system is.

==Animal behavior==
Scientists debate whether animals can consciously imitate the unconscious incitement from &quot;sentinel&quot; animals, whether imitation is uniquely human, or whether humans do a complex version of what other animals do. The current controversy is partly definitional. Thorndike uses &quot;learning to do an act from seeing it done.&quot; It has two major shortcomings: first, by using &quot;seeing&quot; it restricts imitation to the visual domain and excludes, e.g., vocal imitation and, second, it would also include mechanisms such as priming, contagious behavior and social facilitation, which most scientist distinguish as separate forms of observational learning. Thorpe suggested defining imitation as &quot;the copying of a novel or otherwise improbable act or utterance, or some act for which there is clearly no instinctive tendency.&quot; This definition is favored by many scholars, though questions have been raised how strictly the term &quot;novel&quot; has to be interpreted and how exactly a performed act has to match the demonstration to count as a copy.

Hayes and Hayes (1952) used the &quot;do-as-I-do&quot; procedure to demonstrate the imitative abilities of their trained chimpanzee &quot;Viki.&quot; Their study was repeatedly criticized for its subjective interpretations of their subjects&#x27; responses. Replications of this study found much lower matching degrees between subjects and models. However, imitation research focusing on the copying fidelity got new momentum from a study by Voelkl and Huber. They analyzed the motion trajectories of both model and observer monkeys and found a high matching degree in their movement patterns.

Paralleling these studies, comparative psychologists provided tools or apparatuses that could be handled in different ways. Heyes and co-workers reported evidence for imitation in rats that pushed a lever in the same direction as their models, though later on they withdrew their claims due to methodological problems in their original setup. By trying to design a testing paradigm that is less arbitrary than pushing a lever to the left or to the right, Custance and co-workers introduced the &quot;artificial fruit&quot; paradigm, where a small object could be opened in different ways to retrieve food placed inside—not unlike a hard-shelled fruit. Using this paradigm, scientists reported evidence for imitation in monkeys and apes. There remains a problem with such tool (or apparatus) use studies: what animals might learn in such studies need not be the actual behavior patterns (i.e., the actions) that were observed. Instead they might learn about some effects in the environment (i.e., how the tool moves, or how the apparatus works). This type of observational learning, which focuses on results, not actions, has been dubbed emulation (see Emulation (observational learning)).

In an article written by Carl Zimmer, he looked into a study being done by Derek Lyons, focusing on human evolution, in which he studied a chimpanzee. He first started with showing the chimpanzee how to retrieve food from a box. The chimpanzee soon caught on and did exactly what the scientist just did. They wanted to see if the chimpanzee&#x27;s brain functioned just like a human brain, so they replicated the experiment using 16 children, following the same procedure; once the children saw how it was done, they followed the same exact steps.

===Imitation in animals===

Imitation in animals is a study in the field of social learning where learning behavior is observed in animals specifically how animals learn and adapt through imitation. Ethologists can classify imitation in animals by the learning of certain behaviors from conspecifics. More specifically, these behaviors are usually unique to the species and can be complex in nature and can benefit the individual&#x27;s survival.

Some scientists believe true imitation is only produced by humans, arguing that simple learning though sight is not enough to sustain as a being who can truly imitate. Thorpe defines true imitation as &quot;the copying of a novel or otherwise improbable act or utterance, or some act for which there is clearly no instinctive tendency,&quot; which is highly debated for its portrayal of imitation as a mindless repeating act. True imitation is produced when behavioral, visual and vocal imitation is achieved, not just the simple reproduction of exclusive behaviors. Imitation is not a simple reproduction of what one sees; rather it incorporates intention and purpose. Animal imitation can range from survival purpose; imitating as a function of surviving or adapting, to unknown possible curiosity, which vary between different animals and produce different results depending on the measured intelligence of the animal.

There is considerable evidence to support true imitation in animals. Experiments performed on apes, birds and more specifically the Japanese quail have provided positive results to imitating behavior, demonstrating imitation of opaque behavior. However the problem that lies is in the discrepancies between what is considered true imitation in behavior. Birds have demonstrated visual imitation, where the animal simply does as it sees. Studies on apes however have proven more advanced results in imitation, being able to remember and learn from what they imitate. Songbirds have specialized brain circuits for song learning and can imitate vocalizations of others. It is well established that birdsong is a type of animal culture transmitted across generations in certain groups. Studies have demonstrated far more positive results with behavioral imitation in primates and birds than any other type of animal. Imitation in non-primate mammals and other animals have been proven difficult to conclude solid positive results for and poses a difficult question to scientists on why that is so.

====Theories====

There are two types of theories of imitation, transformational and associative. Transformational theories suggest that the information that is required to display certain behavior is created internally through cognitive processes and observing these behaviors provides incentive to duplicate them. Meaning we already have the codes to recreate any behavior and observing it results in its replication. Albert Bandura&#x27;s &quot;social cognitive theory&quot; is one example of a transformational theory. Associative, or sometimes referred to as &quot;contiguity&quot;, theories suggest that the information required to display certain behaviors does not come from within ourselves but solely from our surroundings and experiences. These theories have not yet provided testable predictions in the field of social learning in animals and have yet to conclude strong results.

====New developments====

There have been three major developments in the field of animal imitation. The first, behavioral ecologists and experimental psychologists found there to be adaptive patterns in behaviors in different vertebrate species in biologically important situations. The second, primatologists and comparative psychologists have found imperative evidence that suggest true learning through imitation in animals. The third, population biologists and behavioral ecologists created experiments that demand animals to depend on social learning in certain manipulated environments.

==Child development==

Developmental psychologist Jean Piaget noted that children in a developmental phase he called the sensorimotor stage (a period which lasts up to the first two years of a child) begin to imitate observed actions. This is an important stage in the development of a child because the child is beginning to think symbolically, associating behaviors with actions, thus setting the child up for the development of further symbolic thinking. Imitative learning also plays a crucial role in the development of cognitive and social communication behaviors, such as language, play, and joint attention. Imitation serves as both a learning and a social function because new skills and knowledge are acquired, and communication skills are improved by interacting in social and emotional exchanges. It is shown, however, that &quot;children with autism exhibit significant deficits in imitation that are associated with impairments in other social communication skills.&quot; To help children with autism, reciprocal imitation training (RIT) is used. It is a naturalistic imitation intervention that helps teach the social benefits of imitation during play by increasing child responsiveness and by increasing imitative language.

Reinforcement learning, both positive and negative, and punishment, are used by people that children imitate to either promote or discontinue behavior. If a child imitates a certain type of behavior or action and the consequences are rewarding, the child is very likely to continue performing the same behavior or action. The behavior &quot;has been reinforced (i.e. strengthened)&quot;. However, if the imitation is not accepted and approved by others, then the behavior will be weakened.

Naturally, children are surrounded by many different types of people that influence their actions and behaviors, including parents, family members, teachers, peers, and even characters on television programs. These different types of individuals that are observed are called models. According to Saul McLeod, &quot;these models provide examples of masculine and feminine behavior to observe and imitate.&quot; Children imitate the behavior they have observed from others, regardless of the gender of the person and whether or not the behavior is gender appropriate. However, it has been proven that children will reproduce the behavior that &quot;its society deems appropriate for its sex.&quot;

===Infants===

Infants have the ability to reveal an understanding of certain outcomes before they occur, therefore in this sense they can somewhat imitate what they have perceived. Andrew N. Meltzoff, ran a series of tasks involving 14-month-old infants to imitate actions they perceived from adults. In this gathering he had concluded that the infants, before trying to reproduce the actions they wish to imitate, somehow revealed an understanding of the intended goal even though they failed to replicate the result wished to be imitated. These task implicated that the infants knew the goal intended. Gergely, Bekkering, and Király (2002) figured that infants not only understand the intended goal but also the intentions of the person they were trying to imitate engaging in &quot;rational imitation&quot;, as described by Tomasello, Carpenter and others 

It has long been claimed that newborn humans imitate bodily gestures and facial expressions as soon as their first few days of life. For example, in a study conducted at the Mailman Centre for Child Development at the University of Miami Medical School, 74 newborn babies (with a mean age of 36 hours) were tested to see if they were able to imitate a smile, a frown and a pout, and a wide-open mouth and eyes. An observer stood behind the experimenter (so he/she couldn&#x27;t see what facial expressions were being made by the experimenter) and watched only the babies&#x27; facial expressions, recording their results. Just by looking only at the babies&#x27; faces, the observer was more often able to correctly guess what facial expression was being presented to the child by the experimenter. After the results were calculated, &quot;the researchers concluded that...babies have an innate ability to compare an expression they see with their own sense of muscular feedback from making the movements to match that expression.&quot;

However, the idea that imitation is an inborn ability has been recently challenged. A research group from the University of Queensland in Australia carried out the largest-ever longitudinal study of neonatal imitation in humans. One hundred and nine newborns were shown a variety of gestures including tongue protrusion, mouth opening, happy and sad facial expressions, at four time points between one week and 9 weeks of age. The results failed to reveal compelling evidence that newborns imitate: Infants were just as likely to produce matching and non-matching gestures in response to what they saw.

At around eight months, infants will start to copy their child care providers&#x27; movements when playing pat-a-cake and peek-a-boo, as well as imitating familiar gestures, such as clapping hands together or patting a doll&#x27;s back. At around 18 months, infants will then begin to imitate simple actions they observe adults doing, such as taking a toy phone out of a purse and saying &quot;hello&quot;, pretending to sweep with a child-sized broom, as well as imitating using a toy hammer.

===Toddlers===

At around 30–36 months, toddlers will start to imitate their parents by pretending to get ready for work and school and saying the last word(s) of what an adult just said. For example, toddlers may say &quot;bowl&quot; or &quot;a bowl&quot; after they hear someone say, &quot;That&#x27;s a bowl.&quot; They may also imitate the way family members communicate by using the same gestures and words. For example, a toddler will say, &quot;Mommy bye-bye&quot; after the father says, &quot;Mommy went bye-bye.&quot;

Toddlers love to imitate their parents and help when they can; imitation helps toddlers learn, and through their experiences lasting impressions are made. 12- to 36-month-olds learn by doing, not by watching, and so it is often recommended to be a good role model and caretaker by showing them simple tasks like putting on socks or holding a spoon.

Duke developmental psychologist Carol Eckerman did a study on toddlers imitating toddlers and found that at the age of 2 children involve themselves in imitation play to communicate with one another. This can be seen within a culture or across different cultures. 3 common imitative patterns Eckerman found were reciprocal imitation, follow-the-leader, and lead-follow.

Kenneth Kaye&#x27;s &quot;apprenticeship&quot; theory of imitation rejected assumptions that other authors had made about its development. His research showed that there is no one simple imitation skill with its own course of development. What changes is the type of behavior imitated.

An important agenda for infancy is the progressive imitation of higher levels of use of signs, until the ultimate achievement of symbols. The principal role played by parents in this process is their provision of salient models within the facilitating frames that channel the infant&#x27;s attention and organize his imitative efforts.

===Gender and age differences===
Imitation and imitative behaviors do not manifest ubiquitously and evenly in all human individuals; some individuals rely more on imitated information than others. Although imitation is very useful when it comes to cognitive learning with toddlers, research has shown that there are some gender and age differences when it comes to imitation. Research done to judge imitation in toddlers 2–3 years old shows that when faced with certain conditions &quot;2-year-olds displayed more motor imitation than 3-year-olds, and 3-year-olds displayed more verbal-reality imitation than 2-year-olds. Boys displayed more motor imitation than girls.&quot;

No other research is more controversial pertaining gender differences in toddler imitation than psychologist, Bandura&#x27;s, bobo doll experiments. The goal of the experiment was to see what happens to toddlers when exposed to aggressive and non-aggressive adults, would the toddlers imitate the behavior of the adults and if so, which gender is more likely to imitate the aggressive adult. In the beginning of the experiment Bandura had several predictions that actually came true. Children exposed to violent adults will imitate the actions of that adult when the adult is not present, boys who had observed an adult of the opposite sex act aggressively are less likely to act violently than those who witnessed a male adult act violently. In fact &quot;boys who observed an adult male behaving violently were more influenced than those who had observed a female model behavior aggressively&quot;. One observation was that while boys are likely to imitate physical acts of violence, girls are likely to imitate verbal acts of violence.

===Negative imitation===
Imitation plays a major role on how a toddler interprets the world. Much of a child&#x27;s understanding is derived from imitation, due to a lack of verbal skill imitation in toddlers for communication. It is what connects them to the communicating world, as they continue to grow they begin to learn more. This may mean that it is crucial for parents to be cautious as to how they act and behave around their toddlers. Imitation is the toddlers way of confirming and dis-conforming socially acceptable actions in society. Actions like washing dishes, cleaning up the house and doing chores are actions you want your toddlers to imitate. Imitating negative things is something that is never beyond young toddlers. If they are exposed to cursing and violence, it is going to be what the child views as the norm of their world, since imitation is the &quot;mental activity that helps to formulate the conceptions of the world for toddlers&quot;. So it is important for parents to be careful what they say or do in front of their children.

===Autism===
Children with autism exhibit significant impairment in imitation skills. Imitation deficits have been reported on a variety of tasks including symbolic and non-symbolic body movements, symbolic and functional object use, vocalizations, and facial expressions. In contrast, typically-developing children can copy a broad range of novel (as well as familiar) rules from a very early age. Problems with imitation discriminate children with autism from those with other developmental disorders as early as age 2 and continue into adulthood.

Children with autism exhibit significant deficits in imitation that are associated with impairments in other social communication skills. It is unclear whether imitation is mediating these relationships directly, or whether they are due to some other developmental variable that is also reflected in the measurement of imitation skills.

On the contrary, research from the early 21st century suggests that people affected with forms of high-functioning autism easily interact with one another by using a more analytically-centered communication approach rather than an imitative cue-based approach, suggesting that reduced imitative capabilities do not affect abilities for expressive social behavior but only the understanding of said social behavior. Social communication is not negatively affected when said communication involves less or no imitation. Children with autism may have significant problems understanding typical social communication not because of inherent social deficits, but because of differences in communication style which affect reciprocal understanding.

Autistic individuals are also shown to possess increased analytical, cognitive, and visual processing, suggesting that they have no true impairments in observing the actions of others but may decide not to imitate them because they do not analytically understand them. A 2016 study has shown that involuntary, spontaneous facial mimicry – which supposedly depends on the mirror neuron system – is intact in individuals with autism, contrasting with previous studies and suggesting that the mirror neuron system is not inherently broken in autistic individuals.

==Automatic imitation==
The automatic imitation comes very fast when a stimulus is given to replicate. The imitation can match the commands with the visual stimulus (compatible) or it cannot match the commands with the visual stimulus (incompatible). For example: &#x27;Simon Says&#x27;, a game played with children where they are told to follow the commands given by the adult. In this game, the adult gives the commands and shows the actions; the commands given can either match the action to be done or it will not match the action. The children who imitate the adult who has given the command with the correct action will stay in the game. The children who imitate the command with the wrong action will go out of the game, and this is where the child&#x27;s automatic imitation comes into play. Psychologically, the visual stimulus being looked upon by the child is being imitated faster than the imitation of the command. In addition, the response times were faster in compatible scenarios than in incompatible scenarios.

Children are surrounded by many different people, day by day. Their parents make a big impact on them, and usually what the children do is what they have seen their parent do. In this article they found that a child, simply watching its mother sweep the floor, right after soon picks up on it and starts to imitate the mother by sweeping the floor. By the children imitating, they are really teaching themselves how to do things without instruction from the parent or guardian. Toddlers love to play the game of house. They picked up on this game of house by television, school or at home; they play the game how they see it. The kids imitate their parents or anybody in their family. In the article it says it is so easy for them to pick up on the things they see on an everyday basis.

==Over-imitation==
Over-imitation is &quot;the tendency of young children to copy all of an adult model&#x27;s actions, even components that are irrelevant for the task at hand.&quot; According to this human and cross-cultural phenomenon, a child has a strong tendency to automatically encode the deliberate action of an adult as causally meaningful even when the child observes evidence that proves that its performance is unnecessary. It is suggested that over-imitation &quot;may be critical to the transmission of human culture.&quot; Experiments done by Lyons et al. (2007) has shown that when there are obvious pedagogical cues, children tend to imitate step by step, including many unnecessary steps; without pedagogical cues, children will simply skip those useless steps.

However, another study suggests that children do not just &quot;blindly follow the crowd&quot; since they can also be just as discriminating as adults in choosing whether an unnecessary action should be copied or not. They may imitate additional but unnecessary steps to a novel process if the adult demonstrations are all the same. However, in cases where one out of four adults showed a better technique, only 40% actually copied the extra step, as described by Evans, Carpenter and others. Children&#x27;s imitation is selective, also known as &quot;selective imitation&quot;. Studies have shown that children tend to imitate older, competitive, and trustworthy individuals.

==Deferred imitation==
Piaget coined the term &quot;deferred imitation&quot; and suggested that it arises out of the child&#x27;s increasing ability to &quot;form mental representations of behavior performed by others.&quot; Deferred imitation is also &quot;the ability to reproduce a previously witnessed action or sequence of actions in the absence of current perceptual support for the action.&quot; Instead of copying what is currently occurring, individuals repeat the action or behavior later on. It appears that infants show an improving ability for deferred imitation as they get older, especially by 24 months. By 24 months, infants are able to imitate action sequences after a delay of up to three months, meaning that &quot;they&#x27;re able to generalize knowledge they have gained from one test environment to another and from one test object to another.&quot;

A child&#x27;s deferred imitation ability &quot;to form mental representations of actions occurring in everyday life and their knowledge of communicative gestures&quot; has also been linked to earlier productive language development. Between 9 (preverbal period) and 16 months (verbal period), deferred imitation performance on a standard actions-on-objects task was consistent in one longitudinal study testing participants&#x27; ability to complete a target action, with high achievers at 9 months remaining so at 16 months. Gestural development at 9 months was also linked to productive language at 16 months. Researchers now believe that early deferred imitation ability is indicative of early declarative memory, also considered a predictor of productive language development.

==See also==
* Appropriation (sociology)
* Articulation (sociology)
* Associative Sequence Learning
* Cognitive imitation
* Copycat crime
* Copycat suicide
* Identification (psychology)
* Mimicry
* Royal Commission on Animal Magnetism

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==

* M. Metzmacher, 1995. La transmission du chant chez le Pinson des arbres (&quot;Fringilla c. coelebs&quot;) : phase sensible et rôle des tuteurs chez les oiseaux captifs. &quot;Alauda&quot;, 63 : 123 – 134. 
* M. Metzmacher, 2016. Imitations et transmission culturelle dans le chant du Pinson des arbres &quot;Fringilla coelebs&quot; ? &quot;Alauda&quot;, 84 : 203-220.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1131737" start="0" end="9" title="Imitation" label="Imitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="83" end="91" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="239" end="248" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="270" end="277" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="309" end="320" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="410" end="429" title="genetic inheritance" label="genetic inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193939" start="514" end="529" title="animal training" label="animal training"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="533" end="541" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="572" end="581" title="Consciousness" label="conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q848369" start="592" end="604" title="subconscious" label="subconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q350865" start="625" end="634" title="Mirroring (psychology)" label="mirroring"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="677" end="689" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="696" end="704" title="Theory" label="theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q131841" start="736" end="740" title="idea" label="idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1045" end="1050" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="1068" end="1074" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q105908696" start="1164" end="1179" title="Social learning in animals" label="social learning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1184" end="1214" title="#Imitation in animals" label="imitative abilities in animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390306" start="1230" end="1242" title="Kenneth Kaye" label="Kenneth Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="1270" end="1276" title="infant" label="infant"/>
<link wikidata="Q371174" start="1301" end="1308" title="gesture" label="gesture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80994" start="1316" end="1321" title="adult" label="adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313343" start="1359" end="1370" title="turn-taking" label="turn-taking"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="1690" end="1698" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337214" start="1768" end="1783" title="Social learning theory" label="social learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="1983" end="1993" title="Strategy" label="strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864574" start="2013" end="2024" title="Maladaptation" label="maladaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="2108" end="2118" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="2191" end="2200" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061477" start="2390" end="2404" title="Everett Rogers" label="Everett Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q304994" start="2415" end="2435" title="innovation diffusion" label="innovation diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="2626" end="2638" title="Neuroscience" label="Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q205961" start="2693" end="2698" title="skill" label="skill"/>
<link wikidata="Q73579" start="2894" end="2912" title="Hugo Karl Liepmann" label="Hugo Karl Liepmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q498916" start="3491" end="3498" title="apraxia" label="apraxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988100" start="3532" end="3542" title="Ideational apraxia" label="ideational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656793" start="3547" end="3556" title="Ideomotor apraxia" label="ideomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q309082" start="3664" end="3677" title="mirror neuron" label="mirror neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="3818" end="3855" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="functional magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="3909" end="3923" title="frontal cortex" label="frontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="3937" end="3952" title="parietal cortex" label="parietal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q309082" start="4056" end="4070" title="mirror neurons" label="mirror neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q177601" start="4117" end="4131" title="macaque monkey" label="macaque monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q380221" start="4229" end="4247" title="V.S. Ramachandran" label="V. S. Ramachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="4446" end="4458" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="4557" end="4566" title="cognitive" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="4585" end="4592" title="empathy" label="empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="4650" end="4668" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309082" start="5053" end="5066" title="mirror neuron" label="mirror neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q706622" start="5446" end="5455" title="intention" label="intention"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="5461" end="5468" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="5568" end="5574" title="Autism spectrum" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569" start="5623" end="5631" title="children" label="children"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915349" start="5659" end="5679" title="Neurotypical" label="typically-developing"/>
<link wikidata="Q327968" start="5788" end="5816" title="Facial expression" label="facial emotional expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143725" start="6593" end="6615" title="observational learning" label="observational learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q18237" start="6769" end="6780" title="instinctive" label="instinctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="7143" end="7153" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="7507" end="7519" title="trajectories" label="trajectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="7547" end="7554" title="monkeys" label="monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="7797" end="7800" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="8348" end="8351" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374873" start="8769" end="8803" title="Emulation (observational learning)" label="Emulation (observational learning)"/>
<link wikidata="Q369116" start="8832" end="8843" title="Carl Zimmer" label="Carl Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143725" start="9432" end="9447" title="Observational learning" label="social learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="9454" end="9462" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="9463" end="9471" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782625" start="9643" end="9655" title="conspecifics" label="conspecifics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104482419" start="9793" end="9801" title="survival" label="survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="9907" end="9912" title="Visual perception" label="sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q558363" start="10274" end="10280" title="visual" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390" start="10285" end="10290" title="vocal" label="vocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="10334" end="10346" title="reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="10465" end="10472" title="Motivation" label="purpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q366791" start="10594" end="10603" title="curiosity" label="curiosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="10698" end="10710" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="10787" end="10794" title="animals" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="10821" end="10825" title="apes" label="apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="10827" end="10832" title="birds" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q716869" start="10859" end="10873" title="Japanese quail" label="Japanese quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="10918" end="10926" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="10962" end="10970" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="11071" end="11079" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="11081" end="11086" title="Birds" label="Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q558363" start="11105" end="11111" title="visual" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="11133" end="11139" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="11175" end="11179" title="apes" label="apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="11263" end="11268" title="learn" label="learn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131737" start="11284" end="11291" title="imitate" label="imitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q194240" start="11293" end="11302" title="Songbirds" label="Songbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126556" start="11422" end="11430" title="Bird vocalization" label="birdsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007160" start="11444" end="11458" title="animal culture" label="animal culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="11566" end="11576" title="behavioral" label="behavioral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="11590" end="11598" title="primates" label="primates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="11603" end="11608" title="birds" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="11632" end="11638" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="11657" end="11664" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="11665" end="11672" title="mammals" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="11683" end="11690" title="animals" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="11791" end="11800" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143950" start="11886" end="11902" title="Transformational Theory of Imitation" label="transformational"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="11907" end="11918" title="associative" label="associative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="11963" end="11974" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="12050" end="12059" title="cognitive" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q153753" start="12242" end="12256" title="Albert Bandura" label="Albert Bandura"/>
<link wikidata="Q383646" start="12270" end="12293" title="social cognitive theory" label="social cognitive theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="12345" end="12356" title="Associative" label="Associative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143725" start="12646" end="12661" title="Observational learning" label="social learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205637" start="12827" end="12847" title="behavioral ecologist" label="behavioral ecologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q475042" start="12853" end="12878" title="experimental psychologist" label="experimental psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083958" start="12907" end="12915" title="patterns" label="patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="12942" end="12952" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="12953" end="12960" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q219488" start="13011" end="13025" title="primatologists" label="primatologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483503" start="13030" end="13054" title="comparative psychologist" label="comparative psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="13211" end="13221" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143725" start="13256" end="13271" title="Observational learning" label="social learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="13295" end="13307" title="environment (biophysical)" label="environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190" start="13360" end="13371" title="Jean Piaget" label="Jean Piaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q551897" start="13431" end="13449" title="sensorimotor stage" label="sensorimotor stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029479" start="13768" end="13786" title="Imitative learning" label="Imitative learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636076" start="13909" end="13924" title="joint attention" label="joint attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q830687" start="14551" end="14573" title="Reinforcement learning" label="Reinforcement learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544090" start="14607" end="14617" title="punishment (psychology)" label="punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758101" start="15921" end="15939" title="Andrew N. Meltzoff" label="Andrew N. Meltzoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q714346" start="16567" end="16576" title="Michael Tomasello" label="Tomasello"/>
<link wikidata="Q21264304" start="16578" end="16587" title="Malinda Carpenter" label="Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18350" end="18360" title="Pat-a-cake#Game" label="pat-a-cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q53705" start="18365" end="18375" title="peek-a-boo" label="peek-a-boo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340307" start="18778" end="18785" title="toddler" label="toddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="19616" end="19620" title="Duke University" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390306" start="19987" end="19999" title="Kenneth Kaye" label="Kenneth Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q888802" start="21414" end="21434" title="bobo doll experiment" label="bobo doll experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q80994" start="23930" end="23939" title="adulthood" label="adulthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788847" start="24378" end="24401" title="high-functioning autism" label="high-functioning autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551030" start="24521" end="24530" title="Social cue" label="cue-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q109546940" start="24948" end="24982" title="Double empathy problem" label="differences in communication style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147331" start="24996" end="25006" title="Reciprocity (social psychology)" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751139" start="25080" end="25090" title="Analytic reasoning" label="analytical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="25092" end="25101" title="Cognition" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936617" start="25107" end="25124" title="visual processing" label="visual processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="25352" end="25359" title="mimicry" label="mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="25656" end="25664" title="Stimulus (physiology)" label="stimulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287999" start="25855" end="25865" title="Simon Says" label="Simon Says"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781738" start="30536" end="30561" title="Appropriation (sociology)" label="Appropriation (sociology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800961" start="30564" end="30588" title="Articulation (sociology)" label="Articulation (sociology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810166" start="30591" end="30620" title="Associative Sequence Learning" label="Associative Sequence Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141211" start="30623" end="30642" title="Cognitive imitation" label="Cognitive imitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q109931" start="30645" end="30658" title="Copycat crime" label="Copycat crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047483" start="30661" end="30676" title="Copycat suicide" label="Copycat suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493413" start="30679" end="30706" title="Identification (psychology)" label="Identification (psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="30709" end="30716" title="Mimicry" label="Mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106076363" start="30719" end="30755" title="Royal Commission on Animal Magnetism" label="Royal Commission on Animal Magnetism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577859" wikidata="Q32853" url="?curid=577859" title="Sabuktigin">
<text>Abu Mansur Nasir ad-Din wa&#x27;d-Dawla Sabuktigin (; 940s – August-September 997) was the founder of the Ghaznavid dynasty, and amir of Ghazna from 977 to 997. Sabuktigin was a Turkic slave who was bought by Alp-Tegin, the commander of the royal guard of the Samanid dynasty. Alp-Tegin established himself as the governor of Ghazna in 962, and died a year later in 963. Afterwards, Sabuktigin built his prestige among other slave soldiers in Ghazna until he was elected by them as their ruler in 977.

Sabuktigin expanded his rule down to south of present-day Afghanistan and north of Balochistan. Through conflicts with the Hindu Shahi dynasty of Kabul, he invaded Indian lands, opening the gates of India for the future monarchs of his dynasty. As a vassal of the Samanid Empire, he answered Nuh II&#x27;s call to help regarding Abu Ali Simjuri&#x27;s rebellion, defeating the latter in several battles during 994 to 996. Towards the end of his life, Sabuktigin arranged an agreement with the Kara-Khanid Khanate, Samanids&#x27; rivals, to partition Nuh&#x27;s realm between themselves. However, before he could realize this agreement, he died on his way to Ghazna on August-September 997.

As the founder of the Ghaznavid dynasty, Sabuktigin was later idealized by Ghaznavid historians as a just and forgiving ruler, though these traits may have no basis in reality. He was the image of the &quot;founding monarch&quot; archetype, developed by historians such as Abu&#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi, who drew a contrast between the humble and just Sabuktigin with his successors. This conclusion was shared by later historians such as Nizam al-Mulk and lived all the way to Babur, the founding monarch of the Mughal Empire, who was influenced by Sabuktigin half a millennium after his death.

== Name ==
Sabuktigin is a Turkic name meaning &quot;beloved prince&quot;, however, during his era, the Old Turkic had degenerated from &quot;prince&quot; to a synonym for Turkic slave commanders under the Abbasid service. His (agnomen) means &quot;Protector of the Faith and State&quot;. According to al-Biruni, before , Sabuktigin held the . As an autonomous vassal of the Samanid dynasty, Sabuktigin was referred to as amir, contrary to his descendants who assumed the royal title of sultan.

== Early years ==
Born around 940s, there is not much known about Sabuktigin&#x27;s early life. In Sabuktigin&#x27;s &quot;Pandnama&quot;, a mirror for princes epistle, he attests that he came from a tribe in Barskhan, therefore he probably belonged to a Karluk tribe. His father was called Juq, and in contemporary Chinese documents, Sabuktigin is referred to as Sabuktigin, son of Juq. However, Juzjani, a 13-century historian, citing &quot;Tarikh-i Majadwal&quot; by Abu Al-Qasim Imami (written in early twelfth-century) states that Sabuktigin&#x27;s father was called Qara Bechkem, and through a fabricated genealogy, links him to the last Sasanian , Yazdegerd III (), claiming his daughter married a Turkic chief.Sabuktigin recounts that his tribe was raided and he, along with all the women and the children, was captured. His captors, a rival Karluk tribe, sold him at a slave market at Nakhshab (modern-day Qarshi). Later, he was bought by Alp-Tegin, himself a slave and a prominent commander. Sebuktigin quickly became integrated in the Persian community around him, despite being a stranger at first.

He flourished under Alp-Tegin&#x27;s patronage and by the age of eighteen, commanded 200 (military slaves). At the time, Alp-Tegin served as the head of the royal guard of the Samanid dynasty, but in 962, after he fell from grace, he left his position and sought to establish an independent rule in Ghazna, in present-day eastern Afghanistan. Sabuktigin accompanied him and helped defeating the Samanid army in Tokharistan. Eventually, Alp-Tegin conquered Ghazna from its local ruler, Abu Bakr Lawik, and was recognised as governor by the Samanid administration. He died shortly after in 963, and was succeeded by his son, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim, who also became Sabuktigin&#x27;s new master.

After Abu Ishaq&#x27;s brief reign and death in 966, the Turkic in Ghazna reconciled with the Samanid government but remained autonomous and chose their leaders from their commanders. During the successive reigns of Bilgetegin (966-975) and Böritigin (975-977), Sabuktigin increased his prestige among his troops. In 977, the citizens of Ghazna, tired of the unpopular Böritigin, invited Abu Ali Lawik, Abu Bakr&#x27;s son, to rule their city. The Hindu Shahi dynasty of Kabul supported Lawik and sent a large force under his leadership towards Ghazna. Sabuktigin united the Turkic garrisons of Gardez, Ghazna and Bamyan and defeated the invading forces at Charkh, killing Lawik in the process. Afterwards, with the support of the army, Sabuktigin replaced Böritigin as the governor.

== Reign ==

=== Land expansions ===

In 978, Sabuktigin invaded Rukkhaj and Bust in the south of his realm and subdued a rival Turkic group who were installed there earlier in the century by Qaratigin Isfijabi (d. 929), another rebellious Samanid . He continued his expansion into Qusdar in north-east Baluchistan and a number of frontier forts belonging to Shahi dynasty. 

With the backing of as a , Sabuktigin raided the neighbouring Indian lands and destroyed Hindu temples, replacing them with mosques. The Shahi , Jayapala, placed Afghan garrisons in Multan and Laghman, but they joined Sabuktigin. His threat prompted Jayapala to form an alliance with the Punjabi Muslim Emirate of Multan and march towards Ghazna with a large army in 986. A battle took place in Laghman which after days had no definitive winner. However, a sudden snowstorm devastated Jayapala&#x27;s army. The cause of this storm&#x27;s eruption, according to al-Utbi&#x27;s history book &quot;Tarikh-i Yamini&quot;, was Sabuktigin himself. 

Jayapala conceded to a humiliating treaty with conditions such as paying 1 million dirhams, and granting his relatives as hostages to Sabuktigin. Yet, he did not uphold the treaty once he returned to his realm, causing Sabuktigin to march towards his realm with an army composed of Afghans and Khalajs in 988. Jayapala, who held some prestige among Indian rulers, mustered an army with the assistance of Delhi, Ajmer, Kalinjar and Kannauj. They again battled in Laghman, and this time Sabuktigin defeated Jayapala completely and captured the lands between Lamghan and Peshawar, housing 2000 horsemen in the latter as garrison.

=== Revolt of Fa&#x27;iq Khassa and Abu Ali Simjuri ===

Throughout his reign, Sabuktigin acknowledged Samanid sovereignty, he minted the names of Samanid amirs before his own name in his coins, and used the title (Most Exalted Commander) to indicate his subordinate status. This display was only nominal, since he was not bound to any vassalage obligations. The Samanid amir, Nuh II, came to gradually rely on Sabuktigin&#x27;s military for defense against Kara-Khanid Khanate in the north, who were a constant threat to his borders. In 994, Nuh requested Sabuktigin&#x27;s help in subduing the rebellious Abu Ali Simjuri and his Kara-Khanid supporter, Fa&#x27;iq Khassa.

Sabuktigin with his son Mahmud in tow, met Simjuri&#x27;s army at Herat. During initial negotiations, Sabuktigin agreed to peace if only Abu Ali pledged obedience to Nuh II and paid a sum of 15 million dirhams as compensation. Abu Ali&#x27;s warriors found these terms too humiliating and thus attacked Sabuktigin&#x27;s army on their own. Fa&#x27;iq&#x27;s men quickly disarrayed Sabuktigin&#x27;s war elephants, which made him furious. The battle was a victory for Abu Ali until one of his allies, the Ziyarid prince Dara who ruled Gorgan, deserted his army and joined Sabuktigin. Abu Ali and Fa&#x27;iq fled towards Gorgan to seek help from their ally, Fakhr al-Dawla (Dara&#x27;s overlord). For their victory, Sabuktigin and Mahmud were rewarded with and Mahmud became the commander of the army of Khorasan. In 995, Fa&#x27;iq and Abu Ali invaded Nishapur, and when Sabuktigin arrived, instead of fighting him, asked for forgiveness. Sabuktigin refused and launched an attack. His war elephants crushed many of Abu Ali&#x27;s soldiers and chief commanders. Abu Ali was imprisoned in 996 and was killed in 997 on Sabuktigin&#x27;s order.

=== Administration ===
Sabuktigin put forth a set of reforms regarding the system in his realm. During Alp-Tegin&#x27;s tenure, soldiers earned their pay through plunder and raids, but from his death to Sabuktigin&#x27;s ascension, payment from raids ceased and soldiers turned to as a source of income. Gradually, the soldiers turned their lands into independent ownerships and grew disinclined to fight for their ruler. Moreover, their dominance upon farming lands burdened the farmers and had pampered their production. Therefore, upon ascension, Sabuktigin&#x27;s treasury was empty of gold and silver and reportedly only contained &quot;swords and silks&quot;. Sabuktigin first ordered his commanders to give him gifts for his ascension, and then confiscated farming and lands back into governmental domains, promising to pay his army from his treasury and from spoils of war, making his army dependent on him for their earnings.

Sparse details remain about Sabuktigin&#x27;s bureaucratic retinue; there are no recorded names of his viziers (ministers), and it is speculated that he utilized the local Persian secretaries and officials in Ghazna. After his conquest of Bust, Sabuktigin brought with himself the local secretary and poet Abu al-Fath al-Busti, who became his chancellor. Moreover, al-Utbi, who previously served the Samanids, Abu Ali Simjuri and the Ziyarid ruler Qabus, became his secretary. According to al-Utbi, Sabuktigin was initially mistrustful of him and of al-Busti, because both had served his rivals, but then both successfully gained his favour and served in high positions.

Sabiktigin was the first ruler to bring Islam into the northwest India. He believed in the Hanafi school of Sunni Islam and converted into a Hanafite sect called the Karramiyya. According to Bosworth, the reason for his conversion was his entrancement with the Karramiyya leader, the ascetic Abu Ya&#x27;qub Ishaq ibn Mahmudshadh (d. 993).

=== Death and succession ===
In 996, Nuh II again requested Sabuktigin&#x27;s support against Nasr ibn Ali, the Kara-Khanid , however, after a falling out between the two, Sabuktigin made a secret agreement with Nasr to separate the Samanid realms in Transoxiana between themselves. But shortly after, when he was returning to Ghazna, Sabuktigin died in a village north of Hindu Kush on August-September 997. 

According to Juzjani, Sabuktigin had a total of six sons, of which three were in their adolescence when he died: Mahmud, Abu al-Muzzafar Nasr, and Ismail. One other son, Yusuf, was still a child at the time of his death. He also had a daughter called Hurra-yi Khuttali who later married two rulers of Khwarazm from the Ma&#x27;munid dynasty: Abu al-Hasan Ali and Ma&#x27;mun II. Though there are no given birth dates, Ismail seems to have been his youngest adult son, born from a daughter of Alp-Tegin. His maternal lineage may have influenced Sabuktigin to pass Ghazna onto Ismail upon his death, since it was befitting that a descendant of Alp-Tegin would rule Ghazna. For Nasr, he left Bust, and since Mahmud was commanding the army of Khorasan, Sabuktigin could not bestow him any titles and left nothing for him.

In 998, during a succession struggle, Mahmud deposed Ismail and took his place. In 999, his invasion of Khorasan, along with Kara-Khanid&#x27;s intrusion from north, finally put an end to the Samanid Empire, after which, Mahmud and Nasr ibn Ali partitioned the Samanid lands between themselves.

== Assessment and legacy ==
Abu&#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi, in his history book &quot;Tarikh-i Bayhaqi&quot;, portrayed Sabuktigin as a just ruler, contrasting him with his patron and Sabuktigin&#x27;s grandson, Masʽud I. Before him, al-Utbi had portrayed Sabuktigin as an approachable, forgiving and just ruler, to contrast him with Mahmud. However, according to the British orientalist Clifford Edmund Bosworth, no traits can be attributed to Sabuktigin&#x27;s personality because of a lack in evidence. In truth, Ghaznavid historians such as Bayhaqi conceptualized Sabuktigin as the ideal image of an archetype: the founding monarch, who lived a simple life and was a humble soldier who imposed justice. This representation continued with Nizam al-Mulk, the vizier of the Seljuk Empire, who idealized Sabuktigin. This image persisted even half a millennium later, when Babur, the founder of the Mughal Empire, citing al-Utbi&#x27;s work, sought to find a way to erupt a snowstorm just as Sabuktigin had done.

Sabuktigin was the first Ghaznavid ruler to invade India. According to al-Biruni, he opened the gates of India for his successor, Mahmud. Sabuktigin&#x27;s conquests facilitated the beginning of the Turko-Afghan period into India, which would be further conducted by Mahmud, and later the Ghurids until the Turko-Afghans successfully established themselves in the Delhi Sultanate.

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===

== Bibliography ==
* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="0" end="50" title="Sabuktigin" label="Abu Mansur Nasir ad-Din wa&amp;#x27;d-Dawla Sabuktigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="106" end="123" title="Ghaznavid dynasty" label="Ghaznavid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="129" end="133" title="Emir" label="amir"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="137" end="143" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazna"/>
<link wikidata="Q555219" start="209" end="218" title="Alp-Tegin" label="Alp-Tegin"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="260" end="275" title="Samanid Empire" label="Samanid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="561" end="572" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="586" end="597" title="Balochistan" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="626" end="637" title="Hindu Shahis" label="Hindu Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="649" end="654" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057021" start="667" end="673" title="Medieval India" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103401" start="795" end="801" title="Nuh II" label="Nuh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822447" start="840" end="847" title="Simjurids" label="Simjuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="996" end="1015" title="Kara-Khanid Khanate" label="Kara-Khanid Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="1424" end="1433" title="archetype" label="archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620460" start="1467" end="1490" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi" label="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q298427" start="1627" end="1640" title="Nizam al-Mulk" label="Nizam al-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="1666" end="1671" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="1701" end="1714" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="1812" end="1818" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34988" start="1889" end="1899" title="Old Turkic" label="Old Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="1991" end="1998" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596516" start="2013" end="2020" title="agnomen" label="agnomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="2087" end="2096" title="al-Biruni" label="al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q486181" start="2160" end="2175" title="Samanid Empire" label="Samanid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="2207" end="2211" title="Emir" label="amir"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="2272" end="2278" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483342" start="2422" end="2440" title="mirrors for princes" label="mirror for princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215495" start="2441" end="2448" title="epistle" label="epistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631511" start="2490" end="2498" title="Barskoon" label="Barskhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q815677" start="2536" end="2542" title="Karluks" label="Karluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q657968" start="2678" end="2685" title="Minhaj-i Siraj Juzjani" label="Juzjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="2925" end="2933" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208463" start="2936" end="2949" title="Yazdegerd III" label="Yazdegerd III"/>
<link wikidata="Q644008" start="3196" end="3202" title="Qarshi" label="Qarshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q555219" start="3229" end="3238" title="Alp-Tegin" label="Alp-Tegin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="3692" end="3698" title="Ghazni" label="Ghazna"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="3723" end="3734" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461501" start="3804" end="3815" title="Tokharistan" label="Tokharistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16159204" start="3878" end="3892" title="Abu Bakr Lawik" label="Abu Bakr Lawik"/>
<link wikidata="Q32601" start="4016" end="4033" title="Abu Ishaq Ibrahim of Ghazna" label="Abu Ishaq Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q32599" start="4298" end="4308" title="Bilgetegin" label="Bilgetegin"/>
<link wikidata="Q32605" start="4323" end="4332" title="Böritigin of Ghazni" label="Böritigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670055" start="4470" end="4483" title="Abu Ali Lawik" label="Abu Ali Lawik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="4530" end="4541" title="Hindu Shahis" label="Hindu Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="4553" end="4558" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q467632" start="4677" end="4683" title="Gardez" label="Gardez"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="4696" end="4702" title="Bamyan" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215285" start="4739" end="4745" title="Charkh District" label="Charkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q624638" start="4932" end="4939" title="Arachosia" label="Rukkhaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q476800" start="4944" end="4948" title="Lashkargah" label="Bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="5170" end="5181" title="Balochistan" label="Baluchistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="5332" end="5337" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="5367" end="5374" title="Mosque" label="mosques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568049" start="5388" end="5396" title="Jayapala" label="Jayapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007968" start="5405" end="5411" title="Afghans" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185453" start="5425" end="5431" title="Multan" label="Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185442" start="5436" end="5443" title="Laghman Province" label="Laghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442854" start="5546" end="5563" title="Emirate of Multan" label="Emirate of Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q121878870" start="5617" end="5645" title="First Battle of Laghman" label="battle took place in Laghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946623" start="5838" end="5853" title="Tarikh Yamini" label="Tarikh-i Yamini"/>
<link wikidata="Q572664" start="5970" end="5976" title="dirham" label="dirham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977219" start="6181" end="6188" title="Khalaj people" label="Khalajs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="6291" end="6296" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200049" start="6298" end="6303" title="Ajmer" label="Ajmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630997" start="6305" end="6313" title="Kalinjar Fort" label="Kalinjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="6318" end="6325" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q123349968" start="6327" end="6356" title="Second Battle of Laghman" label="They again battled in Laghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="6455" end="6463" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="6670" end="6675" title="Emir" label="amirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="6851" end="6860" title="Vassal" label="vassalage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103401" start="6892" end="6898" title="Nuh II" label="Nuh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="6973" end="6992" title="Kara-Khanid Khanate" label="Kara-Khanid Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822447" start="7130" end="7137" title="Simjurids" label="Simjuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="7213" end="7219" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="7255" end="7260" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="7588" end="7601" title="War elephant" label="war elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q207044" start="7693" end="7700" title="Ziyarid dynasty" label="Ziyarid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188155" start="7723" end="7729" title="Gorgan" label="Gorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754467" start="7845" end="7859" title="Fakhr al-Dawla" label="Fakhr al-Dawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q131350" start="8040" end="8048" title="Nishapur" label="Nishapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="9370" end="9376" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820143" start="9573" end="9593" title="Abu al-Fath al-Busti" label="Abu al-Fath al-Busti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738658" start="9715" end="9720" title="Qabus" label="Qabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="9979" end="9984" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q125907119" start="9994" end="10009" title="northwest India" label="northwest India"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="10030" end="10043" title="Hanafi school" label="Hanafi school"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="10047" end="10058" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180491" start="10105" end="10115" title="Karramiyya" label="Karramiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="10531" end="10542" title="Transoxiana" label="Transoxiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="10653" end="10663" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="10804" end="10810" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q32617" start="10838" end="10844" title="Ismail of Ghazni" label="Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q125960766" start="10942" end="10959" title="Hurra-yi Khuttali" label="Hurra-yi Khuttali"/>
<link wikidata="Q182647" start="10992" end="11000" title="Khwarazm" label="Khwarazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720623" start="11010" end="11031" title="Ma&amp;#x27;munids" label="Ma&amp;#x27;munid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670444" start="11033" end="11049" title="Abu al-Hasan Ali" label="Abu al-Hasan Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746016" start="11054" end="11068" title="Ma&amp;#x27;mun II" label="Ma&amp;#x27;mun II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620460" start="11834" end="11857" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi" label="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fadl Bayhaqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686082" start="11885" end="11901" title="Tarikh-i Bayhaqi" label="Tarikh-i Bayhaqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q936594" start="12011" end="12019" title="Masʽud I of Ghazni" label="Masʽud I"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="12175" end="12186" title="Oriental studies" label="orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40315" start="12187" end="12211" title="Clifford Edmund Bosworth" label="Clifford Edmund Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="12403" end="12412" title="archetype" label="archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q298427" start="12541" end="12554" title="Nizam al-Mulk" label="Nizam al-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="12574" end="12587" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="12671" end="12676" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="12697" end="12710" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="12883" end="12892" title="al-Biruni" label="al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="13101" end="13108" title="Ghurid dynasty" label="Ghurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q919071" start="13119" end="13132" title="Khalji dynasty" label="Turko-Afghans"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="13176" end="13191" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577864" wikidata="Q20996035" url="?curid=577864" title="Country Party">
<text>Country Party was the original 17th-century name of what developed into the British Whig Party. It may also refer to:

==Politics==
* Australian Country Party (1920), now called the National Party of Australia
* Australian Country Party (2004), now called the Australian Federation Party
* Country Party (Britain), opponents of the Court Party and the government, late 17th and early 18th century
* Ultra-Tories, active 1829–32 in Great Britain
* Country Party (New Zealand), active in the 1920s and 1930s
* PNG Country Party, Papua New Guinea
* Country Party (Rhode Island), United States; active in the 1780s
* Wyoming Country Party, United States; see 2012 United States Senate election in Wyoming

==Other==
* &quot;Country Party&quot; (song), a song by Johnny Lee

==See also==
* Countryside Party (UK)
* New Country Party, Australia
* United Country Party (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20996035" start="0" end="13" title="Country Party" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="84" end="94" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="134" end="165" title="Australian Country Party (1920)" label="Australian Country Party (1920)"/>
<link wikidata="Q88967437" start="212" end="243" title="Australian Country Party (2004)" label="Australian Country Party (2004)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177382" start="290" end="313" title="Country Party (Britain)" label="Country Party (Britain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982365" start="399" end="411" title="Ultra-Tories" label="Ultra-Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177383" start="447" end="474" title="Country Party (New Zealand)" label="Country Party (New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119835" start="508" end="525" title="PNG Country Party" label="PNG Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177388" start="546" end="574" title="Country Party (Rhode Island)" label="Country Party (Rhode Island)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131538325" start="613" end="634" title="Wyoming Country Party" label="Wyoming Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892129" start="655" end="700" title="2012 United States Senate election in Wyoming" label="2012 United States Senate election in Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177385" start="714" end="746" title="Country Party (song)" label="&amp;quot;Country Party&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177550" start="785" end="807" title="Countryside Party (UK)" label="Countryside Party (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006713" start="810" end="827" title="New Country Party" label="New Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q27791805" start="841" end="878" title="United Country Party (disambiguation)" label="United Country Party (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577869" wikidata="Q1113204" url="?curid=577869" title="Dub poetry">
<text>Dub poetry is a form of performance poetry of Jamaican origin, which evolved out of dub music in Kingston, Jamaica, in the 1970s, as well as in London, England, and Toronto, Canada, cities which have large populations of Caribbean immigrants. The term &quot;Dub Poetry&quot; was coined by Dub artist Linton Kwesi Johnson in 1976, and further popularized by artist Oku Onoura, which consists of spoken word over reggae rhythms, originally found on the backing or &quot;version&quot; side of a 12 or 7 inch vinyl record.

Unlike deejaying (also known as toasting), which also features the use of the spoken word, the dub poet&#x27;s performance is normally prepared, rather than the extemporized chat of the dancehall dee jay. In musical setting, the dub poet usually appears on stage with a band performing music specifically written to accompany each poem, rather than simply performing over the top of dub plates, or riddims, in the dancehall fashion. Musicality is built into dub poems, yet dub poets generally perform without backing music, delivering chanted speech with pronounced rhythmic accentuation and dramatic stylization of gesture. Sometimes dub music effects such as echo and reverb are dubbed spontaneously by a poet into live versions of a poem. Many dub poets also employ call-and-response devices to engage audiences.

==Political nature==
Dub poetry has been a vehicle for political and social commentary, with none of the braggadocio often associated with the dancehall. The odd love-song or elegy appears, but dub poetry is predominantly concerned with politics and social justice, commonly voiced through a commentary on current events (thus sharing these elements with dancehall and &quot;conscious&quot; or &quot;roots&quot; reggae music).

==Notable albums==
Dub poetry has established itself as a major form of black popular art and its breakthrough was made through Linton Kwesi Johnson&#x27;s (LKJ)&#x27;s seminal album &quot;Dread Beat an&#x27; Blood&quot;, which was released in the UK in 1978. Oku Onuora&#x27;s &quot;Reflection In Red&quot; in 1979 was the first Jamaican recording of a dub poem, followed by Lillian Allen&#x27;s &quot;Revolutionary Tea Party&quot; and Benjamin Zephaniah&#x27;s &quot;Rasta&quot;, both produced in 1983, and many others from the early 1980s onwards such as Anti Social Workers &#x27;Positive Style&#x27; produced by leading dub producer The Mad Professor on Ariwa Records..

==Toronto==
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, has the second highest concentration of dub poets, preceded by Jamaica and followed by England. Lillian Allen, Afua Cooper, and Ahdri Zhina Mandiela are among the founding mothers of the Canadian dub poetry legacy. The Dub Poets Collective, established in Toronto in 2003, organized a total of five dub poetry festivals, three national and two international, between the years of 2004 and 2010.

==United Kingdom==
LKJ still runs LKJ Records in the UK, a label that publishes both his own books and music, and that of other musicians and poets.

Benjamin Zephaniah continued to publish in the UK. He wrote novels as well as poetry. He was put forward for the post of Oxford Professor of Poetry in 1989 and British Poet Laureate in 1999, and in 2003 was also offered an OBE, which he declined.

Many dub poets have published their work as volumes of written poetry as well as albums of poetry with music.

==See also==
* Performance poetry
* Caribbean poetry
* Postcolonial literature
* Poetry slam
* Poetry reading

==References==
==Further reading==
* Mervyn Morris, &quot;Dub Poetry?&quot;, in &quot;Is English We Speaking and Other Essays&quot; (Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers, 1998).

==External links==
* Kei Miller, &quot;a smaller sound, a lesser fury: A Eulogy for Dub Poetry&quot;, &quot;Small Axe&quot; 14, November 2013.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1113204" start="0" end="10" title="Dub poetry" label="Dub poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168247" start="24" end="42" title="performance poetry" label="performance poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="46" end="53" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q212688" start="84" end="93" title="dub music" label="dub music"/>
<link wikidata="Q34692" start="97" end="114" title="Kingston, Jamaica" label="Kingston, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="144" end="150" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="165" end="172" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006555" start="221" end="230" title="Caribbean people" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q557775" start="300" end="320" title="Linton Kwesi Johnson" label="Linton Kwesi Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082705" start="364" end="374" title="Oku Onuora" label="Oku Onoura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="394" end="405" title="spoken word" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="505" end="517" title="vinyl record" label="vinyl record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369991" start="527" end="536" title="Deejay (Jamaican)" label="deejaying"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="681" end="693" title="extemporized" label="extemporized"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="706" end="715" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q852209" start="918" end="924" title="riddim" label="riddim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130159" start="953" end="963" title="Musicality" label="Musicality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021603" start="1289" end="1306" title="call-and-response" label="call-and-response"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955418" start="1442" end="1453" title="Braggadocio (rap)" label="braggadocio"/>
<link wikidata="Q174864" start="1512" end="1517" title="elegy" label="elegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="1749" end="1755" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q557775" start="1893" end="1920" title="Linton Kwesi Johnson" label="Linton Kwesi Johnson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306207" start="1954" end="1979" title="Dread Beat an&amp;#x27; Blood" label="Dread Beat an&amp;#x27; Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082705" start="2025" end="2035" title="Oku Onuora" label="Oku Onuora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240898" start="2141" end="2154" title="Lillian Allen" label="Lillian Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q561142" start="2202" end="2220" title="Benjamin Zephaniah" label="Benjamin Zephaniah"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2453" end="2469" title="Toronto" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240898" start="2575" end="2588" title="Lillian Allen" label="Lillian Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690848" start="2590" end="2601" title="Afua Cooper" label="Afua Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695041" start="2607" end="2627" title="Ahdri Zhina Mandiela" label="Ahdri Zhina Mandiela"/>
<link wikidata="Q561142" start="3025" end="3043" title="Benjamin Zephaniah" label="Benjamin Zephaniah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805450" start="3146" end="3172" title="Oxford Professor of Poetry" label="Oxford Professor of Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="3193" end="3206" title="Poet Laureate" label="Poet Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="3248" end="3251" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168247" start="3399" end="3417" title="Performance poetry" label="Performance poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039450" start="3420" end="3436" title="Caribbean poetry" label="Caribbean poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059134" start="3439" end="3462" title="Postcolonial literature" label="Postcolonial literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q20852" start="3465" end="3476" title="Poetry slam" label="Poetry slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207537" start="3479" end="3493" title="Poetry reading" label="Poetry reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306702" start="3532" end="3545" title="Mervyn Morris" label="Mervyn Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383534" start="3690" end="3700" title="Kei Miller" label="Kei Miller"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577870" wikidata="Q4850072" url="?curid=577870" title="Balar">
<text>Balar may refer to:

* Balar, Aurangabad, a village in Aurangabad district, Bihar, India
* Balor, Balar or Bolar, leader of the Fomorians in Celtic mythology
* Balar is a most common Last name/Surname in Gujarat.</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="23" end="40" title="Balar, Aurangabad" label="Balar, Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q43086" start="55" end="81" title="Aurangabad district, Bihar" label="Aurangabad district, Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q805514" start="91" end="96" title="Balor" label="Balor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="204" end="211" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577871" wikidata="Q1999819" url="?curid=577871" title="The Greatest Canadian">
<text>The Greatest Canadian is a 2004 television series consisting of 13 episodes produced by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) to identify one greatest Canadian of all time, according to those who watched and participated in the program.

The series two-hour debut on 17 October 2004 garnered more than one million viewers, with approximately 500,000 to 700,000 viewers per episode thereafter. The initial nomination phase received more than 10,000 names submitted for consideration. The second phase of the process concluded on 28 November at midnight and the following evening the winner from more than 1.2 million votes was revealed to be Tommy Douglas.

The series was inspired by the BBC production the &quot;Great Britons&quot; and has a spiritual sequel, &quot;The Greatest Canadian Invention&quot;.

&quot;The Greatest Canadian&quot; experienced strong initial ratings, some fall-off during its run, and a partial rebound for the finale. The series was credited with bringing the CBC public &quot;buzz&quot; and a younger demographic. Conversely the series was critiqued, by University of Calgary communication professors Bart Beaty and Rebecca Sullivan in their book &quot;Canadian Television Today&quot;, as middlebrow &quot;nationalist pandering.&quot;

==Selection process == 
The &quot;Greatest Canadian&quot; was chosen through a two-step voting process. The first phase beginning on 5 April 2004, involved the collection of data (nominees for consideration) through polls conducted by mail, phone and the internet. Of these nominees the bottom 40 of 50 individuals, in order of popularity, were revealed during the first episode in October.
The eligibility criteria as outlined by the CBC was broad:
To prevent bias during the second round of voting; the top ten nominees, also revealed during the first episode, were presented alphabetically rather than by order of first round popularity. This phase was accompanied by a series of hour-long feature documentaries, where 10 Canadian celebrities acting as advocates each presented their case for &quot;The Greatest Canadian&quot;. Viewers then submitted votes over the next six weeks supporting their favourite finalists. Importantly, there was no overall limit on the number of times any listener could call in and cast a vote, nor was voting restricted to Canadians.

==Top 10==
On 17 October 2004 the top 10 nominees were revealed at the end of the first episode in alphabetical order. The winner and all finalists were announced by popularity on 28 November and 29 in a three-hour two part series conclusion.

==Top 50 ==
More than 10,000 names were submitted for consideration with the top 100 individuals being revealed online accompanied with a short biography. Of the 100 only the top 50 nominees were featured during the televised broadcast.

At least three* members of the nominees as the direct result of an active mass-mailing campaign among that individual&#x27;s loyal and well-organized followers. Kin Canada founder Harold A. Rogers, DJ Hal Anderson, and Baháʼí activist Mary Maxwell all benefitted from a grassroots campaign to get their names included in the nominees list. CBC openly admitted this during the broadcast, recognizing that these three esoteric individuals are probably quite unknown to the general public.

Critics have complained there were only four women and three nonwhites in the top 50, that French Canadian participation was very low and that a large number of modern pop culture celebrities made the list like; Bret Hart, Mike Myers, John Candy, Jim Carrey and Avril Lavigne. A recency bias in favour of contemporary icons may be reflective of a youthful voting demographic, as the production was family oriented, or there was unwillingness or confusion distinguishing modern popularity with national historic significance among the participants of all ages. In particular, Don Cherry&#x27;s inclusion in the top 10 upset many Canadians, especially considering it forced out figures they believe more worthy like Louis Riel and Jean Vanier. 

==Other editions==

Other countries have produced similar shows based on the format originated by the BBC. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and Alexander Graham Bell were also featured on the 100 Greatest Britons list. A two-hour spin-off series called &quot;The Greatest Canadian Invention&quot; aired in 2007 with Insulin as the winner.

==See also==
*Canadian Newsmaker of the Year
*&quot;Heritage Minutes&quot;
* List of Canadian awards
*List of Canadian Victoria Cross recipients
*List of companions of the Order of Canada
*List of inductees of Canada&#x27;s Walk of Fame
*Persons of National Historic Significance

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="32" end="42" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="92" end="125" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="157" end="165" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q359653" start="647" end="660" title="Tommy Douglas" label="Tommy Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="694" end="697" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165177" start="719" end="732" title="Great Britons" label="Great Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155016" start="749" end="765" title="spiritual sequel" label="spiritual sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738028" start="773" end="804" title="The Greatest Canadian Invention" label="The Greatest Canadian Invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067471" start="1088" end="1109" title="University of Calgary" label="University of Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13495118" start="1223" end="1233" title="middlebrow" label="middlebrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q641794" start="1240" end="1251" title="Canadian nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410308" start="2983" end="2993" title="Kin Canada" label="Kin Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997172" start="3002" end="3018" title="Harold A. Rogers" label="Harold A. Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640690" start="3023" end="3035" title="Hal Anderson" label="Hal Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="3041" end="3047" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443839" start="3057" end="3069" title="Mary Maxwell (Bahá&amp;#x27;í)" label="Mary Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="3092" end="3102" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="3522" end="3531" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q185724" start="3533" end="3543" title="Mike Myers" label="Mike Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q218532" start="3545" end="3555" title="John Candy" label="John Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="3557" end="3567" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30449" start="3572" end="3585" title="Avril Lavigne" label="Avril Lavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q96401365" start="3589" end="3601" title="recency bias" label="recency bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q592524" start="3885" end="3895" title="Don Cherry" label="Don Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q313691" start="4024" end="4034" title="Louis Riel" label="Louis Riel"/>
<link wikidata="Q545644" start="4039" end="4050" title="Jean Vanier" label="Jean Vanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4156" end="4159" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541043" start="4165" end="4192" title="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier" label="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="4197" end="4218" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q165177" start="4245" end="4265" title="100 Greatest Britons" label="100 Greatest Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738028" start="4312" end="4343" title="The Greatest Canadian Invention" label="The Greatest Canadian Invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="4369" end="4376" title="Insulin" label="Insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030382" start="4407" end="4437" title="Canadian Newsmaker of the Year" label="Canadian Newsmaker of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q785796" start="4445" end="4461" title="Heritage Minutes" label="Heritage Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565747" start="4470" end="4493" title="List of Canadian awards" label="List of Canadian awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254195" start="4495" end="4537" title="List of Canadian Victoria Cross recipients" label="List of Canadian Victoria Cross recipients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837970" start="4539" end="4580" title="List of companions of the Order of Canada" label="List of companions of the Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338321" start="4582" end="4629" title="List of inductees of Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame" label="List of inductees of Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253120" start="4631" end="4672" title="Persons of National Historic Significance" label="Persons of National Historic Significance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577872" wikidata="Q3057764" url="?curid=577872" title="Parachute Intervention Squadron of the National Gendarmerie">
<text>The Parachute Intervention Squadron of the National Gendarmerie (, EPIGN) was a parachute-trained tactical unit of the French Gendarmerie. The squadron was formed in 1984 with personnel from EPGM, a one-of-a-kind parachute squadron that had been created within the mobile gendarmerie in 1971 and was disestablished at that date. EPIGN, was based in Versailles-Satory with its sister unit GIGN. Besides its primary mission of providing heavy support and reinforcement to GIGN, EPIGN soon developed its own set of missions in the fields of protection and observation. It was finally absorbed, together with the &quot;old&quot; GIGN, into the newly reorganized GIGN in September 2007.
==History==
===EPGM: The Mobile Gendarmerie Parachute squadron (1971–1983)===
In 1971, the French Gendarmerie established a new mobile gendarmerie squadron in Mont-de-Marsan in southwest France: &quot;Escadron 9/11 parachutiste de la Gendarmerie mobile&quot; (EPGM). The squadron had a dual mission as a law and order unit specialized in &quot;hard&quot; situations and a parachute unit. One of the new unit&#x27;s additional missions was to provide parachute-qualified provosts to the army&#x27;s 11th airborne division. 

In 1973, in the wake of the Munich massacre, the Gendarmerie created two tactical teams or &quot;intervention units&quot;: one named ECRI (&quot;Équipe Commando Régionale d&#x27;intervention&quot; or Regional Commando Tactical Team) was based in Maisons-Alfort near Paris and a second, named GIGN () was created within the parachute squadron in Mont-de-Marsan. In 1974, the two units were renamed respectively GIGN 1 and GIGN 4. Then in 1976, both units merged into a single one, named GIGN and based in Maisons-Alfort while the parachute squadron remained in Mont-de-Marsan. GIGN relocated to Satory near Versailles (west of Paris) in 1982.

EPGM was involved in maintaining order during some of the most violent demonstrations of the 1980s which included protests against the building of new-generation nuclear plants. It was also deployed overseas to such places as Chad, the Central African Republic and Lebanon. The unit was also deployed to the French Territory of the Afars and the Issas to provide security for the 1977 referendum that led to the independence of Djibouti.

Besides being a qualified gendarme and paratrooper, every member of the unit had to have an additional specialty: high altitude jumper, sharpshooter, explosive neutralization specialist, close combat specialist, combat medic, loadmaster, driver, etc., the unit&#x27;s structure remaining however that of a regular mobile gendarmerie squadron (i.e. one headquarters platoon and three line platoons) under the command of a captain. Being based near the Atlantic coast, the unit trained combat divers and this specialty was then acquired by GIGN4. This know-how was transferred to GIGN and further developed when the two units merged.

===EPIGN: The National Gendarmerie Parachute Intervention Squadron (1984–2007)===
In 1984, it was decided that EPGM (the gendarmerie mobile parachute squadron) would be disestablished and that its personnel would be transferred to Satory to create a new kind of parachute squadron there. The new unit, named &quot;escadron parachutiste d&#x27;intervention de la gendarmerie nationale&quot; or EPIGN would provide tactical support and reinforcements for GIGN whenever additional personnel or heavy weapons were needed.

That same year, GIGN and EPIGN became part of a larger organization called GSIGN ().

==Missions and structure==
As time passed, EPIGN, without ever giving up its primary mission of providing tactical support and reinforcements for GIGN, developed its own set of missions: surveillance and observation of criminals and terrorists, personal protection of VIPs and officials and protection of critical sites such as embassies in war-torn countries.

The unit structure also evolved as the mission scope evolved and very soon, had nothing left in common with that of a regular mobile gendarmerie squadron. In the end the unit, still under the command of a captain, was composed of:
* headquarters platoon – including a high altitude jump cell;
* two Security and Protection Platoons (SPP) specialized in close protection of VIPs or dangerous sites (for example embassies in war-torn countries);
* one Observation and Research Group (GOR) specialized in monitoring suspected criminals or terrorists.

Despite the squadron&#x27;s name, the &quot;intervention&quot; mission was entirely transferred to GIGN, members of the parachute squadron being assigned the task to support the intervention group by sanitizing and cordoning off their operating area and by providing heavy weapon support with machine guns and mortars if and when necessary.

An additional mission was to reinforce GSPR (), the presidential security group (then composed exclusively of gendarmes), mainly during official or state visits abroad.

Squadron personnel frequently conducted security audits of embassies, ports and airports and various French or foreign sites.

Finally the squadron was also involved during special events such as the Pope&#x27;s visit, the World Football or Rugby World Cups, the D-Day commemoration, etc.

=== Uniform === 
EPIGN members often operated in plainclothes with a simple lapel pin (for example for VIP protection). When in uniform, they wore a dark blue beret, like their predecessors of EPGM. 

==Skills==
EPIGN personnel (and now GIGN personnel) was trained in:
* Alpinism (taught by the high-mountain gendarmerie group of Chamonix)
* Parachuting
* Diving
* First aid
* Marksmanship
* Explosive neutralization
* Close security
* Close combat

==Known operations==
The unit was never deployed in a large scale parachute jump and a large part of the unit&#x27;s missions were kept secret but known missions include:
* Embassy protection in war-torn countries or during crises (Afghanistan, Algeria, Colombia, Congo, Ethiopia, Iraq, Romania, Rwanda, El Salvador, Togo, Yemen, Democratic Republic of the Congo)
* Technical assistance and training missions in Burundi, Colombia, Union of the Comoros, Djibouti, Jordan, Republic of the Congo, Mali, Chad, Togo, etc.
* Reinforcement of the Presidential security group (GSPR) during visits to Jordan, Egypt, the Republic of Ireland, etc.
* GIGN support during the assault on the Ouvéa cave. An EPIGN section led the assault group through the jungle and cordoned off the area. An EPIGN member was wounded by gunshot when the hostage takers shot at their helicopter at the beginning of the assault.
* GIGN support (and hostage rescue) during the assault on Air France Flight 8969 at Marseille Marignane airport in December 1994. A section of eighteen EPIGN members was stationed directly underneath the plane during the assault and recovered the hostages as they went down the escape chutes. As only four armored jackets were available due to the urgency of the deployment, they decided that none would be used. 
* Attempted arrest, and shooting, of terrorist Khaled Kelkal in 1995. As GIGN was deployed in the Comoros, EPIGN undertook the operation. Kelkal refused to surrender and was shot in the ensuing exchange.
* Search for and monitoring of suspected criminals after the end of the Yugoslav Wars.
* Search for and monitoring of violent independentist activists (Corsica, Basque Country) or terrorists (Action Directe).

=== EPGM and EPIGN unit commanders ===
EPGM (1971–1983)
* Capitaine Poupinot
* Capitaine Michel
* Capitaine Rémy
* Capitaine Denis
* Capitaine Vanderperre

EPIGN (1984–2007)
* Capitaine Chancerelle
* Capitaine Pattin
* Capitaine Cormier
* Capitaine Strub
* Capitaine Bonneau
* Capitaine Veneau
* Capitaine Lavergne
* Capitaine L.

==Dissolution==
In 2007, the Gendarmerie, in light of mass terrorists events such as the Moscow theater hostage crisis and the Beslan school siege and in order to better integrate its tactical teams under reinforced headquarters, decided to disestablish GSIGN in favor of a &quot;new&quot; GIGN composed of the former GIGN, the former EPIGN and other former components of GSIGN (the Presidential close protection group and the training group). So EPIGN was disestablished and its former members became part of &quot;forces&quot; in the new GIGN (mainly the Security Protection Force and the Observation and Research Force).

== Notes and references ==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
==See also==
* Groupe d&#x27;Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale
* 11th Shock Parachutist Regiment
* Carabinieri Regiment &quot;Tuscania&quot; a similar unit of Carabinieri

==Related links==
* Specwarnet.com report</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3057764" start="4" end="63" title="Parachute Intervention Squadron of the National Gendarmerie" label="Parachute Intervention Squadron of the National Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422336" start="119" end="137" title="National Gendarmerie" label="French Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729881" start="265" end="283" title="Mobile Gendarmerie" label="mobile gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473975" start="360" end="366" title="Satory" label="Satory"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481" start="388" end="392" title="National Gendarmerie Intervention Group" label="GIGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729881" start="810" end="828" title="Mobile Gendarmerie" label="mobile gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188033" start="841" end="855" title="Mont-de-Marsan" label="Mont-de-Marsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362440" start="1152" end="1160" title="Provost (military police)" label="provosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="1234" end="1249" title="Munich massacre" label="Munich massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q208314" start="1452" end="1466" title="Maisons-Alfort" label="Maisons-Alfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481" start="1498" end="1502" title="GIGN" label="GIGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q188033" start="1551" end="1565" title="Mont-de-Marsan" label="Mont-de-Marsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473975" start="1800" end="1806" title="Satory" label="Satory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="1812" end="1822" title="Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450765" start="2157" end="2200" title="French Territory of the Afars and the Issas" label="French Territory of the Afars and the Issas"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="2277" end="2285" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="5510" end="5518" title="Alpinism" label="Alpinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83236" start="5569" end="5577" title="Chamonix" label="Chamonix"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="5581" end="5592" title="Parachuting" label="Parachuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="5595" end="5601" title="Underwater diving" label="Diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="5604" end="5613" title="First aid" label="First aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529376" start="5616" end="5628" title="Marksmanship" label="Marksmanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="5631" end="5640" title="Explosive" label="Explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="5675" end="5687" title="Close combat" label="Close combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403801" start="6367" end="6377" title="Ouvéa cave hostage taking" label="Ouvéa cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574009" start="6643" end="6665" title="Air France Flight 8969" label="Air France Flight 8969"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="6669" end="6678" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q651190" start="6679" end="6696" title="Marseille Provence Airport" label="Marignane airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396784" start="7046" end="7059" title="Khaled Kelkal" label="Khaled Kelkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="7275" end="7288" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q343657" start="7395" end="7409" title="Action directe (armed group)" label="Action Directe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670" start="7833" end="7862" title="Moscow theater hostage crisis" label="Moscow theater hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193733" start="7871" end="7890" title="Beslan school siege" label="Beslan school siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481" start="8434" end="8488" title="National Gendarmerie Intervention Group" label="Groupe d&amp;#x27;Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q171605" start="8491" end="8522" title="11e régiment parachutiste de choc" label="11th Shock Parachutist Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597978" start="8525" end="8566" title="Carabinieri Regiment &amp;quot;Tuscania&amp;quot;" label="Carabinieri Regiment &amp;quot;Tuscania&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="8585" end="8596" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577876" wikidata="Q900774" url="?curid=577876" title="Redox indicator">
<text>A redox indicator (also called an oxidation-reduction indicator) is an indicator which undergoes a definite color change at a specific electrode potential.

The requirement for fast and reversible color change means that the oxidation-reduction equilibrium for an indicator redox system needs to be established very quickly. Therefore, only a few classes of organic redox systems can be used for indicator purposes.

There are two common classes of redox indicators:
* metal complexes of phenanthroline and bipyridine. In these systems, the metal changes oxidation state.
* organic redox systems such as methylene blue. In these systems, a proton participates in the redox reaction. Therefore, sometimes redox indicators are also divided into two general groups: independent or dependent on pH.

The most common redox indicator are organic compounds.
Redox Indicator example:
The molecule 2,2&#x27;- Bipyridine is a redox Indicator. In solution, it changes from light blue to red at an electrode potential of 0.97 V.

==pH independent==
==pH dependent==

==See also==
*Chemical analysis
*pH indicator
*Complexometric indicator

==References==
==External links==
*Redox Indicators. Characteristics And Applications</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q900774" start="2" end="17" title="Redox indicator" label="redox indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q900774" start="34" end="63" title="Redox indicator" label="oxidation-reduction indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11025104" start="135" end="154" title="electrode potential" label="electrode potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="245" end="256" title="Chemical equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="274" end="286" title="redox system" label="redox system"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="469" end="482" title="metal complex" label="metal complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q416005" start="488" end="502" title="phenanthroline" label="phenanthroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q413658" start="507" end="517" title="bipyridine" label="bipyridine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="574" end="594" title="organic redox system" label="organic redox system"/>
<link wikidata="Q422134" start="604" end="618" title="methylene blue" label="methylene blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="791" end="793" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="832" end="849" title="organic compounds" label="organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="1069" end="1086" title="Analytical chemistry" label="Chemical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q300951" start="1088" end="1100" title="pH indicator" label="pH indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370113" start="1102" end="1126" title="Complexometric indicator" label="Complexometric indicator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577879" wikidata="Q5257708" url="?curid=577879" title="Denise Lor">
<text>Denise Lor (born Denise Jeanne Briault; May 3, 1929 – September 27, 2015) was an American popular singer and actress. She was a featured artist on &quot;The Garry Moore Show&quot;. In 1951, she appeared in the short-lived variety show &quot;Seven at Eleven&quot;.
==Early years==
Of French parentage and born in Los Angeles, Lor moved with her mother to Jackson Heights, Queens, New York at the age of 5, following her father&#x27;s death. She graduated from Newtown High School and took art courses at night at Cooper Union, intent on becoming a commercial artist, while waitressing during the day at a Schrafft&#x27;s restaurant. She also had a love for singing, saving up money to do it professionally. She believed her chance to sing in Sonja Henie&#x27;s New York ice show at the Center Theatre to be her big break. She also decided to use her mother&#x27;s maiden name, Lor, as her stage name.

==Television==
In addition to her work on &quot;The Garry Moore Show&quot;, Lor was a regular on &quot;The Big Payoff&quot; and &quot;Droodles&quot;. She made her dramatic TV debut on &quot;Appointment with Adventure&quot; on August 14, 1955.

==Personal appearances==
After Lor&#x27;s association with &quot;The Garry Moore Show&quot; ended, she performed in night clubs and similar venues. In the early 1970s, she worked in touring stock theater.

==Stage==
Lor appeared in numerous musical comedies including &quot;Gypsy&quot;, &quot;Annie&quot; and &quot;Sweeney Todd&quot;.

==Recording==
Lor&#x27;s main hit song was &quot;If I Give My Heart to You&quot;, which charted in 1954 at the same time as another recording of the same song by Doris Day.

==Personal life==
Lor married and subsequently divorced TV director and singer Jay Martin, with whom she had sons, Ron and Denis. They had met when she was singing on &quot;The Garry Moore Show&quot; at CBS, where he was an associate director. Her second marriage was to writer Charles Horine (aka Chuck Horner).

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5257708" start="0" end="10" title="Denise Lor" label="Denise Lor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257708" start="17" end="38" title="Denise Lor" label="Denise Jeanne Briault"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="90" end="97" title="popular music" label="popular"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="98" end="104" title="singing" label="singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735886" start="153" end="173" title="The Garry Moore Show" label="The Garry Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q336181" start="222" end="234" title="variety show" label="variety show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457532" start="241" end="256" title="Seven at Eleven" label="Seven at Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145574" start="354" end="377" title="Jackson Heights, Queens" label="Jackson Heights, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707097" start="459" end="478" title="Newtown High School (Queens)" label="Newtown High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q130981" start="512" end="524" title="Cooper Union" label="Cooper Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432791" start="604" end="630" title="Schrafft&amp;#x27;s (restaurant chain)" label="Schrafft&amp;#x27;s restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q204205" start="741" end="752" title="Sonja Henie" label="Sonja Henie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059357" start="785" end="799" title="Center Theatre (New York City)" label="Center Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055303" start="888" end="898" title="stage name" label="stage name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717734" start="1004" end="1018" title="The Big Payoff" label="The Big Payoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781633" start="1091" end="1117" title="Appointment with Adventure" label="Appointment with Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="1335" end="1348" title="Repertory theatre" label="stock theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="1386" end="1402" title="musical comedies" label="musical comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558496" start="1419" end="1424" title="Gypsy (musical)" label="Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q566892" start="1438" end="1443" title="Annie (musical)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1460" end="1472" title="Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street" label="Sweeney Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990437" start="1530" end="1555" title="If I Give My Heart to You" label="If I Give My Heart to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="1643" end="1652" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577881" wikidata="Q26933712" url="?curid=577881" title="Chromate and dichromate">
<text>Chromate salts contain the chromate anion, . Dichromate salts contain the dichromate anion, . They are oxyanions of chromium in the +6 oxidation state and are moderately strong oxidizing agents. In an aqueous solution, chromate and dichromate ions can be interconvertible.

== Chemical properties ==

Chromates react with hydrogen peroxide, giving products in which peroxide, , replaces one or more oxygen atoms. In acid solution the unstable blue peroxo complex Chromium(VI) oxide peroxide, CrO(O2)2, is formed; it is an uncharged covalent molecule, which may be extracted into ether. Addition of pyridine results in the formation of the more stable complex CrO(O2)2py.

=== Acid–base properties ===
In aqueous solution, chromate and dichromate anions exist in a chemical equilibrium.
The predominance diagram shows that the position of the equilibrium depends on both pH and the analytical concentration of chromium. 

The chromate ion is the predominant species in alkaline solutions, but dichromate can become the predominant ion in acidic solutions.

Further condensation reactions can occur in strongly acidic solution with the formation of trichromates, , and tetrachromates, . All polyoxyanions of chromium(VI) have structures made up of tetrahedral CrO4 units sharing corners.

The hydrogen chromate ion, HCrO4−, is a weak acid:
: + H+; p&quot;K&quot;a ≈ 5.9
It is also in equilibrium with the dichromate ion:
:2  + H2O
This equilibrium does not involve a change in hydrogen ion concentration, which would predict that the equilibrium is independent of pH. The red line on the predominance diagram is not quite horizontal due to the simultaneous equilibrium with the chromate ion. The hydrogen chromate ion may be protonated, with the formation of molecular chromic acid, H2CrO4, but the p&quot;K&quot;a for the equilibrium 
is not well characterized. Reported values vary between about −0.8 and 1.6.

The dichromate ion is a somewhat weaker base than the chromate ion:
:, p&quot;K&quot;a = 1.18
The p&quot;K&quot;a value for this reaction shows that it can be ignored at pH &gt; 4.

=== Oxidation–reduction properties ===
The chromate and dichromate ions are fairly strong oxidizing agents. Commonly three electrons are added to a chromium atom, reducing it to oxidation state +3. In acid solution the aquated Cr3+ ion is produced.
: + 14 H+ + 6 e− → 2 Cr3+ + 7 H2O &quot;ε&quot;0 = 1.33 V
In alkaline solution chromium(III) hydroxide is produced. The redox potential shows that chromates are weaker oxidizing agent in alkaline solution than in acid solution. 
: + 4 + 3 e− → + 5 &quot;ε&quot;0 = −0.13 V

==Applications==

Approximately of hexavalent chromium, mainly sodium dichromate, were produced in 1985. Chromates and dichromates are used in chrome plating to protect metals from corrosion and to improve paint adhesion. Chromate and dichromate salts of heavy metals, lanthanides and alkaline earth metals are only very slightly soluble in water and are thus used as pigments. The lead-containing pigment chrome yellow was used for a very long time before environmental regulations discouraged its use. When used as oxidizing agents or titrants in a redox chemical reaction, chromates and dichromates convert into trivalent chromium, Cr3+, salts of which typically have a distinctively different blue-green color.

==Natural occurrence and production==

The primary chromium ore is the mixed metal oxide chromite, FeCr2O4, found as brittle metallic black crystals or granules. Chromite ore is heated with a mixture of calcium carbonate and sodium carbonate in the presence of air. The chromium is oxidized to the hexavalent form, while the iron forms iron(III) oxide, :

Subsequent leaching of this material at higher temperatures dissolves the chromates, leaving a residue of insoluble iron oxide. Normally the chromate solution is further processed to make chromium metal, but a chromate salt may be obtained directly from the liquor.

Chromate containing minerals are rare. Crocoite, , which can occur as spectacular long red crystals, is the most commonly found chromate mineral. Rare potassium chromate minerals and related compounds are found in the Atacama Desert. Among them is lópezite – the only known dichromate mineral.

As chromate is isostructural to sulfate, sulfate and chromate minerals can form solid solutions such as hashemite, and chromate minerals are often listed alongside sulfate minerals in mineral classification schemes such as Nickel-Strunz classification.

==Toxicity==
Hexavalent chromium compounds can be toxic and carcinogenic (IARC Group 1). Inhaling particles of hexavalent chromium compounds can cause lung cancer. Also positive associations have been observed between exposure to chromium (VI) compounds and cancer of the nose and nasal sinuses. The use of chromate compounds in manufactured goods is restricted in the EU (and by market commonality the rest of the world) by EU Parliament directive on the Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) Directive (2002/95/EC).

== See also ==
*Chromate conversion coating

== Notes ==
==References==
== External links ==
*National Pollutant Inventory - Chromium(VI) and compounds fact sheet
*Demonstration of chromate-dichromate equilibrium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26933712" start="0" end="8" title="Chromate and dichromate" label="Chromate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933712" start="45" end="55" title="Chromate and dichromate" label="Dichromate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269344" start="103" end="111" title="oxyanion" label="oxyanion"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="116" end="124" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="135" end="150" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="177" end="192" title="oxidizing agent" label="oxidizing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="201" end="208" title="aqueous" label="aqueous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="209" end="217" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="322" end="339" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q107429" start="366" end="374" title="peroxide" label="peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034517" start="463" end="490" title="Chromium(VI) oxide peroxide" label="Chromium(VI) oxide peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="532" end="540" title="covalent" label="covalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q103230" start="579" end="584" title="ether (chemistry)" label="ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q210385" start="598" end="606" title="pyridine" label="pyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="764" end="784" title="chemical equilibrium" label="chemical equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239699" start="790" end="810" title="predominance diagram" label="predominance diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="870" end="872" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269344" start="1193" end="1202" title="oxyanions" label="oxyanions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634792" start="1327" end="1336" title="weak acid" label="weak acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422642" start="1767" end="1779" title="chromic acid" label="chromic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="1797" end="1812" title="acid dissociation constant" label="p&amp;quot;K&amp;quot;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="2183" end="2198" title="oxidizing agent" label="oxidizing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="2256" end="2264" title="reduction (chemistry)" label="reducing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186487" start="2462" end="2477" title="redox potential" label="redox potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660666" start="2651" end="2670" title="hexavalent chromium" label="hexavalent chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506986" start="2759" end="2773" title="chrome plating" label="chrome plating"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="2871" end="2883" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569" start="2885" end="2895" title="lanthanide" label="lanthanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563" start="2901" end="2921" title="alkaline earth metal" label="alkaline earth metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075109" start="3022" end="3035" title="chrome yellow" label="chrome yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="3167" end="3172" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="3173" end="3190" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q107172" start="3421" end="3429" title="chromite" label="chromite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="3535" end="3552" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="3557" end="3573" title="sodium carbonate" label="sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422903" start="3994" end="4002" title="Crocoite" label="Crocoite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47141" start="4173" end="4187" title="Atacama Desert" label="Atacama Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000743" start="4203" end="4211" title="lópezite" label="lópezite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803316" start="4265" end="4278" title="isostructural" label="isostructural"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="4282" end="4289" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="4330" end="4344" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783597" start="4354" end="4363" title="hashemite (mineral)" label="hashemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q764802" start="4414" end="4429" title="sulfate mineral" label="sulfate mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q928461" start="4473" end="4501" title="Nickel-Strunz classification" label="Nickel-Strunz classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660666" start="4517" end="4536" title="Hexavalent chromium" label="Hexavalent chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="4554" end="4559" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="4564" end="4576" title="carcinogenic" label="carcinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983535" start="4578" end="4590" title="IARC Group 1" label="IARC Group 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="4655" end="4666" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660666" start="4734" end="4747" title="chromium (VI)" label="chromium (VI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="4762" end="4768" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363" start="4776" end="4780" title="nose" label="nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q281473" start="4785" end="4798" title="nasal sinuses" label="nasal sinuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q740504" start="4960" end="5025" title="Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive" label="Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) Directive (2002/95/EC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087583" start="5044" end="5071" title="Chromate conversion coating" label="Chromate conversion coating"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577883" wikidata="Q10336934" url="?curid=577883" title="Nílton dos Santos">
<text>Nílton dos Santos (born 7 June 1935) is a Brazilian former professional footballer who played as a left back.

==Career==

Namesake and contemporary of Nílton Santos, Nílton dos Santos was Bangu&#x27;s left back from 1953 to 1965, and played 506 matches for the club, being the second athlete with the most appearances, behind only Ubirajara Motta, and considered one of the great idols in the history of Bangu. He was called up to the Brazil national football team in 1956, but never took to the field.

==Honours==

;Bangu
*International Soccer League: 1960

;Individual
*Prêmio Belfort Duarte: 1956

==References==
==External links==
*Nilton dos Santos at ogol.com.br </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10336934" start="0" end="17" title="Nílton dos Santos" label="Nílton dos Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="72" end="82" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="99" end="108" title="Fullback (association football)" label="left back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607563" start="123" end="131" title="Namesake" label="Namesake"/>
<link wikidata="Q83329" start="152" end="165" title="Nílton Santos" label="Nílton Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10387113" start="332" end="347" title="Ubirajara Motta" label="Ubirajara Motta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="436" end="465" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569973" start="526" end="553" title="1960 International Soccer League" label="International Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253825" start="574" end="595" title="Prêmio Belfort Duarte" label="Prêmio Belfort Duarte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577886" wikidata="Q122973400" url="?curid=577886" title="Nurture">
<text>Nurture is usually defined as the process of caring for an organism, as it grows, usually a human. It is often used in debates as the opposite of &quot;nature&quot;, whereby nurture means the process of replicating learned cultural information from one mind to another, and nature means the replication of genetic non-learned behavior.

Nurture is important in the nature versus nurture debate as some people see either nature or nurture as the final outcome of the origins of most of humanity&#x27;s behaviours. There are many agents of socialization that are responsible, in some respects the outcome of a child&#x27;s personality, behaviour, thoughts, social and emotional skills, feelings, and mental priorities.

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122973400" start="0" end="7" title="Nurture" label="Nurture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773859" start="365" end="386" title="nature versus nurture" label="nature versus nurture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577888" wikidata="Q457710" url="?curid=577888" title="Tey">
<text>Tey was the Great Royal Wife of Kheperkheprure Ay, who was the penultimate pharaoh of Ancient Egypt&#x27;s Eighteenth Dynasty. She also had been the wet nurse of Nefertiti.

Her husband, Ay filled important administrative roles in the courts of several pharaohs – Amenhotep III, Akhenaten, and Tutankhamen – before ascending the throne following the death of Tutankhamen, as the male line of the royal family became extinct. He is believed to be connected to the royal family, probably a brother of Queen Tiye (wife of Amenhotep III). Some researchers theorize that he even may have been the father of Nefertiti.

==Family==
Tey was Ay&#x27;s wife. In inscriptions at Amarna, Tey is called &quot;Nurse of the Great Royal Wife.&quot; It has been theorized that this title meant she was stepmother to Nefertiti as Ay&#x27;s second wife. Ay and Tey are never explicitly called Nefertiti&#x27;s father or mother. Thus, if Tey was Ay&#x27;s only wife, neither were parent to Nefertiti. However, if they are the parents of Nefertiti, Mutbenret was most likely Ay and Tey&#x27;s daughter. Further, Nakhtmin, Ay&#x27;s intended successor, might be their son.

Additionally, Tey may have had a sister named Mutemnub and brother-in-law named Nakhtmin. On a statue currently in the Brooklyn Museum, a dignitary named Ay is called Second Prophet of Amun, high priest of Mut, and Steward of Queen Tey. His parents are recorded as Nahtmin and Mutemnub, sister of Queen Tey. The inscription is usually interpreted to mean that she was this Tey&#x27;s sister.

==Amarna==
Tey is depicted in her husband&#x27;s unused Amarna tomb, prepared while he was an administrator to Akhenaten. Her prominence in the decoration is exceptional, but her positions as nurse and tutor of the Great Wife (Nefertiti), and King&#x27;s Royal Ornament fully justify it. A reward scene is depicted on the North Wall, East Side. Aye and Tey are shown before the window of appearances. Akhenaten is shown in a Khepresh crown and Nefertiti in her well-known blue crown (in this case decorated with three uraei). Meritaten, Meketaten, and Ankhesenpaaten are shown in the window of appearances as well. The elder two daughters seem to be throwing rewards to Aye and Tey, while Ankhesenpaaten stands on the pillow before Nefertiti and is caressing her chin.

==Great Royal Wife==
When Ay assumed the throne after the death of Tutankhamen, Tey became his Great Royal Wife and then held the titles Hereditary Princess (&quot;iryt-p`t&quot;), Great of Praises (&quot;wrt-hzwt&quot;), Lady of The Two Lands (&quot;nbt-t3wy&quot;), Great King’s Wife, his beloved (&quot;hmt-niswt-wrt meryt.f&quot;), and Mistress of Upper and Lower Egypt (&quot;hnwt-Shm’w T3-mhw&quot;).

Queen Tey is depicted in the tomb WV23 in the Valley of the Kings, used for Ay after he had become king. She appears behind Ay in a scene where Ay appears to be pulling lotus flowers from a marsh. The images are rather severely damaged. 

Tey may have been buried with her husband in WV23. Fragments of female human bones found in the tomb may be Tey&#x27;s.

Tey is also depicted in a rock chapel dedicated to fertility god Min in Akhmim.

Tey also is mentioned on a wooden box inscribed for &quot;The true scribe of the king whom he loves, troop commander, overseer of cavalry, and Father of the God, Ay.&quot; The text mentions: &quot;The much-valued one, the sole one (unique) of Re, appreciated by the Great Royal Wife, the mistress of the house, Tey.&quot;

A colossal statue at Akhmim was likely carved in Tey&#x27;s likeness, but was later reinscribed for Meritamen, a daughter-wife of Ramesses II.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q457710" start="0" end="3" title="Tey" label="Tey"/>
<link wikidata="Q146029" start="32" end="49" title="Ay (pharaoh)" label="Kheperkheprure Ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="75" end="82" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="94" end="99" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q146055" start="107" end="125" title="Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Eighteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="149" end="158" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q40930" start="162" end="171" title="Nefertiti" label="Nefertiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q42606" start="264" end="277" title="Amenhotep III" label="Amenhotep III"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="279" end="288" title="Akhenaten" label="Akhenaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="294" end="305" title="Tutankhamen" label="Tutankhamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152230" start="505" end="509" title="Tiye" label="Tiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736" start="668" end="674" title="Amarna" label="Amarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202143" start="1028" end="1037" title="Mutbenret" label="Mutbenret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215272" start="1091" end="1099" title="Nakhtmin" label="Nakhtmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="1271" end="1286" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162765" start="1319" end="1341" title="Second Prophet of Amun" label="Second Prophet of Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29409" start="1358" end="1361" title="Mut" label="Mut"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="1656" end="1665" title="Akhenaten" label="Akhenaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012650" start="1788" end="1814" title="khekeret-nisut" label="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070190" start="1970" end="1978" title="Khepresh" label="Khepresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q153344" start="2071" end="2080" title="Meritaten" label="Meritaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q153648" start="2082" end="2091" title="Meketaten" label="Meketaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q230863" start="2097" end="2111" title="Ankhesenpaaten" label="Ankhesenpaaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q40930" start="2277" end="2286" title="Nefertiti" label="Nefertiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q146029" start="2341" end="2343" title="Ay (pharaoh)" label="Ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073256" start="2410" end="2426" title="Great Royal Wife" label="Great Royal Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706226" start="2752" end="2761" title="WV23" label="tomb WV23"/>
<link wikidata="Q133423" start="2769" end="2788" title="Valley of the Kings" label="Valley of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q146029" start="2799" end="2801" title="Ay (pharaoh)" label="Ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q192322" start="3148" end="3151" title="Min (god)" label="Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q340572" start="3155" end="3161" title="Akhmim" label="Akhmim"/>
<link wikidata="Q260813" start="3587" end="3596" title="Meritamen" label="Meritamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="3617" end="3628" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577891" wikidata="Q7817407" url="?curid=577891" title="Tom Rolfe">
<text>Tom Rolfe (April 14, 1962 – June 12, 1989) was an American Thoroughbred racehorse and sire. He was the leading colt of his generation in the United States, winning the Preakness Stakes and being voted American Champion Three-Year-Old Male Horse in 1965.

==Background==
Tom Rolfe was one of the best American sons of the undefeated Italian champion Ribot. His dam was Pocahontas, from whom he takes his name (the historical Pocahontas&#x27;s only child was named Thomas). His half-siblings include the talented racehorse and sire Chieftain (a son of Bold Ruler).

A small horse, Tom Rolfe stood 15.2 hands and weighed less than 1,000 pounds.

==Racing career==
Tom Rolfe won 16 of his 31 starts, with total earnings of $671,297. Ridden by future Hall of Fame jockey Ron Turcotte, he ran third to winner Lucky Debonair in the 1965 Kentucky Derby. In May he won the Preakness Stakes at Pimlico Race Course, beating Dapper Dan by a neck, despite losing a shoe in the race and sustaining a minor injury. In the Belmont Stakes in June he led in the straight but was caught close to the finish and beaten a neck by Hail To All. He went on to record a notable hat-trick at Arlington Park, winning the Citation Handicap in July, the Arlington Classic in August, and the American Derby in September (breaking the track record). His performances were enough to earn him American Champion 3-Year-Old Male Horse honors.

His sire, Ribot, won back-to-back runnings of the Prix de l&#x27;Arc de Triomphe, and Tom Rolfe was shipped to Longchamp Racecourse in Paris, France to contest the 1965 Arc. He disputed the lead until the closing stages and finished sixth on the grass course to Sea-Bird, but that result remains one of the best by an American-trained entry in that championship race.

Tom Rolfe stayed in training as a four-year-old in 1966. His wins included carrying 127 pounds to victory in the Aqueduct Handicap in September.

==Stud record==
Retired to stud at Claiborne Farm near Paris, Kentucky, Tom Rolfe proved a successful sire. He is largely known today as a sire of outstanding broodmares, but his best offspring on the track was 1970 American Champion Two-Year-Old Colt and 1987 leading broodmare sire Hoist The Flag. Tom Rolfe died in 1989 and was buried at Claiborne Farm&#x27;s Marchmont cemetery.

==Breeding==
==References==

*Tom Rolfe&#x27;s pedigree and stats</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7817407" start="0" end="9" title="Tom Rolfe" label="Tom Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="59" end="71" title="Thoroughbred" label="Thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="72" end="81" title="horse racing" label="racehorse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86" end="90" title="Horse breeding#Terminology" label="sire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856617" start="168" end="184" title="Preakness Stakes" label="Preakness Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304670" start="201" end="244" title="American Champion Three-Year-Old Male Horse" label="American Champion Three-Year-Old Male Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245980" start="349" end="354" title="Ribot (horse)" label="Ribot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193406" start="424" end="434" title="Pocahontas" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939078" start="550" end="560" title="Bold Ruler" label="Bold Ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974502" start="746" end="758" title="National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396962" start="766" end="778" title="Ron Turcotte" label="Ron Turcotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697881" start="803" end="817" title="Lucky Debonair" label="Lucky Debonair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141795" start="830" end="844" title="Kentucky Derby" label="Kentucky Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856617" start="864" end="880" title="Preakness Stakes" label="Preakness Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194656" start="884" end="903" title="Pimlico Race Course" label="Pimlico Race Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q192130" start="952" end="956" title="horseshoe" label="shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q612758" start="1007" end="1021" title="Belmont Stakes" label="Belmont Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639199" start="1109" end="1120" title="Hail To All" label="Hail To All"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792383" start="1166" end="1180" title="Arlington Park" label="Arlington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122401" start="1194" end="1211" title="Citation Handicap" label="Citation Handicap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792303" start="1225" end="1242" title="Arlington Classic" label="Arlington Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743608" start="1262" end="1276" title="American Derby" label="American Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304670" start="1360" end="1399" title="American Champion 3-Year-Old Male Horse" label="American Champion 3-Year-Old Male Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q422296" start="1459" end="1489" title="Prix de l&amp;#x27;Arc de Triomphe" label="Prix de l&amp;#x27;Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542489" start="1520" end="1540" title="Longchamp Racecourse" label="Longchamp Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1544" end="1549" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1551" end="1557" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476644" start="1671" end="1679" title="Sea-Bird" label="Sea-Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q100995" start="1866" end="1872" title="Pound (mass)" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416587" start="1891" end="1908" title="Aqueduct Handicap" label="Aqueduct Handicap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125063" start="1959" end="1973" title="Claiborne Farm" label="Claiborne Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181341" start="1979" end="1994" title="Paris, Kentucky" label="Paris, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304672" start="2140" end="2175" title="American Champion Two-Year-Old Colt" label="American Champion Two-Year-Old Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546942" start="2185" end="2207" title="Leading broodmare sire in North America" label="leading broodmare sire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877808" start="2208" end="2222" title="Hoist The Flag" label="Hoist The Flag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577892" wikidata="Q2078880" url="?curid=577892" title="CVS Pharmacy">
<text>CVS Pharmacy Inc. is an American retail corporation. A subsidiary of CVS Health, it is headquartered in Woonsocket, Rhode Island. Originally named the Consumer Value Stores, it was founded in Lowell, Massachusetts, in 1963.

The chain was owned by its original holding company Melville Corporation from its inception until its current parent company (CVS Health) was spun off into its own company in 1996. CVS Pharmacy is currently the largest pharmacy chain in the United States by number of locations (over 9,600 as of 2016) and total prescription revenue. Its parent company ranks as the fifth largest U.S. corporation by FY2020 revenues in the &quot;Fortune&quot; 500. The parent company of CVS Pharmacy&#x27;s leading competitor (Walgreens) ranked 19th for the same time period. CVS sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of general merchandise, including over-the-counter drugs, beauty products and cosmetics, film and photo finishing services, seasonal merchandise, greeting cards, and convenience foods through their CVS Pharmacy and Longs Drugs retail stores and online through CVS.com. It also provides healthcare services through its more than 1,100 MinuteClinic medical clinics as well as their Diabetes Care Centers. Most of these clinics are located within or outside CVS stores.
== Overview ==

CVS Pharmacy used to be a subsidiary of Melville Corporation, where its full name was initially Consumer Value Stores. Melville changed its name to CVS Corporation in 1996 after Melville sold off many of its nonpharmacy stores. The last of its nondrugstore operations were sold in 1997.

Former CEO Tom Ryan has said he considers &quot;CVS&quot; to stand for &quot;Customer, Value, and Service&quot;.

During the company&#x27;s days as a regional chain in the Northeast, many CVS stores did not include pharmacies. Today, the company seldom builds new stores without pharmacies and outside of New England is gradually phasing out any such shops. Any new non-pharmacy store is usually built in a more urban setting where another CVS with a pharmacy exists within walking distance such as downtown Boston, Massachusetts, or Providence, Rhode Island. These stores usually lack a pharmacy and a photo center but carry most of the general merchandise items that a normal CVS Pharmacy carries such as health and beauty items, sundries, and food items.

On October 18, 2024, David Joyner, who previously oversaw Caremark, replaced Karen Lynch as CEO.

==Acquisitions and growth==
===1960s===
The name &quot;CVS&quot; was used for the first time in 1964. That year, they had 17 retail locations, and 40 stores five years later.

In 1967, CVS began operation of its first stores with pharmacy departments, opening locations in Warwick and Cumberland, Rhode Island. CVS was acquired by the now-defunct Melville Corporation in 1969, boosting its growth.

===1970s===
By 1970, CVS operated 100 stores in New England and the Northeast.

In early 1972, CVS introduced America&#x27;s first refillable plastic bottle with its CVS private-label shampoo. Customers paid 79¢ for a bottle of CVS private-label shampoo and when they returned the empty bottle and cap, could buy another bottle of the same shampoo for 69¢ (a 10¢ saving). This practice created a cause-related repeat-purchase cycle, wherein the customer saved 10¢ as they bought another bottle of CVS shampoo and avoided using (and CVS producing) a new plastic bottle. Each initial PVC bottle, flip-top cap and label cost CVS 11.5¢, so the process paid for itself and reduced plastic bottle pollution.

In 1972, CVS acquired 84 Clinton Drug and Discount Stores, which introduced CVS to Indiana and the Midwest. By 1974, CVS had 232 stores and sales of $100million. In 1977, CVS acquired the 36-store New Jersey–based Mack Drug chain.

===1980s===
The chain had more than 400 stores by 1981. Sales reached $1billion in 1985, partly due to the pharmacies being added to many of CVS&#x27;s older stores.

In 1980, CVS became the 15th largest pharmacy chain in the U.S., with 408 stores and $414million in sales. In 1988 CVS celebrated its 25th anniversary, finishing the year with nearly 750 stores and sales of about $1.6billion.

===1990s===
In 1990 CVS acquired the 490-store Peoples Drug chain from Imasco, which established the company in new mid-Atlantic markets including Washington, D.C., Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia. In 1994 CVS started PharmaCare Management Services. The parent company decided to focus on CVS in 1995, selling off Marshalls and This End Up. The following year, they let go of Footaction/Footstar, Meldisco, Linens &#x27;n Things, and KB Toys. The company, then decided to change its name from Melville Corporation to CVS Corporation. In 1997, Bob&#x27;s Stores were also sold, and CVS nearly tripled its 1,400 stores after purchasing the 2,500-store Revco chain (Revco had acquired Hook&#x27;s Drug Stores, some of the original Hook&#x27;s Drug Stores still operate under CVS brand and CVS operates digital pharmacy company as Hook SupeRx LLC.). CVS bought 200 Arbor Drugs locations in 1998, opened approximately 180 new stores, closed about 160 stores, and relocated nearly 200 existing stores from strip malls to freestanding locations. In 1999 CVS acquired Soma.com, the first online pharmacy, and renamed it CVS.com. The same year, CVS launched their CVS ProCare Pharmacy for complex drug therapies.

In 1990 CVS bought the 23-store Rix Dunnington chain. In 1993, CVS withdrew from the southern California market. Formerly traded as MVL on the New York Stock Exchange, the company now trades as CVS.

===2000–2008: Acquisition of Eckerd and other acquisitions ===
CVS bought Stadtlander Pharmacy of Pittsburgh from Bergen Brunswig/AmerisourceBergen in 2000. As of December 2009, CVS Caremark had over 7,000 locations.

In 2004 CVS purchased 1,268 Eckerd drug stores and Eckerd Health Services, a PBM/mail-order pharmacy business, from J. C. Penney. Most of the former Eckerd stores, which were converted to CVS stores by June, are located in Florida, Texas, and other southern states. Because JCPenney credit cards were accepted at Eckerd locations, CVS continued to accept them until July 2014.
On January 23, 2006, CVS announced that it had agreed to acquire the freestanding drug store operations of supermarket chain Albertsons. The deal included the acquisition of 700 drug stores trading under the Osco Drug and Sav-On Drugs banners, mostly in the midwestern and southwestern United States (with a concentration of stores in southern California and the Chicago area), and was formally completed on June 2, 2006.&lt;ref name=&quot;CVS-Caremark-Aug-2006-8-K/A&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Transition of Sav-On and Osco stores to the CVS brand was completed by December 2006. CVS now dominates the southern California market. Also included were Albertsons Health&#x27;n&#x27;Home (now CVS Home Health) durable medical equipment stores. Approximately 28 CVS Home Health locations are present in Arizona, California, and the Kansas City area, representing CVS&#x27;s first venture into the specialized DME market.CVS had previously operated stores in southern California but completely withdrew from the market in 1993. CVS sold virtually all of the locations to Sav-On&#x27;s then owner American Stores, who operated them under the name American Drug Stores. Many of the stores CVS gained in January 2006 had been the stores it owned prior to 1993. Before their re-acquisition, these stores were operated under the name Sav-On Express (the Express name was used to help customers identify these stores that did not carry all the lines of merchandise as compared to the larger, traditional Sav-On Drugs locations). CVS now operates over 6,200 stores in 43 states and the District of Columbia. In some locations, CVS has two stores less than two blocks apart.

On July 13, 2006, CVS announced that it had entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Minneapolis-based MinuteClinic, the pioneer and largest provider of retail-based health clinics in the U.S. MinuteClinic operates as a wholly owned subsidiary of CVS Corporation. MinuteClinic health care centers are staffed by board-certified nurse practitioners and physician assistants who are trained to diagnose and treat common family illnesses such as throat, ear, eye, sinus, bladder, and bronchial infections, and provide prescriptions when clinically appropriate. MinuteClinic also offers common vaccinations, such as flu shots, tetanus, and Hepatitis A &amp; B. The clinics are supported by physicians who collaborate with the staff. There are over 550 locations across the United States, most of which are within CVS Pharmacy locations.

On November 1, 2006, CVS announced that it was entering into a purchase agreement with Nashville-based Caremark Rx Inc., a pharmacy benefits manager. The new company is called &quot;CVS Caremark Corporation&quot; and the corporate headquarters remains in Woonsocket, Rhode Island. The new pharmacy services business, including the combined pharmacy benefits management (PBM), specialty pharmacy, and disease management businesses, is headquartered in Nashville, Tennessee. The new CVS Caremark Corporation is expected to achieve about $75billion in yearly revenue for 2007. The merger was formally completed on March 22, 2007. Tom Ryan, CVS&#x27;s Chairman and CEO, remains president and CEO of the combined company, while Caremark&#x27;s president and CEO, Mac Crawford, is chairman of the board.

On November 7, 2007, Mac Crawford stepped down as chairman of the board for CVS Caremark. He was replaced by president and CEO of CVS Caremark, Tom Ryan.

On August 12, 2008, CVS Pharmacy announced that it would acquire Longs Drugs for $2.9billion. Walgreens made a counteroffer but dropped it. The deal closed October 30, 2008. Longs Drugs stores outside Hawaii were rebranded to CVS Pharmacy by the summer of 2009.

===Since 2012: Acquisitions and conversion to CVS Health===
In 2012 CVS Caremark received 59 percent of Rhode Island&#x27;s tax credits.

On July 14, 2014, it was announced that CVS Caremark would acquire the Miami-based Navarro Discount Pharmacies when the deal closes, the 33 stores will remain untouched and will stay under the Navarro name.

On September 3, 2014, CVS Caremark changed its name to CVS Health and announced that it would stop selling tobacco products.

On October 25, 2014, CVS Health disabled near field communication NFC payments, disallowing customers from using Apple Pay or Google Wallet payment methods. A reason was not immediately given. Analysts suggested that it was a way to favor the MCX system, which was still under development, and of which CVS was a founding member. They eventually re-enabled NFC on their registers after the MCX system failed to take off.

On May 21, 2015, it was announced that CVS Health would acquire Omnicare, Inc. the leading provider of pharmacy services to long-term care facilities, for $98.00 per share in cash, for a total enterprise value of approximately $12.7billion, which includes approximately $2.3billion in debt. The transaction was expected to close near the end of 2015.

On June 15, 2015, CVS Health announced its agreement to acquire Target Corporation&#x27;s pharmacy and retail clinic businesses. The deal expanded CVS to new markets in Seattle, Denver, Portland and Salt Lake City. The acquisition includes more than 1,660 pharmacies in 47 states. CVS will operate them through a store-within-a-store format. Target&#x27;s nearly 80 clinic locations will be rebranded as MinuteClinic, and CVS plans to open up to 20 new clinics in their stores within three years. CVS started rebranding the pharmacies within the Target stores on February 3, 2016.

In December 2017 CVS Health announced a deal to acquire Aetna. On October 10, 2018, CVS Health received approval from the United States Department of Justice to acquire Aetna, for $69billion.

CVS announced it would close 46 &quot;underperforming stores&quot; in 2019, and a further 22 in 2020, without disclosing their locations.

In May 2020 CVS Health announced a partnership with New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to more than 60 CVS pharmacies that will conduct 50 or more COVID-19 tests per day. The New York partnership comes within days of CVS&#x27;s disclosure that it was going to dramatically ramp up COVID-19 testing by processing up to 1.5 million tests every month.

In November 2021, CVS announced it would be closing approximately 900 stores over the next 3 years due to declining sales in underperforming and failing stores.

In January 2024, CVS said some Target pharmacy locations would close between February and April, citing shifts in population, consumer consumption, and anticipated health needs. The move came amid industry-wide labor struggles for pharmacies and were part of the company&#x27;s plans to close about 10% of its stores overall. At the time of the announcement, the company operated roughly 1,800 pharmacies within Target&#x27;s 1,950 locations.

On February 5, 2024, it was announced that CVS Pharmacy will sell its stores in Puerto Rico to Caribe Pharmacy Holdings, which operates the Farmacias Caridad chain in the region.
=== Antitrust concerns ===

CVS Health has adopted a vertical integration strategy, combining its retail pharmacy business with other sectors of the healthcare industry, such as insurance and pharmacy benefit management (PBM). Vertical integration refers to the consolidation of multiple stages of production or services within a single company, enabling greater control over the supply chain. CVS’s acquisition of Aetna and ownership of PBM CVS Caremark have drawn significant criticism, with opponents arguing that this model monopolizes key aspects of the healthcare market. The three largest PBMs in the United States are UnitedHealth Group&#x27;s Optum, CVS Health’s CVS Caremark, and Cigna&#x27;s Express Scripts. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has accused PBMs, including CVS Caremark, of anticompetitive practices such as conflicts of interest and price inflation. Similarly, the American Medical Association (AMA) opposed the CVS-Aetna merger, arguing it would reduce competition and increase costs for consumers.
====CVS Rewards Program====
In 2013 CVS introduced a program that rewarded customers up to $50 per year in ExtraCare Bucks (store credit) that customers can use for purchasing additional items in store in exchange for filling their prescriptions. In order to enroll in the program, customers had to sign a HIPAA waiver acknowledging, &quot;my health information may potentially be re-disclosed and thus is no longer protected by the federal Privacy Rule.&quot; Stores had to fulfill a quota of a number of customers in the program each week. Walgreens and Rite Aid also offer rewards for filling prescriptions, although they do not require a signed HIPAA waiver.

====Stopping cigarette sales====
As was common practice among U.S. pharmacies, CVS originally stocked cigarettes for sale to the public. This met with criticism from public health advocates of the removal of tobacco from pharmacies due to the harmful effects on health associated with smoking, who pointed to the apparent contradiction implicit in selling cigarettes while offering smoking cessation products and medications to treat ailments such as asthma that are caused or aggravated by smoking. CVS and other pharmacies that continued to sell tobacco products were subject to criticism, and attempts were made to introduce regional bans on the practice, notably by the City and County of San Francisco.

In 2007 CEO Thomas Ryan stated that the company was considering halting the sale of cigarettes within its pharmacies, acknowledging that the issue was problematic for the company. He said the company would continue selling cigarettes, citing internal market research that concluded that ceasing cigarette sales would not change the consumer practice of purchasing them.

In February 2014, CVS announced that it would stop selling cigarettes and other tobacco products at its stores and that it was challenging other retailers to do the same. The decision meant the company would forego about $1.5billion a year in tobacco revenue. In a videotaped message, CEO Larry J. Merlo said ending tobacco sales &quot;is the right thing to do&quot;. On September 3, 2014, CVS officially stopped selling cigarettes in its stores. A &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine article cited the move to remove tobacco products as coinciding with CVS&#x27;s decision to change its corporate name from CVS Caremark to CVS Health and said this reflected a &quot;broader health care commitment&quot; and desire to change the future health of Americans.

===Online===
The domain &quot;CVS.com&quot; attracted at least 26million visitors annually by 2008 according to a Compete.com survey.

CVS no longer owns the soma.com domain name, which it acquired with the purchase of online drugstore pioneer Soma; that domain now resides with the lingerie brand of the same name owned by clothing retailer Chico&#x27;s.

By 2004, all CVS stores were able to receive electronic prescriptions.

===CVS Pharmacy y más===
In 2015 CVS Pharmacy launched an alternative version of their CVS Pharmacy stores called CVS Pharmacy y más specifically aimed at attracting Hispanic shoppers. The first stores were launched in Florida and have since expanded to California, Puerto Rico, Texas, and New Jersey.

==Environmental record==
In 2005 CVS participated in a program to reduce the pollution of Maine&#x27;s waterways. CVS agreed to accept drugs for disposal so that people would not dispose of them in ways that reach rivers and other bodies of waters.

In 2013 CVS agreed to pay Connecticut $800,000 due to alleged mismanagement of hazardous waste. The Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection agency found that CVS had improperly identified, managed, and disposed of hazardous materials.

==Controversies==

=== Post-&quot;Dobbs&quot; prescription refusals ===
Following the &quot;Dobbs&quot; case that overturned &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;, CVS instructed its pharmacists in six states to refuse to fill prescriptions for many routine drugs, which could be potentially used to cause an abortion, unless the patient could affirmatively prove that they were not using the drug for an abortion, even if the prescription was long-standing. Patient advocates for those with autoimmune disorders, such as Crohn&#x27;s disease, noted that this rule could result in many patients being denied access to medicines to treat their diseases.

===$2.25 million HIPAA Privacy Case===
CVS was required to pay the United States government $2.25million in 2009 for violations of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office for Civil Rights (OCR) and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) found that CVS did not appropriately dispose of sensitive patient information or provide the necessary training on disposal to their employees.

===Executives accused of bribing state senator===
Former CVS executives John R. Kramer and Carlos Ortiz were charged with bribery, conspiracy, and fraud (including mail fraud) by a federal grand jury for allegedly paying State Senator John A. Celona (D-RI) to act as a &quot;consultant&quot; for the company. Between February 2000 and September 2003, CVS paid Celona $1,000 a month, and he received tickets to golf outings and sporting events and compensation for travel to Florida and California. In August 2005, he pleaded guilty to mail fraud charges, and in January 2007, he was fined a record $130,000 by the Rhode Island Ethics Committee. The investigation, named Operation Dollar Bill, was led by the FBI and Rhode Island State Police. The case was prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Gerard B. Sullivan and Dulce Donovan. Kramer and Ortiz were acquitted after a jury trial, in May 2008.

===Massachusetts prescription errors===
During 2005 a rash of prescription mistakes came to light in some of CVS Corporation&#x27;s Boston-area stores. An investigation confirmed 62 errors or quality problems going back to 2002. In February 2006 the state Board of Pharmacy announced that the non-profit Institute of Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) would monitor all Massachusetts stores for the next two years. Later, a 2007 segment on &quot;ABC News 20/20&quot; accused CVS, Walgreens and Rite Aid among other pharmacies, of making various prescription dispensing errors. This segment aired in March of 2007, and included an undercover investigation. CVS responded by claiming they had invested millions of dollars in designing a comprehensive quality assurance program.

===Texas lawsuit over illegally dumping records containing patient information===
Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott sued CVS in April 2007, for illegally dumping records containing confidential patient information and sensitive financial information including credit card numbers when closing an acquired Eckerd store in Liberty, Texas. CVS was accused of breaking the state&#x27;s 2005 Identity Theft Enforcement and Protection Act. It was reported that this was the fourth time action had been taken against CVS for violating the 2005 law and that there were also other possible violations under the Texas Business and Commerce Code. CVS settled by paying $315,000 to the state and agreeing to overhaul its information security system.

===Deceptive business practices===

In February 2008 CVS settled a large civil lawsuit for deceptive business practices. The Kaiser Family Foundation reported:

CVS Caremark has agreed to a $38.5 million settlement in a multi-state civil deceptive-practices lawsuit against pharmacy benefit manager Caremark filed by 28 attorneys general, the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; reports. The attorneys general, led by Lisa Madigan (D) of Illinois and Douglas Ganslar (D) of Maryland, allege that Caremark &quot;engaged in deceptive business practices&quot; by informing physicians that patients or health plans could save money if patients were switched to certain brand-name prescription drugs (Miller, &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, 2/14).

However, the switch often saved patients and health plans only small amounts or increased their costs, while increasing Caremark&#x27;s profits, Connecticut Attorney General Richard Blumenthal (D) said (Levick, &quot;Hartford Courant&quot;, 2/15). Pennsylvania Attorney General Tom Corbett (R) said the PBM kept discounts and rebates that should have been passed on to employers and patients (Levy, &quot;AP/San Francisco Chronicle&quot;, 2/14). In addition, Caremark did not &quot;adequately inform doctors&quot; of the full financial effect of the switch and did not disclose that the switch would increase Caremark&#x27;s profits, the lawsuit alleges (&quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, 2/14).

...The settlement prohibits Caremark from requesting prescription drug switches in certain cases, such as when the cost to the patient would be higher with the new prescription drug; when the original prescription drug&#x27;s patent will expire within six months; and when patients were switched from a similar prescription drug within the previous two years (&quot;Hartford Courant&quot;, 2/15). Patients also have the ability to decline a switch from the prescribed treatment to the prescription offered by the pharmacy under the settlement, Madigan said (&quot;Bloomberg News/The Philadelphia Inquirer&quot;, 2/15).

===Pseudoephedrine lawsuit===

On October 14, 2010, CVS was ordered to pay $77.6million in fines and returned profits stemming from a lawsuit alleging improper control in the sale of pseudoephedrine, a drug that can be used to make methamphetamine.

===DEA investigation into oxycodone diversion===

In 2011 the U.S. Department of Justice charged that CVS pharmacies in Sanford, Florida, ordered enough painkillers to supply a population eight times its size. Sanford has a population of 53,000 but the supply would support 400,000. According to the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), in 2010 a single CVS pharmacy in Sanford ordered 1.8million oxycodone pills, an average of 137,994 pills a month. Other pharmacy customers in Florida averaged 5,364 oxycodone pills a month. DEA investigators serving a warrant to a CVS pharmacy in Sanford on October 18, 2011, noted that &quot;approximately every third car that came through the drive-thru lane had prescriptions for oxycodone or hydrocodone&quot;. According to the DEA, a pharmacist at that location stated to investigators that &quot;her customers often requested certain brands of oxycodone using &quot;street slang&quot;, an indicator that the drugs were being diverted and not used for legitimate pain management. In response, CVS, in a statement issued February 17, 2012, in response to opioid trafficking questions from &quot;USA Today&quot;, said the company was committed to working with the DEA and had taken &quot;significant actions to ensure appropriate dispensing of painkillers in Florida&quot;.

===Sale of homeopathic remedies===
On April 1, 2011, the James Randi Educational Foundation awarded CVS Pharmacy the tongue-in-cheek Pigasus Award for selling homeopathic remedies alongside medicines recognized by science.

In July 2018 the Center for Inquiry (CfI) filed a lawsuit in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia against CVS for consumer fraud over its sale of homeopathic medicines. In July, 2019, CFI announced that the Stiefel Freethought Foundation was contributing an additional $150,000 to the previously committed $100,000 to support the CVS and Walmart lawsuits. The case was dismissed.

===Photo website security===
On July 17, 2015, CVS shut down its online photo processing services, blaming a third-party vendor, believed to be PNI Digital Media. According to reporters, CVS was unwilling to confirm or deny questions about whether hackers had stolen customer photographs as well as data. The site was updated on September 11, 2015, with more details of the attack. By the end of November 2015 the CVS photo website was restored, and customers may order photo services online again.

===Receipt length===

CVS has drawn ire for the length of its customer receipts, specifically receipts given to people who have signed up for their ExtraCare rewards program. Due to CVS&#x27;s practice of placing numerous targeted coupons on the front, these receipts can be up to in length. CVS CEO Larry Merlo responded by saying that they were working on ways to reduce the length of the receipts by 25% and mentioned that customers can get their receipts and coupons digitally through CVS&#x27;s mobile app, which requires the customer to sign up for digital coupons and receipts. However, despite this, Merlo admitted that CVS still could do a better job of making the instructions to opt out of paper receipts more clear.

The story has since become an internet meme.

===Loss of controlled substances===
In 2020, Massachusetts CVS stores lost controlled substances at a rate several times higher than other pharmacy chains. CVS was fined $5 million by the federal government in 2017 for controlled substance losses and other violations in California pharmacies, and $1.5 million in 2018 for failing to report losses from New York pharmacies.

=== Abortion pill controversy ===
In January 2023, CVS announced their intentions to start dispensing mifepristone, one of the two drugs used in a medication abortion, following a change in regulations from the Food and Drug Administration. After receiving their certification to do so, CVS started offering abortion pills in jurisdictions where they are legal. The offering of abortion pills at pharmacies such as CVS has caused major political turmoil, and has resulted in numerous protests in-front of the pharmacies.

=== Pharmacists mistakenly cause an abortion ===
In October 2023, CVS mistakenly gave misoprostol, an abortion pill, to Tamika Thomas, a woman undergoing IVF who was supposed to be receiving a medication to help kick-start her pregnancy. In an interview with 8 News Now, Thomas stated she knew something was wrong when she experienced major cramping. &quot;My cramping went beyond that. It was extreme. It was painful.&quot; As a result of the medication, Tamika lost both of her embryos. She stated, &quot;They just killed my baby... Both my babies, because I transferred two embryos.&quot;

At the hearing, one of the pharmacists stated, &quot;It&#x27;s a human error. It was just a human error, and I&#x27;m so sorry.&quot; The two pharmacists were fined and placed on probation for one year. CVS Pharmacy was given a maximum fine of $10,000. The pharmacists will be able to return to work after one year if all conditions are met.

=== Department of Justice lawsuit ===
On December 18, 2024, The United States Department of Justice sued CVS, accusing the pharmacy of filling thousand of prescriptions haphazardly, leading to thousands of wrongful deaths. Into the lawsuit, CVS pushed its pharmacists to fill prescriptions without investigating whether they were legitimate in order to boost profits. In 2022, CVS agreed to pay close to $5 billion over 10 years to settle thousand of similar claims by state, local and Native American tribal governments. It did not admit wrongdoing under the deal.

==See also==
* Rite Aid
* Walgreens

==References==
==External links==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="0" end="17" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="CVS Pharmacy Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="33" end="39" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q624375" start="69" end="79" title="CVS Health" label="CVS Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q54276" start="104" end="128" title="Woonsocket, Rhode Island" label="Woonsocket, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="151" end="172" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="Consumer Value Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="192" end="213" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813868" start="277" end="297" title="Melville Corporation" label="Melville Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="367" end="375" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spun off"/>
<link wikidata="Q507619" start="453" end="458" title="chain store" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="648" end="671" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591889" start="735" end="744" title="Walgreens" label="Walgreens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931196" start="1050" end="1061" title="Longs Drugs" label="Longs Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871141" start="1169" end="1181" title="MinuteClinic" label="MinuteClinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813868" start="1358" end="1378" title="Melville Corporation" label="Melville Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64455" start="1617" end="1625" title="Thomas Ryan (businessman)" label="Tom Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1911" end="1922" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="2114" end="2135" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="2140" end="2164" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q106086392" start="2442" end="2453" title="Karen S. Lynch" label="Karen Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49195" start="2736" end="2743" title="Warwick, Rhode Island" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143667" start="2748" end="2758" title="Cumberland, Rhode Island" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813868" start="2810" end="2830" title="Melville Corporation" label="Melville Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="2910" end="2921" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166061" start="4238" end="4250" title="Peoples Drug" label="Peoples Drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003420" start="4262" end="4268" title="Imasco" label="Imasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q15903261" start="4510" end="4519" title="Marshalls" label="Marshalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q63335" start="4572" end="4582" title="Footaction" label="Footaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466589" start="4583" end="4591" title="Footstar" label="Footstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553600" start="4603" end="4624" title="Linens &amp;#x27;n Things" label="Linens &amp;#x27;n Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326502" start="4630" end="4637" title="KB Toys" label="KB Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157089" start="4846" end="4851" title="Revco" label="Revco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784756" start="5057" end="5068" title="Arbor Drugs" label="Arbor Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081320" start="5276" end="5291" title="online pharmacy" label="online pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="5544" end="5567" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332881" start="5847" end="5853" title="Eckerd Corporation" label="Eckerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="5935" end="5947" title="J. C. Penney" label="J. C. Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="6042" end="6049" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="6051" end="6056" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="6068" end="6083" title="Southern United States" label="southern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831861" start="6321" end="6331" title="New Albertsons" label="Albertsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106428" start="6404" end="6413" title="Osco Drug" label="Osco Drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106428" start="6418" end="6430" title="Sav-On Drugs" label="Sav-On Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831861" start="6841" end="6851" title="New Albertsons" label="Albertsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745184" start="7282" end="7297" title="American Stores" label="American Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="7765" end="7785" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871141" start="7963" end="7975" title="MinuteClinic" label="MinuteClinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180823" start="8817" end="8842" title="Pharmacy benefit management" label="pharmacy benefits manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039014" start="8876" end="8900" title="CVS Caremark" label="CVS Caremark Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931196" start="9713" end="9724" title="Longs Drugs" label="Longs Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="9849" end="9855" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="10120" end="10125" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982161" start="10132" end="10159" title="Navarro Discount Pharmacies" label="Navarro Discount Pharmacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q273353" start="10424" end="10448" title="near field communication" label="near field communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010990" start="10496" end="10505" title="Apple Pay" label="Apple Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q111988573" start="10509" end="10522" title="Google Wallet" label="Google Wallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818364" start="10626" end="10629" title="Merchant Customer Exchange" label="MCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818364" start="10773" end="10776" title="Merchant Customer Exchange" label="MCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="11221" end="11239" title="Target Corporation" label="Target Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26049" start="11795" end="11800" title="Aetna" label="Aetna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="11861" end="11896" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="12123" end="12149" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="12210" end="12218" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="13099" end="13110" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039014" start="13640" end="13652" title="CVS Caremark" label="CVS Caremark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103926" start="13824" end="13842" title="UnitedHealth Group" label="UnitedHealth Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q30284383" start="13850" end="13855" title="Optum" label="Optum"/>
<link wikidata="Q642271" start="13888" end="13893" title="Cigna" label="Cigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q768231" start="13901" end="13916" title="Express Scripts" label="Express Scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811450" start="15086" end="15120" title="Tobacco-free pharmacy" label="removal of tobacco from pharmacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q465016" start="15132" end="15157" title="Health effects of tobacco" label="harmful effects on health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462253" start="15271" end="15288" title="smoking cessation" label="smoking cessation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="15340" end="15346" title="asthma medication" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="15563" end="15595" title="San Francisco" label="City and County of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="15682" end="15692" title="cigarettes" label="cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="16424" end="16430" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011597" start="16833" end="16844" title="Compete.com" label="Compete.com"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17002" end="17033" title="Chico&amp;#x27;s (clothing retailer)#Soma" label="lingerie brand of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096393" start="17061" end="17073" title="Chico&amp;#x27;s (clothing retailer)" label="Chico&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q606563" start="18795" end="18800" title="HIPAA" label="HIPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="18890" end="18893" title="U.S. Department of Health and Human Services" label="OCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="18929" end="18932" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="FTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096996" start="19749" end="19770" title="Operation Dollar Bill" label="Operation Dollar Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="19787" end="19790" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320964" start="19795" end="19820" title="Rhode Island State Police" label="Rhode Island State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q197867" start="20422" end="20436" title="20/20 (US television series)" label="ABC News 20/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591889" start="20456" end="20465" title="Walgreens" label="Walgreens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433273" start="20470" end="20478" title="Rite Aid" label="Rite Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605224" start="20858" end="20869" title="Greg Abbott" label="Greg Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q981297" start="21075" end="21089" title="Liberty, Texas" label="Liberty, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721589" start="21618" end="21642" title="Kaiser Family Foundation" label="Kaiser Family Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="21842" end="21857" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587159" start="22443" end="22459" title="Hartford Courant" label="Hartford Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="22631" end="22633" title="Associated Press" label="AP"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="22634" end="22657" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="23482" end="23496" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q600111" start="23497" end="23522" title="The Philadelphia Inquirer" label="The Philadelphia Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q263958" start="23721" end="23736" title="pseudoephedrine" label="pseudoephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="23850" end="23876" title="U.S. Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q786770" start="23908" end="23924" title="Sanford, Florida" label="Sanford, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="24088" end="24119" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q407535" start="24187" end="24196" title="oxycodone" label="oxycodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q411441" start="24523" end="24534" title="hydrocodone" label="hydrocodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="24926" end="24935" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="25143" end="25150" title="April Fool&amp;#x27;s Day" label="April 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681020" start="25162" end="25196" title="James Randi Educational Foundation" label="James Randi Educational Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669430" start="25238" end="25251" title="Pigasus Award" label="Pigasus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="25264" end="25275" title="homeopathic" label="homeopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q648015" start="25346" end="25364" title="Center for Inquiry" label="Center for Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643519" start="25394" end="25436" title="Superior Court of the District of Columbia" label="Superior Court of the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="25485" end="25496" title="homeopathy" label="homeopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119843" start="25864" end="25881" title="PNI Digital Media" label="PNI Digital Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q330190" start="26291" end="26298" title="receipt" label="receipt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806074" start="26520" end="26531" title="Larry Merlo" label="Larry Merlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="26979" end="26992" title="internet meme" label="internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q411240" start="27472" end="27484" title="mifepristone" label="mifepristone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604964" start="27517" end="27536" title="Medical abortion" label="medication abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="27581" end="27609" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="27766" end="27776" title="Pharmacy" label="pharmacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="27854" end="27861" title="protest" label="protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q416025" start="27978" end="27989" title="misoprostol" label="misoprostol"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="28046" end="28049" title="In vitro fertilisation" label="IVF"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="28119" end="28128" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006818" start="28233" end="28238" title="cramp" label="cramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="28372" end="28378" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="28512" end="28522" title="pharmacist" label="pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="28664" end="28673" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="28892" end="28927" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433273" start="29410" end="29418" title="Rite Aid" label="Rite Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591889" start="29421" end="29430" title="Walgreens" label="Walgreens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577894" wikidata="Q2338601" url="?curid=577894" title="Darley Dale">
<text>Darley Dale, formerly Darley, is a town and civil parish in the Derbyshire Dales district of Derbyshire, England, with a population of 5,413. It lies north of Matlock, on the River Derwent and the A6 road. The town forms part of a built-up area with both Matlock and Rowsley.

==Geography==
This article contains information on the area covered by the current civil parish of Darley Dale. The main built-up area of the parish extends for 2 miles along the A6 road north-west of Matlock, starting near the ARC Leisure Centre and ending near Stancliffe Quarry. It is bounded on the south-west by the River Derwent and extends over the hills and moors to the north-east as far as Darwin Forest Country Park.

The parish includes the settlements at Darley Dale, Darley Hillside, Churchtown, Two Dales (Toadhole), Upper Hackney and Farley, but excludes Darley Bridge and Northwood. Darley Dale is sometimes confused with Darley Abbey (a mile north of Derby and with Dale Abbey (6 miles north-east of Derby).

==History==
* Earlier versions of this article claimed that a Benedictine abbey was built in Darley under the reign of Henry I in the 12th century – this is not supported by the evidence now available.
* St Helen&#x27;s Church dates from the 12th century.
* Darley Bridge survives from the late medieval period, having been built in the 15th century.
* The Wirksworth Moor to Longstone turnpike opened in 1759.
* The Chesterfield to Matlock, Darley and Rowsley Bridge turnpike opened in 1760.
* In 1849 a railway line opened for passenger traffic between Ambergate and Rowsley, with intermediate stations at Matlock Bath, Matlock Bridge and Darley (Dale).
* In 1873 a new railway station opened at Darley on opposite side of level crossing.
* In 1877 Rowsley railway sidings brought into use.
* St Helen&#x27;s Church was restored in 1877.
* Whitworth Hospital opened in 1889.
* Whitworth Institute was erected in 1890.
* In 1890 Darley railway station officially re-named Darley Dale.
* Around the same time &quot;Toadhole&quot; also became &quot;Two Dales&quot;. 
* The town grew in the 19th and 20th centuries around the lead mining, metal forging, railway and quarrying industries.

==Places of worship==

===St Helen&#x27;s Church===

Situated in the Churchtown part of Darley Dale, this Grade II* listed parish church dates from the 12th century. The church was restored in 1877, and the tower was restored and strengthened in 1902–03. Outside the church, in the south wall of the chancel, the four periods of architecture, Norman, Early English, Decorated and Perpendicular, can be seen. Inside the church, there are monuments to Sir John de Darley who was lord of the manor in 14th century. There is also a memorial window to the famous engineer Sir Joseph Whitworth, who lived in the parish and is buried in the churchyard. The yew tree just outside the south porch is claimed to be 2,000 years old and is one of the thickest in England, with a girth of around 33 feet, 4 feet from the ground. It is claimed that this tree marked a sacred site in pre-Christian times.

===Wesleyan Methodist Chapel===
Situated on Chesterfield Road in Two Dales, this was built in 1827. Formally known as Hudson&#x27;s Chapel, it is now called The Old Chapel and was superseded by the Dale Road Methodist Church in 1906. After use as a Sunday school, it was converted into a bakery. Before conversion to a residential dwelling, the property was used by a local builder as storage unit.

===Hackney Primitive Methodist Chapel===
Situated on Greenaway Lane, this was built in 1848 and was superseded by the nearby Hackney Methodist Church in 1908. After a period as a Sunday school, it is no longer used as a place of worship.

===Dale Road Methodist Church===
Situated on Dale Road, close to the Whitworth Institute, this was built in 1904. It superseded the Wesleyan Chapel in Two Dales.

===Hackney Methodist Church===

This was built in 1908 to replace a smaller Primitive Methodist chapel nearby on Greenaway Lane. It is now a private residence.

===Darley Hillside Methodist Church===
The church was built on Moor Lane in 1912 to replace an earlier building on Lumb Lane. It was part of the same circuit as Dale Road Methodist Church, but is now closed and converted into a community centre.

==Whitworth legacy==

Sir Joseph Whitworth, the 19th-century machine toolmaker and engineer, lived at Stancliffe Hall in Darley Dale for the last 13 years of his life. He died in Monte Carlo in 1887, aged 83, and was buried at St. Helen&#x27;s Church. During his lifetime he drew up plans for the village and these were fulfilled thanks to generous endowments from his estate. He had, according to his biographer Terence Kilburn, hoped to build a comprehensive village college but his wife, Louisa, preferred a social centre. The Institute and Park was a compromise and is just one of the things the Whitworths did to enrich the lives of Darley Dale&#x27;s inhabitants.

===Whitworth Hospital===
Lady Louisa Whitworth built Whitworth Cottage Hospital, the first of two major building projects in Darley Dale, following the death of her husband and it was opened in 1889. It is still in use as an NHS hospital today, providing a minor injuries unit, two urgent care wards and some community health services.

===Whitworth Institute===
The opening to the public of the Whitworth Institute in September 1890 marked the beginning of Lady Louisa&#x27;s second major project in Darley Dale. The institute comprised an indoor swimming pool, an assembly hall, various reading and committee rooms and eventually a library, a billiard room, a museum of natural history, a convenient hotel (Whitworth Hotel, now &quot;Barrington&#x27;s&quot;) and a landscaped park. The Whitworth Institute was given to the people of Darley Dale and in 2009/10 underwent a £1.7M renovation to ensure its continued use for future generations.

===Whitworth Park===
The park provides a variety of sporting activities with soccer and cricket pitches, a bowling green and a skateboard arena.
Whitworth Park also provides over ten acres of landscaped grounds with pathways along tree-lined avenues. There is also a shallow lake. The centrepiece of the park is an obelisk commemorating Sir Joseph Whitworth.
In 2003 the park was the subject of a £750,000 refurbishment.

==Notable people==
Notable people associated with Darley Dale include:
* Nigel Bond, snooker player, was born there
* Tom Chambers, actor, was born there in 1977
* Mike Hendrick, English cricketer, was born there in 1948
*Christopher Green, comedy writer and performer, grew up there
* Joseph Paxton, architect and gardener for the nearby Chatsworth House
* Crichton Porteous, author
* Joseph Whitworth, engineer – see the Whitworth legacy section above
* Sir Godfrey de Foljambe, politician and judge, was the local landowner in the 1360s and 1370s.
*Timothy Yates, theologian, was the vicar of St Helen&#x27;s in the years 1979–1990

==Notable buildings and attractions==

The town was the winner of the 2003 Britain in Bloom, in the category of &#x27;Large Village&#x27; The prize was presented by local marine expert Ben Goodwin.

A biennial arts festival, the Darley Dale Arts Festival, is held in July in odd-numbered years.

At the bottom of Station Road lies Darley Dale railway station. National rail services ceased in the 1960s however the station is now occupied by the railway and heritage preservation group Peak Rail. From there, a heritage steam service operates south to Matlock and north to Rowsley South, with a route distance of approximately five miles.

An annual transport festival, the Darley Dale Festival of Transport, is held at the bottom of Station Road every September.

Nearby is the holiday resort Darwin Forest Country Park.

The Square &amp; Compass public house on Station Road is home to an annual music festival, the Ale House Rocks Music Festival.

==Media==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC East Midlands and ITV Central. Television signals can be received from one of the three local relay transmitters (Darley Dale, Matlock and Stanton Moor).

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Derby on 95.3 FM, Capital Midlands on 102.8 FM and Greatest Hits Radio Yorkshire (formerly Peak FM) on 102.0 FM. 

The town is served by these local newspapers: &quot;Matlock Mercury&quot;, &quot;Buxton Advertiser&quot; and &quot;Derbyshire Times&quot;.

==Two Dales (Toadhole)==
Two Dales was called &quot;Toadhole&quot; until the late 19th century; the name was changed at the suggestion of the parish vicar, who felt it would help with the promotion of tourism, as with the adding of &quot;Dale&quot; to Darley.

Ladygrove Mill was built in Two Dales for spinning cotton by Abraham Flint, but converted to flax spinning in 1789 by Daniel Dakeyne of Knabb House. It was expanded by his sons, Edward and James, who built a series of three dams on the Sydnope Valley rising to 96 feet. To cope with the water pressure, they invented a revolutionary water-pressure powered &quot;disc engine&quot;, which they patented in 1830 as the Dakeyne hydraulic disc engine. It was the progenitor of a type, now known as a &quot;nutating disc engine&quot; (which has been the subject of entrepreneurial interest in the 21st century). The mills and equipment have virtually disappeared but the remains of the dams can still be seen.

The Plough Inn public house in Two Dales was the reason behind former England international footballer Eddie Shimwell&#x27;s transfer from Sheffield United to Blackpool in December 1946. Shimwell wanted to buy the pub, but Sheffield United would not allow it because of their ban on players becoming publicans, so the full-back put in a transfer request.

==See also==
*Listed buildings in Darley Dale

==References==
==External links==

*Darley Dale Town Council
*&quot;Geograph&quot; Darley Dale station in the 1990s
*Peak Rail Website

== Further reading ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2338601" start="0" end="11" title="Darley Dale" label="Darley Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338601" start="22" end="28" title="Darley Dale" label="Darley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="44" end="56" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199980" start="64" end="80" title="Derbyshire Dales" label="Derbyshire Dales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="93" end="103" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337703" start="159" end="166" title="Matlock, Derbyshire" label="Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q939664" start="175" end="188" title="River Derwent, Derbyshire" label="River Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649590" start="197" end="204" title="A6 road (England)" label="A6 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439544" start="267" end="274" title="Rowsley" label="Rowsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225975" start="677" end="703" title="Darwin Forest Country Park" label="Darwin Forest Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841788" start="848" end="861" title="Darley Bridge" label="Darley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223870" start="916" end="928" title="Darley Abbey" label="Darley Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372980" start="961" end="971" title="Dale Abbey" label="Dale Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="1066" end="1083" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="Benedictine abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="1390" end="1398" title="Toll road" label="turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="2762" end="2778" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="2841" end="2844" title="Taxus baccata" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="3331" end="3344" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="4314" end="4334" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Sir Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="4471" end="4482" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930707" start="4753" end="4768" title="village college" label="village college"/>
<link wikidata="Q77115" start="4803" end="4816" title="social centre" label="social centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30293206" start="5016" end="5042" title="Whitworth Hospital, Matlock" label="Whitworth Cottage Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540156" start="5359" end="5378" title="Whitworth Institute" label="Whitworth Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q427096" start="6402" end="6412" title="Nigel Bond" label="Nigel Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="6414" end="6421" title="snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815252" start="6447" end="6459" title="Tom Chambers (actor)" label="Tom Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528898" start="6493" end="6506" title="Mike Hendrick" label="Mike Hendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112430" start="6551" end="6568" title="Chris Green (writer/performer)" label="Christopher Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q318372" start="6615" end="6628" title="Joseph Paxton" label="Joseph Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068289" start="6668" end="6684" title="Chatsworth House" label="Chatsworth House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184927" start="6687" end="6704" title="Crichton Porteous" label="Crichton Porteous"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="6715" end="6731" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839472" start="6789" end="6808" title="Godfrey de Foljambe" label="Godfrey de Foljambe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29940196" start="6881" end="6894" title="Timothy Yeats" label="Timothy Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407723" start="7040" end="7056" title="Britain in Bloom" label="Britain in Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801521" start="7175" end="7188" title="arts festival" label="arts festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223871" start="7296" end="7323" title="Darley Dale railway station" label="Darley Dale railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157836" start="7451" end="7460" title="Peak Rail" label="Peak Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787688" start="7517" end="7524" title="Matlock Riverside railway station" label="Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372289" start="7538" end="7551" title="Rowsley South railway station" label="Rowsley South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225975" start="7759" end="7785" title="Darwin Forest Country Park" label="Darwin Forest Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="7863" end="7877" title="music festival" label="music festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834811" start="7979" end="7996" title="BBC East Midlands" label="BBC East Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444865" start="8001" end="8012" title="ITV Central" label="ITV Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118709" start="8163" end="8178" title="BBC Radio Derby" label="BBC Radio Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063602" start="8191" end="8207" title="Capital Midlands" label="Capital Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18746352" start="8224" end="8253" title="Greatest Hits Radio Yorkshire" label="Greatest Hits Radio Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265781" start="8264" end="8271" title="Peak FM (North Derbyshire)" label="Peak FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787683" start="8340" end="8355" title="Matlock Mercury" label="Matlock Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003258" start="8369" end="8386" title="Buxton Advertiser" label="Buxton Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261709" start="8403" end="8419" title="Derbyshire Times" label="Derbyshire Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="8740" end="8746" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="8782" end="8786" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209934" start="9105" end="9134" title="Dakeyne hydraulic disc engine" label="Dakeyne hydraulic disc engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325110" start="9190" end="9210" title="nutating disc engine" label="nutating disc engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="9409" end="9421" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="9464" end="9471" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336487" start="9497" end="9511" title="Eddie Shimwell" label="Eddie Shimwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="9533" end="9549" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="9553" end="9562" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610451" start="9764" end="9795" title="Listed buildings in Darley Dale" label="Listed buildings in Darley Dale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577895" wikidata="Q5223869" url="?curid=577895" title="Darley, North Yorkshire">
<text>Darley is a linear village in Nidderdale in the former Harrogate district of North Yorkshire, England. The population as at the 2011 Census is 1,332 and is included in the civil parish of Darley and Menwith. The village extends for 1 mile east from a junction with the B6451 road. The western end of the village is known as Darley Head and the eastern end as The Holme.
Darley has won many local and national &#x27;Britain in Bloom&#x27; awards.

== Amenities ==
Darley has two churches, Christ Church (Anglican) and Darley Methodist Church. There are three community halls (Darley Memorial Hall, Christ Church Community Centre and Hookstone Memorial Hall), a playing field, and a combined village store and post office that became a locally run concern in 2016.

At the western end of the village is Darley Mill, a grade II listed 17th-century corn mill. It formerly housed a restaurant and retail units, but these closed in 2016 after the business were not deemed viable. Nearby is Darley&#x27;s only pub, the Wellington Inn.

Darley used to have a railway station on the Nidd Valley Railway, but this was closed in 1951. The village is served by hourly buses of Harrogate Bus Company (route 24) between Harrogate and Pateley Bridge.

== Civil parish ==
Darley is the only village in the civil parish of Darley and Menwith, until 2013 known as Menwith with Darley. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 1,332. Apart from the village, the parish consists of scattered farms and houses to the south west of the village, and includes the northern part of RAF Menwith Hill. There is no settlement of Menwith, although the name was first recorded in 1230. Menwith is derived from the Old English &quot;mǣne&quot; &quot;common&quot; and the Old Norse &quot;viðr&quot; &quot;wood&quot;, and refers to the &quot;common wood&quot; of Darley.

The parish of Menwith with Darley was historically a township in the parish of Hampsthwaite, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. It became a separate civil parish in 1866. It was transferred to the new county of North Yorkshire in 1974.

==See also==
*Listed buildings in Darley and Menwith

== References ==
== External links ==

*Village website 
*Darley Christ Church
*Darley Mill - a restored watermill in the village
*Days out North Yorkshire</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5223869" start="0" end="6" title="Darley, North Yorkshire" label="Darley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544351" start="30" end="40" title="Nidderdale" label="Nidderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q894087" start="55" end="64" title="Harrogate (borough)" label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="77" end="92" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="128" end="139" title="2011 Census for England and Wales" label="2011 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223869" start="188" end="206" title="Darley and Menwith" label="Darley and Menwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837008" start="269" end="279" title="B6451 road" label="B6451 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407723" start="415" end="431" title="Britain in Bloom" label="Britain in Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q26543354" start="801" end="812" title="Darley Mill" label="Darley Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="816" end="831" title="grade II listed" label="grade II listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="845" end="854" title="corn mill" label="corn mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q46996881" start="1051" end="1066" title="Darley railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030814" start="1074" end="1093" title="Nidd Valley Railway" label="Nidd Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666369" start="1165" end="1186" title="Harrogate Bus Company" label="Harrogate Bus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q215829" start="1206" end="1215" title="Harrogate" label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617126" start="1220" end="1234" title="Pateley Bridge" label="Pateley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="1290" end="1302" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928142" start="1566" end="1582" title="RAF Menwith Hill" label="RAF Menwith Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1693" end="1704" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1749" end="1758" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646130" start="1927" end="1939" title="Hampsthwaite" label="Hampsthwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="1948" end="1972" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962052" start="2097" end="2135" title="Listed buildings in Darley and Menwith" label="Listed buildings in Darley and Menwith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577896" wikidata="Q745145" url="?curid=577896" title="Bituriges Cubi">
<text>The Bituriges Cubi (Gaulish: &quot;Biturīges Cubi&quot;) were a Gallic tribe dwelling in a territory corresponding to the later province of Berry, which is named after them, during the Iron Age and the Roman period. They had a homonym tribe, the Bituriges Vivisci, in the Bordelais region, which could indicate a common origin, although there is no direct evidence of this.

== Name ==
They are mentioned as &quot;Bituriges&quot; by Caesar (mid-1st c. BC), &quot;Bitoúriges oi̔ Kou͂boi&quot; (Βιτούριγες οἱ Κοῦβοι) and &quot;Koúbois Bitoúrixi&quot; (Κούβοις Βιτούριξι) by Strabo (early 1st c. AD), &quot;Bituriges ... qui Cubi appellantur&quot; by Pliny (1st c. AD), and as &quot;Bitoúriges oi̔ Kou͂boi&quot; (Βιτούριγες οἱ Κοῦβοι) by Ptolemy (2nd c. AD).

The Gaulish ethnonym &quot;Biturīges&quot; means &#x27;kings of the world&#x27;, or possibly &#x27;perpetual kings&#x27;. It derives from the stem &quot;bitu-&quot; (&#x27;world&#x27;, perhaps also &#x27;perpetual&#x27;; cf. OIr. &quot;bith&quot; &#x27;world, life, age&#x27;, &quot;bith&quot;- &#x27;eternally&#x27;, Old Welsh &quot;bid&quot;, OBret. &quot;bit&quot; &#x27;world&#x27;) attached to &quot;riges&quot; (&#x27;kings&#x27;; &quot;rix&quot;). Whether the meaning &#x27;perpetual&#x27; was already associated with &quot;bitu&quot;- in ancient Celtic languages or appeared later in Old Irish remains uncertain. In any case, the meaning &#x27;world&#x27; probably emerged from the notion of &#x27;living world, place of the livings&#x27;, since the Proto-Celtic stem *&quot;bitu-&quot; derives from Proto-Indo-European *&quot;gʷiH-tu&quot;-, meaning &#x27;life&#x27; (cf. Lat. &quot;vīta&quot; &#x27;life&#x27;, OCS &quot;žiti&quot; &#x27;to live&#x27;).

The city of Bourges, attested ca. 400 AD as &quot;civitas Biturigum&quot; (&#x27;civitas of the Bituriges&#x27;, &quot;Bituricas&quot; in 844, &quot;Bituris&quot; in 1182), and the region of Berry, attested in 860 as &quot;pagus Biturigus&quot; (&#x27;pagus of the Bituriges&#x27;), are named after the Gallic tribe.

== Geography ==

Their chief town during the pre-Roman era was the oppidum of Avaricum Biturigum (modern Bourges). Their dwelled west of the Aedui, south of the Carnutes and Cenomani, north of the Pictones, Lemovices and Arverni, and east of the Turones.

== History ==
According to a legend recounted by Livy, the Bituriges ruled over all of Gaul ca. 600 BC. Faced with overpopulation in their homeland, the Biturigian king Ambigatus sent his sister&#x27;s sons Bellovesus and Segovesus in search of new territories to settle. Segovesus headed towards the Hercynian Forest, while Bellovesus is said to have led the Gallic invasion of northern Italy. Many Greek ceramics and amphoras imported from Massalia, as well as local productions of fine art pottery dated to the second part of the 6th century BC were found on the site Bourges, which, according to historian Venceslas Kruta, gives archeological credit to the essence of the tradition reported by Livy evoking the power of the people of the region well before his own time.

In the 1st century BC, the Bituriges Cubi were client of the Aedui as part of their confederation headed. During the Gallic Wars, they supported the Arverni in their fight against Caesar, and suffered great losses in the siege of their oppidum named Noviodunum, followed by their chief town Avaricum in 52 BC, the only oppidum in their territory spared by the scorched-earth tactics of Vercingetorix. They also took part in the defence of Alesia during the siege of the oppidum by the Romans. After the defeat of Vercingetorix, Rome had to suppress a Gallic revolt in the territory of the Bituriges in 51 BC. Their submission to Rome was reportedly quick, and they asked Caesar to intervene against their neighbours the Carnutes only a few weeks later.

== Legacy ==
A passage from Livy, &quot;summa imperii penes Biturges&quot; (&#x27;all the power in the hands of the Bituriges&#x27;), has become the motto of the city of Bourges.

==See also==
* List of peoples of Gaul
* Saint-Benoît-du-Sault

==References==

==Primary sources==

=== Bibliography ===
* 
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q745145" start="4" end="18" title="Bituriges Cubi" label="Bituriges Cubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29977" start="20" end="27" title="Gaulish language" label="Gaulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q827169" start="140" end="145" title="Berry (province)" label="Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="185" end="193" title="La Tène culture" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="202" end="214" title="Roman period" label="Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919174" start="246" end="263" title="Bituriges Vivisci" label="Bituriges Vivisci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="272" end="281" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordelais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="433" end="439" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="572" end="578" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="648" end="653" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="735" end="742" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29977" start="761" end="768" title="Gaulish" label="Gaulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="769" end="777" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="982" end="986" title="Old Irish" label="OIr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="1075" end="1084" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="1102" end="1108" title="Old Breton" label="OBret."/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="1515" end="1527" title="Proto-Celtic" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1565" end="1584" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="1678" end="1681" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="OCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="1734" end="1741" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094545" start="1803" end="1810" title="civitas" label="civitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q827169" start="1913" end="1918" title="Berry, France" label="Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436282" start="1974" end="1979" title="pagus" label="pagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="2107" end="2114" title="oppidum" label="oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q281826" start="2118" end="2136" title="Avaricum" label="Avaricum Biturigum"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="2145" end="2152" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q677863" start="2181" end="2186" title="Aedui" label="Aedui"/>
<link wikidata="Q852944" start="2201" end="2209" title="Carnutes" label="Carnutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q859382" start="2214" end="2222" title="Aulerci Cenomani" label="Cenomani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466130" start="2237" end="2245" title="Pictones" label="Pictones"/>
<link wikidata="Q628171" start="2247" end="2256" title="Lemovices" label="Lemovices"/>
<link wikidata="Q382553" start="2261" end="2268" title="Arverni" label="Arverni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461576" start="2286" end="2293" title="Turones" label="Turones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="2345" end="2349" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089196" start="2465" end="2474" title="Ambigatus" label="Ambigatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q816041" start="2503" end="2513" title="Bellovesus" label="Bellovesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478002" start="2518" end="2527" title="Segovesus" label="Segovesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q699675" start="2597" end="2613" title="Hercynian Forest" label="Hercynian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2684" end="2689" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566850" start="2738" end="2746" title="Massilia" label="Massalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408252" start="2906" end="2921" title="Venceslas Kruta" label="Venceslas Kruta"/>
<link wikidata="Q677863" start="3133" end="3138" title="Aedui" label="Aedui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706885" start="3322" end="3332" title="Noviodunum" label="Noviodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q178953" start="3458" end="3471" title="Vercingetorix" label="Vercingetorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q835966" start="3511" end="3517" title="Alesia (city)" label="Alesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131386" start="3529" end="3549" title="Battle of Alesia" label="siege of the oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q852944" start="3792" end="3800" title="Carnutes" label="Carnutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="3854" end="3858" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="3975" end="3980" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="3996" end="4003" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="4021" end="4044" title="List of peoples of Gaul" label="List of peoples of Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q625293" start="4047" end="4068" title="Saint-Benoît-du-Sault" label="Saint-Benoît-du-Sault"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577897" wikidata="Q1591889" url="?curid=577897" title="Walgreens">
<text>Walgreens is an American pharmacy store chain and the second largest in the United States, behind CVS Health&#x27;s CVS Pharmacy. It specializes in filling prescriptions, health and wellness products, health information, and photo services. It was founded in Chicago in 1901, and is headquartered in the Chicago suburb of Deerfield, Illinois. On December 31, 2014, Walgreens acquired Switzerland-based Alliance Boots, and formed a new holding company, Walgreens Boots Alliance. Walgreens became a subsidiary of the new company, which retained its Deerfield headquarters and trades on the Nasdaq under the symbol WBA. In 2021 the company was one of several pharmacy chains found by a federal jury to have substantially contributed to the opioid crisis.

== History ==
Walgreens began in 1901, when Charles Rudolph Walgreen purchased a small food front store on the corner of Bowen and Cottage Grove Avenues in Chicago, where he had worked as a pharmacist.
His energy and enthusiasm soon led to new ideas and ambitious expansion. For example, he manufactured his own line of drug products to ensure high quality and low prices. By 1913, Walgreens had grown to four stores on Chicago&#x27;s South Side. It opened its fifth in 1915 and four more in 1916. By 1919, there were 20 stores in the chain.

As a result of alcohol prohibition, the 1920s were a successful time for Walgreens. Although alcohol was illegal, Walgreens sold prescription whiskey. This prescribed alcohol was sold at inflated price, which was much higher than the pricing at the bathtub or the speakeasy. In 1922, the company introduced a malted milkshake, which led to its establishing ice cream manufacturing plants. A Walgreens employee named Ivar Coulson modified the basic malted milk recipe by adding scoops of vanilla ice cream. The milkshake was sold at $0.20 and Walgreens became the place to &quot;hang out&quot;. The next year, Walgreens began opening stores away from residential areas. In the mid-1920s, there were 44 stores with annual sales of $1.2 million combined. Walgreens had also expanded by then into Minnesota, Missouri, and Wisconsin. By 1930, it had 397 stores with annual sales of $4 million. This expansion partly was attributed to selling prescribed alcohol, mainly whiskey, which Walgreen often stocked under the counter, as accounted in Daniel Okrent&#x27;s &quot;Last Call: The Rise and Fall of Prohibition&quot;.

The stock market crash in October 1929 and subsequent Great Depression did not greatly affect the company. By 1934, Walgreens was operating 601 stores in 30 states. After Walgreen died in 1939, his son Charles R. Walgreen Jr. took over the chain until his retirement. The Charles R. Walgreen Jr. years were relatively prosperous but lacked the massive expansion seen in the early part of the century. In 1946, Walgreens purchased Sanborns, one of Mexico&#x27;s largest pharmacy and department store chains, from Frank Sanborn (Walgreens sold Sanborns to Grupo Carso in 1982). Charles &quot;Cork&quot; R. Walgreen III took over after Walgreen Jr.&#x27;s retirement in the early 1950s and modernized the company by switching to barcode scanning. The company also created larger-sized Walgreens Superstores and purchased the Globe Discount City chain of big-box stores from United Mercantile, Inc. in the 1960s. The Walgreen family was not involved in senior management of the company for a short time after Walgreen III retired. In the 1980s Walgreens owned and operated a chain of casual family restaurants/pancake houses called Wag&#x27;s. Walgreens sold most of these to Marriott Corp. in 1988, and by 1991 the chain was out of business. In 1986, Walgreens acquired the MediMart chain from Stop &amp; Shop. Kevin P. Walgreen was made a vice-president in 1995 and promoted to senior vice president of store operations in 2006.
===21st-century===
==== 2000s ====
On July 12, 2006, David Bernauer stepped down as CEO of Walgreens and was replaced by company president Jeff Rein, who was later named chief executive officer and chairman of the board. That year, Walgreens acquired the Happy Harry&#x27;s chain in Delaware, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and New Jersey. In 2007, Walgreens acquired Hal Rosenbluth&#x27;s Take Care Health Systems, a chain of quick-care clinics, for an undisclosed amount. On October 10, 2008, Rein abruptly quit as CEO and was replaced by Alan G. McNally as chairman and acting CEO. On January 26, 2009, Gregory Wasson was named CEO effective February 1, 2009.

==== 2010s ====
In 2010, Walgreens acquired New York City-area chain Duane Reade for $1.075 billion, including debt, and continued to use the Duane Reade name on some stores in the New York City metropolitan area. In March 2011, Walgreens acquired Drugstore.com for $409 million. On June 19, 2012, Walgreens paid $6.7 billion for a 45% interest in Alliance Boots. That year, Walgreens acquired Mid-South drugstore chain operating under the USA Drug, Super D Drug, May&#x27;s Drug, Med-X, and Drug Warehouse banners.

In 2011 Walgreens announced it would end its relationship with Express Scripts, a prescription benefits manager. A coalition of minority groups, led by Al Sharpton&#x27;s National Action Network, sent letters urging CEO Gregory Wasson to reconsider. Groups sending letters were National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference, the Congress of Racial Equality, Hispanic Leadership Fund and others. In 2012, Walgreens announced that it would continue to participate in Express Scripts.

In July 2013, Walgreens had attempted to acquire Toronto-based Shoppers Drug Mart, which would have marked Walgreen&#x27;s first expansion into Canada and outside the U.S., but ultimately acquired by Loblaw Companies. Later on September 10, 2013, Walgreens announced it had acquired Kerr Drug. In August 2014, Walgreens purchased the remaining 55% of Alliance Boots. The combined company became known as the Walgreens Boots Alliance and was headquartered in Chicago. In December of that year, Walgreens purchased the Almus Pharmaceutical generic brand. Also that year, Walgreens acquired Farmacias Benavides. On July 28, 2016, Walgreens announced it would shut down Drugstore.com, as well as Beauty.com, to focus on its own Walgreens.com website. On September 19, 2017, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) approved Walgreens&#x27; fourth attempt to purchase Rite Aid, with 1,932 stores, for $4.38 billion.

==== 2020s ====
In February 2020, Walgreens announced the appointment of Richard Ashworth as president, but he left within the year. Before the appointment, he served as president of operations for Walgreens.
On June 27, 2024, Walgreens said it would close a &quot;significant portion&quot; of its 8,600 U.S. locations within three years as it struggled to keep up with a fast-changing retail pharmacy industry. The company said 25 percent, or around 2,150 of its stores were underperforming and would be considered for closure. It did not identify any closure locations.

In December 2024, Walgreens Boots Alliance is in talks to sell itself to private equity firm Sycamore Partners.

==Corporate operations==
Walgreens&#x27;s corporate headquarters is in Deerfield, Illinois. Walgreens has had a technology office in Chicago since 2010. It serves as their digital hub.

In November 2010, Walgreens filed a trademark infringement lawsuit against the Wegmans supermarket chain, claiming the &quot;W&quot; in the Wegman&#x27;s logo was too similar to Walgreens&#x27;s. The suit was settled in April 2011, with Wegmans agreeing to discontinue use of its &quot;W&quot; logo by June 2012, although the supermarket retained the right to use the &quot;Wegmans&quot; name in script. According to Jo Natale, Wegmans director of media relations, &quot;The cost of making relatively minor changes to a limited number of products was much less than the cost of litigating this case to the end.&quot;

In the summer of 2014, a corporate relocation to Switzerland was considered as part of a merger with Alliance Boots, a European drugstore chain. This drew controversy as many consumers felt that it was an attempt at tax inversion. On August 5, 2014, Walgreens announced that it would not relocate its headquarters.

As of June 2023, the company operated almost 9,000 stores in the U.S. It announced it was closing 150 locations in the U.S. (plus 300 in the UK) at the end of the month.

== Store model ==

In its 2009 business model, Walgreens are freestanding corner stores, with the entrance on the street with the most traffic flow, figuratively making it a &quot;corner drugstore&quot; similar to how many independent pharmacies evolved. Many stores have a drive-through pharmacy.

Most freestanding stores have a similar look and layout, including a bigger and more spacious layout than certain stores in major cities. Newer buildings have a more modern design than older stores. Some stores in major cities, such as New York and Chicago, have multiple floors, most notably their flagship stores. Behind the front registers are tobacco products and alcoholic beverages. Some stores do not sell these products, e.g., New Jersey stores that do not sell alcohol and Massachusetts stores that do not sell tobacco.

==Lawsuits and criticism against Walgreens==
===Allegations of discrimination===
In March 2008, Walgreens settled a lawsuit with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) that alleged the company discriminated against African Americans for $24 million. The settlement was split between the 10,000 African-American employees of the company. In the agreement, Walgreens avoided any admission of guilt.

In September 2011, Walgreens settled a lawsuit with the EEOC that claimed that a store improperly terminated a worker with diabetes for eating a package of the store&#x27;s food while working to stop a hypoglycemia attack.

===Drug fraud===

In June 2008, after Walgreens was sued for drug fraud—&quot;switching dosage forms on three medications without doctor approvals in order to boost profits&quot;—it agreed to stop these actions and pay $35 million to the federal government, 42 states, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

===Federal billing fraud and price negotiation===
Also in June 2008, Walgreens &quot;agreed to pay $35 million to the U.S. and 42 states and Puerto Rico for overcharging state Medicaid programs by filling prescriptions with more expensive dosage forms of ranitidine, a generic form of Zantac, and fluoxetine, a generic form of Prozac.&quot;

In 2009, Walgreens threatened to leave the Medicaid program, the state and federal partnership to provide health insurance coverage to the poor, in Delaware over reimbursement rates. Walgreens was the largest pharmacy chain in the state and the only chain to make such a threat. The state of Delaware and Walgreens reached an agreement on payment rates and the crisis was averted.

In 2010, Walgreens stopped accepting Medicaid in Washington state, leaving its one million Medicaid recipients unable to use Medicaid to pay for their prescriptions filled at these 121 stores.

On April 20, 2012, the U.S. Department of Justice announced that Walgreens agreed to pay $7.9 million in a settlement. The fine related to allegations of violations of the federal Anti-Kickback Statute and the False Claims Act regarding beneficiaries of federal health care programs.

In January 2019, Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc. agreed to pay more than $269 million to settle federal and state lawsuits that accused the corporation of overbilling federal healthcare programs. In September 2024, it agreed to another $106 million to settle whistleblower claims it billed federal programs for prescriptions that were temporarily bottled, but never picked up by patients.

===Use of proprietary drugs===

Walgreens was named in a lawsuit by the United Food and Commercial Workers Unions and Employers Midwest Health Benefits Fund in the Northern District Court of Illinois in January 2012. The suit alleged that Walgreens and Par Pharmaceutical violated the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act in &quot;at least two widespread schemes to overcharge&quot; for generic drugs.

===Distribution of opioids===
In September 2012, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) accused Walgreens of endangering public safety and barred the company from shipping oxycodone and other controlled drugs from its Jupiter, Florida, distribution center. The DEA said that Walgreens failed to maintain proper controls to ensure that it did not dispense drugs to addicts and drug dealers. The DEA also said that six of Walgreens&#x27; Florida pharmacies ordered in excess of one million oxycodone pills a year. In contrast, in 2011 the average pharmacy in the U.S. ordered 73,000 oxycodone tablets a year according to the DEA. One Walgreens pharmacy in Fort Myers, Florida, ordered 95,800 pills in 2009, but by 2011, this number had jumped to 2.2 million pills in one year. Another example was a Walgreens pharmacy in Hudson, Florida, a town of 34,000 people near Clearwater, that purchased 2.2 million pills in 2011, the DEA said. Immediate suspension orders are an action taken when the DEA believes a registrant, such as a pharmacy or a doctor, is &quot;an imminent danger to the public safety.&quot; All DEA licensees &quot;have an obligation to ensure that medications are getting into the hands of legitimate patients,&quot; said Mark Trouville, former DEA special agent in charge of the Miami Field Division. &quot;When they choose to look the other way, patients suffer and drug dealers prosper.&quot;

The Jupiter, Florida, distribution center, which opened in 2001, is one of 12 such distribution centers owned by Walgreens. Since 2009, Walgreens&#x27; Jupiter facility has been Florida&#x27;s largest distributor of oxycodone, the DEA said. Over the past three years, its market share has increased, and 52 Walgreens are among the top 100 oxycodone purchasers in the state, the DEA said.

In 2013, United States Attorney Wifredo Ferrer said Walgreens committed &quot;an unprecedented number&quot; of recordkeeping and dispensing violations. Walgreens was fined $80 million, the largest fine in the history of the Controlled Substances Act at that time.

In November 2021, a federal jury found that Walgreens, along with CVS and Walmart, &quot;had substantially contributed to&quot; the opioid crisis. The trial lasted six weeks with the jury returning a verdict finding the pharmacies liable. It was the first trial where pharmacy companies defended themselves amid the opioid epidemic.

In May 2022, Walgreens agreed to pay a settlement of $683 million to the state of Florida concerning opioid sales. Walgreens did not admit to wrongdoing as part of the settlement.

In August 2022, the state of Tennessee sued Walgreens, alleging that the pharmacy fueled the state&#x27;s opioid epidemic by failing to maintain effective controls against abuse of the prescription painkiller. The lawsuit claims that Walgreens willfully flooded the market with an oversupply of prescription narcotics in violation of public nuisance and consumer protection laws.

In August 2022, a federal judge in Cleveland awarded $650 million to Lake County and Trumbull County in a opiod suit that included CVS and Walmart. Lawyers representing the counties said the companies were responsible for $3.3 billion in damages. Two other companies, Rite Aid and Giant Eagle, were also sued by the counties but settled before trial for an undisclosed amount.

===Pricing and advertising===

Wisconsin&#x27;s Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection fined Walgreens over differences between shelf price and scanned price and for signage in 2012. In 2013, Walgreens paid a $29,241 fine.

The New York State Attorney General announced in April 2016 that a settlement was reached in the complaint that Walgreens used misleading advertising and overcharged consumers. Walgreens would pay $500,000 in penalties, fees and costs, and change advertising and other practices.

A judge in Kansas City, Missouri, ordered Walgreens to pay a $309,000 fine for pricing discrepancies in 2015.

===Illegal disposal===
In December 2012, a judge ordered Walgreens to pay $16.57 million to settle a lawsuit claiming that over 600 stores were illegally dumping hazardous waste and unlawfully disposing of customer records containing confidential medical information.

===Selling expired products and over-charging===
A Santa Clara County Superior Court judge allowed Walgreens to pay $2.25 million in January 2018 to resolve a consumer protection lawsuit brought by Bay Area prosecutors alleging that the company sold expired baby food, infant formula, and over-the-counter drugs. The suit also alleged that Walgreens violated state law by charging more than the lowest-posted or -advertised price for items.

===Medication denied because of religious beliefs===
In June 2018, a staff pharmacist at a Walgreens in Peoria, Arizona, refused to give a woman medication to end her pregnancy. The medication was prescribed by a doctor after tests revealed that the pregnancy would end in a miscarriage. The woman said she was left &quot;in tears and humiliated&quot;. Walgreens responded that its policy &quot;allows pharmacists to step away from filling a prescription for which they have a moral objection&quot;.

===Investor relations===
In September 2018, Walgreens agreed to pay $34.5 million to settle a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) investigation on charges of misleading investors on financial targets. The SEC alleged that former CEO Greg Wasson and then-CFO Wade Miquelon acted &quot;negligently&quot; in giving financial estimates.

===Over-billing governments===
In January 2019, Walgreens paid $269.2 million for two separate counts of defrauding the federal and 39 state governments in over-billing schemes.

===Unlicensed pharmacist===
In February 2020, Walgreens agreed to pay $7.5 million to settle a consumer protection lawsuit accusing the company of placing people&#x27;s health at risk by permitting an unlicensed person to work as a pharmacist without an adequate background check. This person had handled over 745,000 prescriptions and filled over 100,000 prescriptions for controlled substances. The State of California, Alameda County, and Santa Clara County all took part in the investigation. When it was asked by the California Board of Pharmacy during the investigation, Walgreens was unable to furnish a copy of her employment application. Although there are records that the person had attended classes in a university pharmacy program, there are no records that she had completed her degree requirements that would allow her to take the pharmacist licensing exams.

===Wage theft violations===
In March 2021, a class action against Walgreens resulted in a settlement of $4.5 million. Walgreens was accused of wage theft and labor law violations of its employees in California between 2010 and 2017, including that Walgreens &quot;rounded down employees&#x27; hours on their timecards, required employees to pass through security checks before and after their shift without compensating them for time worked, and failed to pay premium wages to employees who were denied legally required meal breaks.&quot;

===Dispensing incorrect vaccines to preschoolers===
In September 2021, a Walgreens pharmacist in Baltimore, Maryland, accidentally gave a 4-year-old girl a full adult dosage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine instead of the intended Influenza vaccine. So far, the girl has not suffered any major side effects. A Walgreens spokesperson said such mistakes are &quot;extremely rare&quot; and that the company&#x27;s top priority is patient safety.

A few weeks later, a Walgreens pharmacist in Evansville, Indiana, accidentally gave a 4-year-old boy, a 5-year-old girl, and their parents a full adult dosage each of the Pfizer vaccine instead of intended flu vaccine. Unlike the Maryland girl, both Indiana children instantly got sick enough that the parents took them to a pediatric cardiologist for treatment. At the time of the injections, the FDA had not yet approved the use of the Pfizer vaccine to children under age 12. Although Pfizer was in the process of seeking approval for use in children ages 5 to 11 with the dosage that would be one third that for an adult, it had not asked permission to vaccinate children ages 4 and younger. Walgreens refused to comment on the case when requested by news media.

=== Abortion pill controversy ===
In January 2023, Walgreens, in addition to CVS, announced their intentions to start dispensing mifepristone, one of the two drugs used in a medication abortion, following a change in regulations from the Food and Drug Administration. The offering of abortion pills at pharmacies such as Walgreens has caused major political turmoil, and has resulted in numerous protests in-front of the pharmacies.

After receiving their certification to do so, Walgreens started offering abortion pills at a few of their locations. However, numerous attorneys general in conservative states sent advisories to Walgreens to not sell abortion pills within their state. Walgreens conceded, which caused criticism from numerous abortion-rights activists.

California Governor Gavin Newsom announced that the state would no longer be doing business with Walgreens due to the company&#x27;s response to conservative states on abortion pills.

=== Metrics ===
In 2022, Walgreens dropped task-based metrics for pharmacy staff performance due to concerns that speed KPIs were putting patient safety at risk.

== Brands ==
== Contributions to popular culture ==

Although milkshakes and malted milk had been around for some time before, Walgreens has claimed credit for the popularization of the malted milkshake (or at least its version of it, invented by Ivar &quot;Pop&quot; Coulson in 1922).

==See also==

* Alliance Boots
* CVS Pharmacy
* Rite Aid
* Walgreen Coast

==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General sources ===

==External links==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1591889" start="0" end="9" title="Walgreens" label="Walgreens"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107184" start="25" end="39" title="Pharmacy (shop)" label="pharmacy store"/>
<link wikidata="Q624375" start="98" end="108" title="CVS Health" label="CVS Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="116" end="128" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="CVS Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="259" end="266" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754965" start="304" end="318" title="Chicago metropolitan area" label="Chicago suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q287895" start="322" end="331" title="Deerfield, Illinois" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q676238" start="402" end="416" title="Alliance Boots" label="Alliance Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="435" end="450" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712620" start="452" end="476" title="Walgreens Boots Alliance" label="Walgreens Boots Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="588" end="594" title="Nasdaq" label="Nasdaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087481" start="737" end="750" title="Opioid epidemic" label="opioid crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082215" start="797" end="821" title="Charles Rudolph Walgreen" label="Charles Rudolph Walgreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492277" start="1173" end="1198" title="Chicago&amp;#x27;s South Side" label="Chicago&amp;#x27;s South Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="1311" end="1330" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="alcohol prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="1605" end="1609" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="1612" end="1621" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="2089" end="2098" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="2100" end="2108" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="2114" end="2123" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2466" end="2482" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323385" start="2614" end="2637" title="Charles Rudolph Walgreen Jr." label="Charles R. Walgreen Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2278494" start="2842" end="2850" title="Grupo Sanborns" label="Sanborns"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2859" end="2865" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396455" start="2966" end="2977" title="Grupo Carso" label="Grupo Carso"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="3138" end="3145" title="barcode" label="barcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q108940253" start="3234" end="3253" title="Globe Discount City" label="Globe Discount City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="3263" end="3277" title="big-box stores" label="big-box stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130198" start="3518" end="3531" title="pancake house" label="pancake house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959446" start="3540" end="3550" title="Wag&amp;#x27;s" label="Wag&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772977" start="3584" end="3598" title="Marriott Corp." label="Marriott Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q1591889" start="3892" end="3906" title="David Bernauer" label="David Bernauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174776" start="3978" end="3987" title="Jeff Rein" label="Jeff Rein"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="4009" end="4032" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="4037" end="4058" title="Chair (official)" label="chairman of the board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652791" start="4094" end="4112" title="Happy Harry&amp;#x27;s" label="Happy Harry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="4122" end="4130" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="4132" end="4144" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="4146" end="4154" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4160" end="4170" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q124395366" start="4200" end="4221" title="Hal Rosenbluth" label="Hal Rosenbluth&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607205" start="4438" end="4452" title="Gregory Wasson" label="Gregory Wasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310380" start="4565" end="4576" title="Duane Reade" label="Duane Reade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308965" start="4744" end="4757" title="Drugstore.com" label="Drugstore.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q676238" start="4844" end="4858" title="Alliance Boots" label="Alliance Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895099" start="4890" end="4899" title="Mid-South (region)" label="Mid-South"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109192" start="4936" end="4944" title="USA Drug" label="USA Drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180823" start="5095" end="5124" title="Pharmacy benefit management" label="prescription benefits manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q380433" start="5165" end="5176" title="Al Sharpton" label="Al Sharpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820137" start="5563" end="5581" title="Shoppers Drug Mart" label="Shoppers Drug Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q909856" start="5700" end="5716" title="Loblaw Companies" label="Loblaw Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394322" start="5783" end="5792" title="Kerr Drug" label="Kerr Drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q676238" start="5851" end="5865" title="Alliance Boots" label="Alliance Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712620" start="5908" end="5932" title="Walgreens Boots Alliance" label="Walgreens Boots Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435613" start="6088" end="6107" title="Farmacias Benavides" label="Farmacias Benavides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308965" start="6166" end="6179" title="Drugstore.com" label="Drugstore.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="6274" end="6298" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q287895" start="7163" end="7182" title="Deerfield, Illinois" label="Deerfield, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="7225" end="7232" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q98091506" start="7314" end="7336" title="trademark infringement" label="trademark infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="7337" end="7344" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288478" start="7357" end="7364" title="Wegmans" label="Wegmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172466" start="8112" end="8125" title="tax inversion" label="tax inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q746984" start="8518" end="8530" title="traffic flow" label="traffic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8918" end="8926" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="8931" end="8938" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="8981" end="8995" title="flagship store" label="flagship store"/>
<link wikidata="Q44106" start="9029" end="9045" title="tobacco products" label="tobacco products"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="9050" end="9069" title="Alcoholic drink" label="alcoholic beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713290" start="9117" end="9127" title="Alcohol laws of New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="9164" end="9177" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="9345" end="9384" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="10123" end="10135" title="Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="10139" end="10150" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="11094" end="11120" title="U.S. Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538166" start="11816" end="11857" title="United Food and Commercial Workers" label="United Food and Commercial Workers Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376211" start="11997" end="12015" title="Par Pharmaceutical" label="Par Pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418478" start="12029" end="12079" title="Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act" label="Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="12219" end="12250" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q986329" start="12387" end="12403" title="Jupiter, Florida" label="Jupiter, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="13979" end="14001" title="United States Attorney" label="United States Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999488" start="14002" end="14016" title="Wifredo Ferrer" label="Wifredo Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q624375" start="14301" end="14304" title="CVS Health" label="CVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="14309" end="14316" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087481" start="14367" end="14380" title="Opioid epidemic" label="opioid crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="15166" end="15175" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q288606" start="15200" end="15211" title="Lake County, Ohio" label="Lake County"/>
<link wikidata="Q336229" start="15216" end="15231" title="Trumbull County, Ohio" label="Trumbull County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="15262" end="15265" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="CVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="15270" end="15277" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433273" start="15399" end="15407" title="Rite Aid" label="Rite Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522721" start="15412" end="15423" title="Giant Eagle" label="Giant Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="15540" end="15549" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30640633" start="15557" end="15613" title="Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection" label="Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419320" start="16463" end="16496" title="Santa Clara County Superior Court" label="Santa Clara County Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="16571" end="16590" title="consumer protection" label="consumer protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q51686" start="16958" end="16973" title="Peoria, Arizona" label="Peoria, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="17449" end="17488" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="18110" end="18120" title="pharmacist" label="pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959502" start="18896" end="18906" title="wage theft" label="wage theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q97154240" start="19474" end="19506" title="Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine" label="Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q383260" start="19531" end="19548" title="Influenza vaccine" label="Influenza vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="20589" end="20592" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="CVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q411240" start="20641" end="20653" title="mifepristone" label="mifepristone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604964" start="20686" end="20705" title="Medical abortion" label="medication abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="20750" end="20778" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180766" start="20814" end="20824" title="Pharmacies in the United States" label="pharmacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="20908" end="20915" title="protest" label="protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603658" start="21081" end="21098" title="State attorney general" label="attorneys general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="21255" end="21280" title="Abortion-rights movement" label="abortion-rights activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="21283" end="21293" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="21303" end="21315" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223519" start="21708" end="21719" title="malted milk" label="malted milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="21824" end="21833" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="21878" end="21906" title="Ivar &amp;quot;Pop&amp;quot; Coulson" label="Ivar &amp;quot;Pop&amp;quot; Coulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q676238" start="21934" end="21948" title="Alliance Boots" label="Alliance Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="21951" end="21963" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="CVS Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433273" start="21966" end="21974" title="Rite Aid" label="Rite Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111648" start="21977" end="21991" title="Walgreen Coast" label="Walgreen Coast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577901" wikidata="Q281089" url="?curid=577901" title="Rout of Ludford Bridge">
<text>The Rout of Ludford Bridge was a largely bloodless confrontation fought in the early years of the Wars of the Roses. It took place on 12 October 1459, and resulted in a setback for the Yorkists. Although this seemed to be a triumph for the rival Lancastrians at the time, they had thrown away their advantage within six months.

==Background==
In the first pitched battle of the wars, the First Battle of St Albans in 1455, Richard of York, backed by his brother in law the Earl of Salisbury and Salisbury&#x27;s son the Earl of Warwick, had eliminated most of his rivals at court. He reaffirmed his allegiance to the (Lancastrian) King, Henry VI and was reappointed Lord Protector, until February 1456. However, Henry&#x27;s Queen, Margaret of Anjou, suspected that Richard ultimately intended to supplant her infant son Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales and become King himself. She continually plotted and agitated against Richard and the Nevilles (the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick). She was supported by several nobles, many of them the sons of York&#x27;s opponents who had died at St. Albans.

The renewed outbreak of open warfare was precipitated by some high-handed actions by Warwick, who held the post of Captain of Calais. Late in 1458, he had led ships from Calais in attacks on merchant ships from Lübeck and Spain, on obscure grounds of acknowledgement of English sovereignty in the Channel, to secure plunder to pay his garrison. Though these actions infuriated the royal court, they were popular among the merchants, particularly in London and Kent, as they removed competitors for English trade with Flanders. When Warwick was summoned to London to explain his actions before the King&#x27;s council, there was violence between Warwick&#x27;s retinue and the royal household. Warwick claimed that his life had been threatened and he returned to Calais with any charges unanswered.

Margaret took this to be open defiance of Henry&#x27;s authority. She had long before persuaded Henry to move the court from London to the Midlands, where her supporters had the most influence. They began mustering their forces, and summoned a council to be held in Coventry on 24 June 1459. York, Salisbury and Warwick himself feared that they would be arrested for treason if they went to their opponents&#x27; heartland, and refused to attend. They were quickly indicted for rebellion.

The Yorkist forces began the campaign dispersed over the country. York himself was at Ludlow in the Welsh Marches, Salisbury was at Middleham Castle in North Yorkshire and Warwick was at Calais. As Salisbury and Warwick marched to join the Duke of York, Margaret ordered a force under the Duke of Somerset to intercept Warwick and another under James Tuchet, 5th Baron Audley to intercept Salisbury. Warwick successfully evaded Somerset, while Audley&#x27;s forces were routed at the bloody Battle of Blore Heath.

==Battle==

Even after this defeat, the forces available to Henry and Margaret outnumbered the Yorkist combined armies by two to one. The Yorkist army tried to move towards London, but found their path blocked by the Lancastrian army with King Henry himself nominally at its head, and fell back to Worcester. Here, the Duke of York attended mass in the cathedral before sending written protestations of his loyalty to Henry. These were ignored.

The Yorkists retreated towards Ludlow, before making a stand at a fortified position near Ludford, Shropshire on 12 October. Their troops excavated a defensive ditch in a field on the opposite side of the River Teme from Ludlow, near the bridge which gave the battle its name. They also constructed barricades of carts in which cannon were emplaced. However, morale was low, not least because the royal standard could be seen flying in the Lancastrian army, and it was known that King Henry himself was present, in full armour. For much of his reign, Henry had been regarded as an ineffectual ruler, and he had even lapsed into madness for periods of several months at a time. Richard of York and his supporters had maintained that they were opposed only to Henry&#x27;s &quot;evil counsellors&quot;. Now they realised that their army would probably refuse to fight against an army which included Henry himself. Henry and the Duke of Buckingham, in command of the royal army, proclaimed the offer of a pardon to any who would change sides.

Among the troops brought by Warwick from Calais were 600 men led by Andrew Trollope, an experienced soldier. During the night, Trollope and his men and others from the Yorkist forces defected to the Lancastrians. Faced with certain defeat, York, Salisbury, and Warwick announced that they were returning to Ludlow for the night. They then abandoned their armies and fled into Wales.

At dawn on 13 October, the leaderless Yorkist troops knelt in submission before Henry, and were pardoned. York had abandoned not only his troops but also his wife Cecily Neville, Duchess of York, his two younger sons George and Richard and his youngest daughter Margaret. By popular account, they were found standing at the Ludlow Market Cross when the Lancastrians arrived. They were placed in the care of the Duchess&#x27;s sister Anne, wife of the Duke of Buckingham. The Lancastrian troops proceeded to plunder Ludlow, becoming drunk on looted wine and committing many outrages.

==Aftermath==
York, with his second son Edmund, Earl of Rutland, made his way to Ireland where he had previously been Lieutenant of Ireland, and still had support from the Irish parliament. Salisbury, Warwick, and York&#x27;s eldest son Edward, Earl of March went to South Wales, where Warwick had estates and supporters. There they took a ship, also intending to reach Ireland, but were blown across the Bristol Channel to the West Country where a supporter, Sir John Dynham, loaned them a boat which took them to Calais. On 9 October, King Henry had appointed the Duke of Somerset to replace Warwick as Captain of Calais. However, Warwick was able to forestall him, possibly only by hours. Under Warwick&#x27;s uncle, Lord Fauconberg, the garrison and city still supported Warwick.

King Henry and his army meanwhile returned to Coventry, where a Parliament packed with Queen Margaret&#x27;s supporters attainted York, Salisbury and Warwick and their remaining supporters. However, it proved impossible for the Earl of Wiltshire, who was appointed Lieutenant of Ireland in Richard of York&#x27;s place, to raise troops to oust York from Ireland. Somerset was able to land near Calais and captured the nearby castle of Guînes but was twice repulsed when he tried to capture Calais from Warwick. Warwick was able to sail to Ireland, evading the royal ships commanded by the Duke of Exeter, to concert plans with the Duke of York.

Although it had appeared that the country had been united behind King Henry at the time of the Rout of Ludford Bridge, within a short time the behaviour of Henry&#x27;s court had prompted many complaints that Lancastrian favourites were enriching themselves at the expense of the King and populace, and were failing to prevent the spread of lawlessness. It was these grievances which Richard of York had first used as pretext to take arms against Henry&#x27;s court in the early 1450s. Within six months of the confrontation, Warwick was able to land at Sandwich in Kent, with popular support from London and the south east of England. He then marched into the Midlands and, aided by treachery in the Lancastrian army, he captured King Henry at the Battle of Northampton.

==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q281089" start="4" end="26" title="Rout of Ludford Bridge" label="Rout of Ludford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="98" end="115" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="185" end="193" title="Yorkists" label="Yorkists"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="246" end="258" title="House of Lancaster" label="Lancastrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q842796" start="389" end="414" title="First Battle of St Albans" label="First Battle of St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q384856" start="474" end="491" title="Richard Neville, 5th Earl of Salisbury" label="Earl of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q437571" start="521" end="536" title="Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick" label="Earl of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="638" end="646" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="667" end="681" title="Lord Protector" label="Lord Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q231145" start="733" end="750" title="Margaret of Anjou" label="Margaret of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q313262" start="822" end="860" title="Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales" label="Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996427" start="1222" end="1239" title="List of Captains, Lieutenants and Lords Deputies of English Calais" label="Captain of Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="1318" end="1324" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1329" end="1334" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1556" end="1562" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="1567" end="1571" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1624" end="1632" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="2045" end="2053" title="Midlands (England)" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="2172" end="2180" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q839811" start="2482" end="2488" title="Ludlow" label="Ludlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q427862" start="2496" end="2509" title="Welsh Marches" label="Welsh Marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705370" start="2528" end="2544" title="Middleham Castle" label="Middleham Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="2548" end="2563" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q714475" start="2685" end="2701" title="Henry Beaufort, 3rd Duke of Somerset" label="Duke of Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q646476" start="2741" end="2771" title="James Tuchet, 5th Baron Audley" label="James Tuchet, 5th Baron Audley"/>
<link wikidata="Q581401" start="2887" end="2908" title="Battle of Blore Heath" label="Battle of Blore Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646181" start="3209" end="3218" title="Worcester, England" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="3252" end="3256" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698748" start="3447" end="3466" title="Ludford, Shropshire" label="Ludford, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19684" start="3562" end="3572" title="River Teme" label="River Teme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265605" start="4283" end="4301" title="Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham" label="Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q768417" start="4466" end="4481" title="Andrew Trollope" label="Andrew Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="4774" end="4779" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q238004" start="4945" end="4976" title="Cecily Neville, Duchess of York" label="Cecily Neville, Duchess of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q356173" start="4999" end="5005" title="George Plantagenet, 1st Duke of Clarence" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="5010" end="5017" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q465991" start="5044" end="5052" title="Margaret of York" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q565662" start="5215" end="5219" title="Anne Neville, Duchess of Buckingham" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285898" start="5406" end="5429" title="Edmund, Earl of Rutland" label="Edmund, Earl of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="5447" end="5454" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="5603" end="5624" title="Edward IV of England" label="Edward, Earl of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q188203" start="5771" end="5786" title="Bristol Channel" label="Bristol Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="5794" end="5806" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230629" start="5830" end="5841" title="John Dynham, 1st Baron Dynham" label="John Dynham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364228" start="6086" end="6101" title="William Neville, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Lord Fauconberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="6271" end="6280" title="attainder" label="attainted"/>
<link wikidata="Q933080" start="6379" end="6396" title="James Butler, 5th Earl of Ormond" label="Earl of Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q325999" start="6586" end="6592" title="Guînes" label="Guînes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452585" start="6740" end="6754" title="Henry Holland, 3rd Duke of Exeter" label="Duke of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="7351" end="7359" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q916295" start="7546" end="7567" title="Battle of Northampton (1460)" label="Battle of Northampton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577902" wikidata="Q1276621" url="?curid=577902" title="Donald Duck Adventures">
<text>Donald Duck Adventures is a 1987–1998 Disney comic book series featuring the adventures of Donald Duck and his nephews Huey, Dewey and Louie.

== Publication history ==
=== Gladstone I: 1987–90 and Gladstone II: 1993–98 ===
Gladstone Publishing published 48 issues. The first 20 were published from 1987 to 1990 (#1-#20), and then the last 28 were published from 1993 to early 1998 (#21-#48), whereas Gladstone II continued the numbering of Gladstone I, ignoring the intermediate numbering of Disney Comics. The series contained original material alongside reprints from older Donald Duck strips from the 1930s and 1940s, as well as more modern material from the King syndicated strip from the 1980s.

=== Disney Comics: 1990–93 ===
Disney Comics published the title from 1990 to 1993, this one being the only one of the &quot;new&quot; Disney comic books to survive the company&#x27;s comic implosion in 1991. They started a new numbering, issues #1-38.

=== Gemstone: 2003–06 ===
Gemstone Publishing published its own series of &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot;, this one as a digest size graphic novel alongside &quot;Mickey Mouse Adventures&quot;. These 128-page comics were sized 5&quot; × 7½&quot;, and started a new numbering yet again, #1-#21. This &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; was canceled in December 2006.

==See also==
* Disney comics 
* Disney comics titles in the USA:
** &quot;Mickey Mouse Magazine&quot; (1935-1940)
** &quot;Walt Disney&#x27;s Comics and Stories&quot; (1940-present)
** &quot;Donald Duck&quot; (1942-2017)
** &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; (1943-2017)
** &quot;Uncle Scrooge&quot; (1952-present)
** &quot;Walt Disney Comics Digest&quot; (1968-1976)
** &quot;Uncle Scrooge Adventures&quot; (1987-1997)
** &quot;Mickey Mouse Adventures&quot; (1990-1991)
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (1988-1998)
** &quot;Walt Disney Giant&quot; (1995-1996)

== External links ==
* Disney Comics Worldwide (DCW):
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Gladstone I and II)
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Disney Comics)
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Gemstone)
* INDUCKS:
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Gladstone I and II)
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Disney Comics)
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Gemstone)
* Covers of all issues on outducks.org:
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Gladstone I and II)
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Disney Comics)
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (Gemstone)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q906229" start="38" end="55" title="Disney comics" label="Disney comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="91" end="102" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965" start="119" end="140" title="Huey, Dewey and Louie" label="Huey, Dewey and Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q685270" start="224" end="244" title="Gladstone Publishing" label="Gladstone Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q742886" start="493" end="506" title="Disney Comics (publishing)" label="Disney Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469675" start="663" end="678" title="King Features Syndicate" label="King syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q742886" start="733" end="746" title="Disney Comics (publishing)" label="Disney Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530765" start="982" end="1001" title="Gemstone Publishing" label="Gemstone Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480302" start="1080" end="1091" title="digest size" label="digest size"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="1092" end="1105" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856916" start="1122" end="1145" title="Mickey Mouse Adventures" label="Mickey Mouse Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q906229" start="1340" end="1353" title="Disney comics" label="Disney comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q66111902" start="1399" end="1420" title="Mickey Mouse Magazine" label="Mickey Mouse Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710155" start="1448" end="1485" title="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Comics and Stories" label="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Comics and Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036011" start="1516" end="1527" title="Donald Duck (American comic book)" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q969695" start="1555" end="1567" title="Mickey Mouse (comic book)" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770842" start="1595" end="1608" title="Uncle Scrooge" label="Uncle Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056812" start="1639" end="1664" title="Walt Disney Comics Digest" label="Walt Disney Comics Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882807" start="1692" end="1716" title="Uncle Scrooge Adventures" label="Uncle Scrooge Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856916" start="1744" end="1767" title="Mickey Mouse Adventures" label="Mickey Mouse Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963935" start="1845" end="1862" title="Walt Disney Giant" label="Walt Disney Giant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577904" wikidata="Q703983" url="?curid=577904" title="Derlei">
<text>Vanderlei Fernandes Silva (born 14 July 1975), known as Derlei, is a Brazilian former footballer who played as a striker.

He spent most of his 16-year professional career in Portugal (one full decade), having represented all three most important clubs in the country and amassing Primeira Liga totals of 187 matches and 70 goals. He also played two seasons with Dynamo Moscow in the Russian Premier League.

With Porto, Derlei won eight major titles including two leagues, one Champions League and one UEFA Cup.

==Club career==
===Early career===
Born in São Bernardo do Campo, São Paulo, Derlei began playing in the lower levels of Brazilian football, but joined Portugal&#x27;s U.D. Leiria in 1999, going on to appear in 92 competitive games for the club. In his last season, as they overachieved for a final seventh place in the Primeira Liga led by young manager José Mourinho, he scored 21 goals.

===Porto and Dynamo===
Derlei signed with FC Porto in the summer of 2002, playing an important part in a successful squad that was also managed by Mourinho, and being nicknamed &quot;Ninja&quot; while playing for the northern side. In his second game on 2 September, a 1–0 local derby victory at Boavista FC, he was sent off for fighting with his compatriot and former Leiria teammate, Éder Gaúcho; he was suspended for two games and his opponent for one. He was the top scorer of the 2002–03 UEFA Cup with 12 goals in 13 games; this tally included two in the 3–2 final win against Celtic to overtake opponent Henrik Larsson, as well as braces in the preceding rounds against Panathinaikos F.C. and S.S. Lazio.

In the 2003–04 Primeira Liga, Derlei was leading the domestic goalscoring chart, including a hat-trick on 5 October in a 4–1 home win over Académica de Coimbra, but suffered a right knee anterior cruciate ligament injury against F.C. Alverca on 22 December, initially being ruled out for the rest of the season by the club&#x27;s doctor. He recovered to face the same team on 25 April, and on 5 May he scored a penalty for the only goal of the UEFA Champions League semi-final away to Deportivo de La Coruña, as his team eventually lifted the title.

In January 2005, after disciplinary problems related to his lateness in arriving from the winter break, Derlei was sold to FC Dynamo Moscow for €7 million. After two years in Russian football where he was always one of the top five scorers, he moved to S.L. Benfica on loan in January 2007. He played his first league match for the latter on 2 February, coming on as a second-half substitute in a 0–0 home draw with Boavista; his only goal in 16 appearances opened a 2–0 win over Académica on the final day of the season at the Estádio da Luz.

===Sporting===
Derlei left for Lisbon rivals Sporting CP in late June 2007, signing a one-year deal with the option for another after being freed from his two-year contract with Dynamo Moscow – he was, therefore, one of the few players to have represented the Big Three of Portugal. He spent most of 2007–08 on the sidelines, with another serious knee injury.
Derlei made a comeback to competition when, on 16 April 2008, he entered the field for Leandro Romagnoli in the 61st minute during the semi-final of the Taça de Portugal against Benfica, scoring only 18 minutes later to make it 3–2 to Sporting, in a match which eventually ended with a 5–3 win as the team went on to win the tournament against another former acquaintance of the player, Porto.

In his second season, Derlei fought with Hélder Postiga for a chance to play alongside Liédson, and scored some goals including an important one in a 1–0 home victory over FC Shakhtar Donetsk in the Champions League, which sealed Sporting&#x27;s group stage qualification on 4 November 2008. At the end of the campaign, he declined the club&#x27;s offer for a contract extension on the grounds the compensation was insufficient, thus being made a free agent.

===Return to Brazil===
On 27 August 2009, 34-year-old Derlei joined Vitória on a one-year deal. He made his competitive debut on 13 September in a match against Campeonato Brasileiro Série A leaders Palmeiras; having taken the pitch in the second half, he scored the 3–2 winner;

Derlei transferred to modest Madureira shortly after, returning to a team he had represented more than one decade prior.

==International career==
After winning the UEFA Cup with Porto in 2003, Derlei was called up to represent Brazil at that year&#x27;s Confederations Cup, which several of the team&#x27;s regulars had declined. He turned down the offer as it required for him to sign up to a company.

Derlei then began the process of acquiring Portuguese nationality in the aim of representing their national side on home soil at UEFA Euro 2004, but injury allowed his former clubmate Postiga to cement a place instead. His citizenship was confirmed that August, after the tournament, but he was never called up. 

==Club statistics==


==Honours==
América-RN
*Campeonato Potiguar: 1996

Porto
*Primeira Liga: 2002–03, 2003–04
*Taça de Portugal: 2002–03
*Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira: 2003, 2004
*UEFA Champions League: 2003–04
*UEFA Cup: 2002–03
*Intercontinental Cup: 2004

Sporting
*Taça de Portugal: 2007–08
*Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira: 2007, 2008
*Taça da Liga runner-up: 2007–08, 2008–09
Individual
*UEFA Cup Top Scorer: 2002–03
*SJPF Player of the Month: October 2004

==References==
==External links==
*
*PortuGOAL profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q703983" start="0" end="25" title="Derlei" label="Vanderlei Fernandes Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q703983" start="56" end="62" title="Derlei" label="Derlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="86" end="96" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113" end="120" title="Forward (association football)#Striker" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504478" start="232" end="252" title="Big Three (Portugal)" label="most important clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q182994" start="281" end="294" title="Primeira Liga" label="Primeira Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17497" start="363" end="376" title="FC Dynamo Moscow" label="Dynamo Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q182165" start="384" end="406" title="Russian Premier League" label="Russian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q128446" start="414" end="419" title="FC Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q500728" start="474" end="477" title="2004 UEFA Champions League Final" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="478" end="494" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q599264" start="499" end="502" title="2003 UEFA Cup Final" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="503" end="511" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q184403" start="557" end="578" title="São Bernardo do Campo" label="São Bernardo do Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="580" end="589" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152339" start="619" end="653" title="Brazilian football league system" label="lower levels of Brazilian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q211401" start="682" end="693" title="U.D. Leiria" label="U.D. Leiria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599572" start="763" end="778" title="2001–02 Primeira Liga" label="his last season"/>
<link wikidata="Q182994" start="834" end="847" title="Primeira Liga" label="Primeira Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q79983" start="869" end="882" title="José Mourinho" label="José Mourinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q128446" start="947" end="955" title="FC Porto" label="FC Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q117530683" start="1178" end="1189" title="local derby" label="local derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q219703" start="1201" end="1212" title="Boavista F.C." label="Boavista FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350113" start="1221" end="1229" title="Ejection (sports)" label="sent off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399074" start="1291" end="1302" title="Éder Gaúcho" label="Éder Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q629461" start="1390" end="1397" title="2002–03 UEFA Cup" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1398" end="1406" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q599264" start="1465" end="1478" title="2003 UEFA Cup Final" label="3–2 final win"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="1487" end="1493" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179334" start="1515" end="1529" title="Henrik Larsson" label="Henrik Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125709" start="1556" end="1572" title="2002–03 UEFA Cup final phase" label="preceding rounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122219" start="1581" end="1599" title="Panathinaikos F.C." label="Panathinaikos F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="1604" end="1614" title="S.S. Lazio" label="S.S. Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155019" start="1624" end="1645" title="2003–04 Primeira Liga" label="2003–04 Primeira Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="1710" end="1719" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q243235" start="1756" end="1776" title="Académica de Coimbra (football)" label="Académica de Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912826" start="1804" end="1837" title="anterior cruciate ligament injury" label="anterior cruciate ligament injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386850" start="1846" end="1858" title="F.C. Alverca" label="F.C. Alverca"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="2028" end="2035" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="2061" end="2082" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602383" start="2083" end="2093" title="2003–04 UEFA Champions League knockout stage" label="semi-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q8760" start="2102" end="2124" title="Deportivo de La Coruña" label="Deportivo de La Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q17497" start="2291" end="2307" title="FC Dynamo Moscow" label="FC Dynamo Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478197" start="2343" end="2359" title="Football in Russia" label="Russian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="2421" end="2433" title="S.L. Benfica" label="S.L. Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850936" start="2549" end="2559" title="Substitute (association football)" label="substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636459" start="2682" end="2688" title="2006–07 Primeira Liga" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875112" start="2696" end="2710" title="Estádio da Luz" label="Estádio da Luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="2744" end="2750" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="2758" end="2769" title="Sporting CP" label="Sporting CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504478" start="2973" end="2982" title="Big Three (Portugal)" label="Big Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635421" start="3013" end="3020" title="2007–08 Primeira Liga" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q372755" start="3160" end="3177" title="Leandro Romagnoli" label="Leandro Romagnoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610252" start="3204" end="3218" title="2007–08 Taça de Portugal" label="the semi-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q29224" start="3226" end="3242" title="Taça de Portugal" label="Taça de Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q579092" start="3471" end="3488" title="2008–09 Primeira Liga" label="his second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q214117" start="3509" end="3523" title="Hélder Postiga" label="Hélder Postiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q213676" start="3555" end="3562" title="Liédson" label="Liédson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172969" start="3640" end="3659" title="FC Shakhtar Donetsk" label="FC Shakhtar Donetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188787" start="3667" end="3683" title="2008–09 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="3915" end="3925" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q274465" start="3996" end="4003" title="Esporte Clube Vitória" label="Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="4089" end="4118" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q80964" start="4127" end="4136" title="Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras" label="Palmeiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351959" start="4195" end="4205" title="2009 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="3–2 winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581586" start="4237" end="4246" title="Madureira Esporte Clube" label="Madureira"/>
<link wikidata="Q647475" start="4446" end="4481" title="2003 FIFA Confederations Cup" label="that year&amp;#x27;s Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232784" start="4656" end="4678" title="Portuguese nationality law" label="Portuguese nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="4706" end="4725" title="Portugal national football team" label="their national side"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="4742" end="4756" title="UEFA Euro 2004" label="UEFA Euro 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661169" start="4973" end="4992" title="Campeonato Potiguar" label="Campeonato Potiguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182994" start="5007" end="5020" title="Primeira Liga" label="Primeira Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509482" start="5022" end="5029" title="2002–03 Primeira Liga" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155019" start="5031" end="5038" title="2003–04 Primeira Liga" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q29224" start="5040" end="5056" title="Taça de Portugal" label="Taça de Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378721" start="5058" end="5065" title="2002–03 Taça de Portugal" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127062" start="5067" end="5096" title="Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira" label="Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851185" start="5098" end="5102" title="2003 Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767682" start="5104" end="5108" title="2004 Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="5110" end="5131" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q244467" start="5133" end="5140" title="2003–04 UEFA Champions League" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="5142" end="5150" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q629461" start="5152" end="5159" title="2002–03 UEFA Cup" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="5161" end="5181" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217106" start="5183" end="5187" title="2004 Intercontinental Cup" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q29224" start="5199" end="5215" title="Taça de Portugal" label="Taça de Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610252" start="5217" end="5224" title="2007–08 Taça de Portugal" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127062" start="5226" end="5255" title="Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira" label="Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q10375088" start="5257" end="5261" title="2007 Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612003" start="5263" end="5267" title="2008 Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q966559" start="5269" end="5281" title="Taça da Liga" label="Taça da Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053324" start="5293" end="5300" title="2007–08 Taça da Liga" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090770" start="5302" end="5309" title="2008–09 Taça da Liga" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="5322" end="5330" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q824576" start="5331" end="5341" title="List of UEFA Cup and Europa League top scorers" label="Top Scorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390554" start="5352" end="5376" title="SJPF Player of the Month" label="SJPF Player of the Month"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577905" wikidata="Q949561" url="?curid=577905" title="Cobham, Kent">
<text>Cobham () is a village and civil parish in the borough of Gravesham in Kent, England. The village is located south-east of Gravesend, and just south of Watling Street, the Roman road from Dover to London. The parish, which includes the hamlet of Sole Street, covers an area of and had a population of 1,469 at the 2011 census, increasing from 1,328 at the 2001 census.

Since 1970 the village has been in a conservation area which aims to preserve the historic character and appearance of the area.

==History==
Cobham parish has had several manors; one of which, Henhurst, was mentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086, and in the Textus Roffensis as being part of the Rochester Bridge charter of c.975, so there has been a settlement in the parish since at least the 10th century. The largest and most notable of the manors was Cobham or Cobham Hall, which mainly consisted of the manor house, Cobham Hall, and the private park or demesne attached to the house; there is no record of any manorial courts being held before the 16th century, and the lands under rent to the lord of the manor were not significant so at least one court was shared with the other manors within the parish. The parish of Cobham was originally within the ancient hundred of Shamwell. In 1132, Henry I gave Cobham church, which was then an annex of the church at Shorne, to Bermondsey Priory (later to become Bermondsey Abbey).

The Cobham family was established here before the reign of King John (who reigned from 1199).

The lords of the manor of Cobham were Hereditary High Stewards of nearby Gravesend; in 1692 the custom was stopped that Gravesend paid to the lords of Cobham a yearly sum (a pontage) for the use of the landing stage on the River Thames.

==Notable buildings==
Cobham Hall was the former home of the Earls of Darnley: its gardens were designed by Humphry Repton. The surviving grade I listed manor house is one of the largest and most important houses in Kent. Today the building houses Cobham Hall School, a private boarding school for girls with a co-educational sixth form, which retains of the ancient estate. In the former deer park of Cobham Hall is the Darnley Mausoleum, a pyramid-topped structure built in 1786 as ordered by the will of the 3rd Earl of Darnley.

A 15th century hall house in Sole Street, that was threatened with demolition in 1970, has been dismantled and re-erected at the Weald and Downland Living Museum.

The parish church is 13th century and is dedicated to St Mary Magdalene. It contains monumental brasses, of which William Belcher in his &quot;Kentish Brasses&quot; (1905) stated: &quot;No church in the world possesses such a splendid series as the nineteen brasses in Cobham Church, ranging in date between 1298 and 1529.&quot; Thirteen of the brasses belong to the years 1320–1529 and commemorate members of the Brooke and Cobham families. The Brooke Tomb contains alabaster effigies of George Brooke, 9th Baron Cobham (1497–1558) and his wife Ann Bray.

To the immediate south of the church is the building known as Cobham College, now an almshouse, which originally housed the five priests employed by the chantry founded in 1362 by John Cobham, 3rd Baron Cobham.

Another church in the ecclesiastical parish, in Luddesdown, is dedicated to St Peter and St Paul.

==Schools==
The Earls of Darnley left Cobham Hall in 1957; since 1962 it has been Cobham Hall School, a private boarding school for girls; it opens to the public on some occasions in the year.

In addition to Cobham Hall School, there is a local primary school, Cobham Primary School.

==Other features==
There are two areas of open space in the parish: Cobham Park, which includes extensive woodlands; and Jeskyns, a one-time farm of 360 acres (147 ha), which has been turned into a greenspace area by the Forestry Commission.

The village was also linked to its namesake , a which was an active Royal Navy vessel between 1953 and 1966.

Cobham is served by Sole Street railway station, on the Chatham Main Line which runs from Gillingham to London Victoria via Bromley South.

==People==

Cobham has associations with Charles Dickens, who used to walk out to the village: he set part of &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; in The Leather Bottle pub. Other people connected with Cobham include Sir Joseph Williamson, who bought Cobham Hall in 1696, and the insane artist Richard Dadd, who, while recuperating in Cobham, murdered his father in 1843. The Hon Ivo Bligh, the first English cricket captain to attempt to recover The Ashes from Australia, became the 8th Earl of Darnley in 1900, taking over the family home of Cobham Hall. Author Ralph Arnold lived at Meadow House, which is described in his book &quot;A Yeoman of Kent&quot; (1949).

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q949561" start="0" end="6" title="Cobham, Kent" label="Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="27" end="39" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459781" start="58" end="67" title="Gravesham" label="Gravesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="71" end="75" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q676689" start="123" end="132" title="Gravesend" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="152" end="166" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="188" end="193" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="407" end="424" title="conservation area" label="conservation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="595" end="608" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799161" start="629" end="645" title="Textus Roffensis" label="Textus Roffensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528098" start="667" end="683" title="Rochester Bridge" label="Rochester Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052" start="766" end="778" title="10th century" label="10th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q86753237" start="893" end="904" title="Cobham Hall" label="Cobham Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="930" end="937" title="demesne" label="demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q10531620" start="987" end="1001" title="manorial court" label="manorial court"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="1239" end="1246" title="Hundred (county division)" label="hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="1269" end="1276" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598092" start="1338" end="1344" title="Shorne" label="Shorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q822030" start="1384" end="1400" title="Bermondsey Abbey" label="Bermondsey Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="1463" end="1472" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q676689" start="1572" end="1581" title="Gravesend" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q676689" start="1619" end="1628" title="Gravesend" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228059" start="1673" end="1680" title="pontage" label="pontage"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1722" end="1734" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q86753237" start="1759" end="1770" title="Cobham Hall" label="Cobham Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326245" start="1798" end="1814" title="Earl of Darnley" label="Earls of Darnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316530" start="1845" end="1859" title="Humphry Repton" label="Humphry Repton"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1875" end="1889" title="Listed building" label="grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="1890" end="1901" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138885" start="1985" end="2003" title="Cobham Hall School" label="Cobham Hall School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662247" start="2126" end="2135" title="Deer park (England)" label="deer park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224147" start="2158" end="2175" title="Darnley Mausoleum" label="Darnley Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923257" start="2285" end="2295" title="hall house" label="hall house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553215" start="2399" end="2431" title="Weald and Downland Living Museum" label="Weald and Downland Living Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q899459" start="2519" end="2535" title="monumental brass" label="monumental brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537283" start="2923" end="2954" title="George Brooke, 9th Baron Cobham" label="George Brooke, 9th Baron Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17529813" start="3053" end="3067" title="Cobham College" label="Cobham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548045" start="3076" end="3085" title="almshouse" label="almshouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q575842" start="3144" end="3151" title="chantry" label="chantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265521" start="3171" end="3200" title="John Cobham, 3rd Baron Cobham" label="John Cobham, 3rd Baron Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="3225" end="3246" title="ecclesiastical parish" label="ecclesiastical parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702687" start="3251" end="3261" title="Luddesdown" label="Luddesdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185762" start="3709" end="3716" title="Jeskyns" label="Jeskyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437242" start="3809" end="3828" title="Forestry Commission" label="Forestry Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3899" end="3909" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434718" start="3961" end="3988" title="Sole Street railway station" label="Sole Street railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087674" start="3997" end="4014" title="Chatham Main Line" label="Chatham Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086117" start="4031" end="4041" title="Gillingham (Kent) railway station" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="4045" end="4060" title="Victoria Station (London)" label="London Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200768" start="4065" end="4078" title="Bromley South railway station" label="Bromley South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="4122" end="4137" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q460583" start="4197" end="4216" title="The Pickwick Papers" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185794" start="4293" end="4314" title="Joseph Williamson (English politician)" label="Sir Joseph Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q594150" start="4356" end="4369" title="insane artist" label="insane artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q449519" start="4370" end="4382" title="Richard Dadd" label="Richard Dadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529459" start="4452" end="4465" title="Ivo Bligh, 8th Earl of Darnley" label="Hon Ivo Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="4485" end="4492" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q725151" start="4523" end="4532" title="The Ashes" label="The Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326245" start="4564" end="4579" title="Earl of Darnley" label="Earl of Darnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q113805727" start="4640" end="4652" title="Ralph Arnold (publisher)" label="Ralph Arnold"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577908" wikidata="Q18426314" url="?curid=577908" title="Complexometric titration">
<text>Complexometric titration (sometimes chelatometry) is a form of volumetric analysis in which the formation of a colored complex is used to indicate the end point of a titration. Complexometric titrations are particularly useful for the determination of a mixture of different metal ions in solution. An indicator capable of producing an unambiguous color change is usually used to detect the end-point of the titration. Complexometric titrations are those reactions where a simple ion is transformed into a complex ion and the equivalence point is determined by using metal indicators or electrometrically.

==Reactions used==

In theory, any complexation reaction can be used as a volumetric technique provided that:
# The reaction reaches equilibrium rapidly after each portion of titrant is added.
# Interfering situations do not arise. For instance, the stepwise formation of several different complexes of the metal ion with the titrant, resulting in the presence of more than one complex in solution during the titration process.
# A complexometric indicator capable of locating equivalence point with fair accuracy is available.

In practice, the use of EDTA as a titrant is well established.

==Use of EDTA==

EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, has four carboxyl groups and two amine groups that can act as electron pair donors, or Lewis bases. The ability of EDTA to potentially donate its six lone pairs of electrons for the formation of coordinate covalent bonds to metal cations makes EDTA a hexadentate ligand. However, in practice EDTA is usually only partially ionized, and thus forms fewer than six coordinate covalent bonds with metal cations.

Disodium EDTA is commonly used to standardize aqueous solutions of transition metal cations. Disodium EDTA (often written as Na2H2Y) only forms four coordinate covalent bonds to metal cations at pH values ≤ 12. In this pH range, the amine groups remain protonated and thus unable to donate electrons to the formation of coordinate covalent bonds. Note that the shorthand form Na4−xHxY can be used to represent any species of EDTA, with x designating the number of acidic protons bonded to the EDTA molecule.

EDTA forms an octahedral complex with most 2+ metal cations, M2+, in aqueous solution. The main reason that EDTA is used so extensively in the standardization of metal cation solutions is that the formation constant for most metal cation-EDTA complexes is very high, meaning that the equilibrium for the reaction:

:M2+ + H4Y → MH2Y + 2H+

lies far to the right. Carrying out the reaction in a basic buffer solution removes H+ as it is formed, which also favors the formation of the EDTA-metal cation complex reaction product. For most purposes it can be considered that the formation of the metal cation-EDTA complex goes to completion, and this is chiefly why EDTA is used in titrations and standardizations of this type.

=== Data processing and calculation ===
First step is to plot the absorbance(A) values of standard solution against molar concentrations (c) of the known solution. Then the best straight line is plotted, passing through the origin. The experimental points are plotted as per Beer’s law:

A= E*c*l where E= molar extinction coefficient and l= optical path length usually 1 cm.

Second step is to measure absorbance (A’) of unknown solution and match it with the known absorbance-concentration plot of the standard solution. Thereby calculating the molar concentration of the unknown solution. This is calculated by using the formula, concentration of unknown =A’/(E*l). This can also be calculated using this given relation , 

concentration of unknown/ concentration of known = A’/A.

=== Indicators ===
To carry out metal cation titrations using EDTA, it is almost always necessary to use a complexometric indicator to determine when the end point has been reached. Common indicators are organic dyes such as Fast Sulphon Black, Eriochrome Black T, Eriochrome Red B, Patton Reeder, or Murexide. Color change shows that the indicator has been displaced (usually by EDTA) from the metal cations in solution when the end point has been reached. Thus, the free indicator (rather than the metal complex) serves as the endpoint indicator.

==See also==

*Titration
*Triethanolamine

==References==
== Bibliography ==

* “ “ G.N Mukherjee. Page 30</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18426314" start="0" end="24" title="Complexometric titration" label="Complexometric titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426314" start="36" end="48" title="Complexometric titration" label="chelatometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="63" end="82" title="volumetric analysis" label="volumetric analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370113" start="302" end="311" title="complexometric indicator" label="indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="740" end="751" title="chemical equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="857" end="875" title="Stability constants of complexes#Theory" label="stepwise formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370113" start="1039" end="1063" title="complexometric indicator" label="complexometric indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q408032" start="1223" end="1254" title="ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid" label="ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="1265" end="1273" title="carboxyl" label="carboxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="1289" end="1294" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="1343" end="1353" title="Lewis base" label="Lewis base"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693737" start="1507" end="1518" title="hexadentate" label="hexadentate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370113" start="3791" end="3815" title="complexometric indicator" label="complexometric indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="3896" end="3899" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436989" start="3909" end="3927" title="Fast Sulphon Black" label="Fast Sulphon Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q414854" start="3929" end="3947" title="Eriochrome Black T" label="Eriochrome Black T"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3949" end="3965" title="Eriochrome Red B" label="Eriochrome Red B"/>
<link wikidata="Q570828" start="3967" end="3980" title="Patton Reeder" label="Patton Reeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q414825" start="3985" end="3993" title="Murexide" label="Murexide"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="4249" end="4258" title="Titration" label="Titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q424314" start="4260" end="4275" title="Triethanolamine" label="Triethanolamine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577911" wikidata="Q5029815" url="?curid=577911" title="Canadian Centennial">
<text>The Canadian Centennial was a yearlong celebration held in 1967 to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Canadian Confederation. Celebrations in Canada occurred throughout the year but culminated on Dominion Day, July 1. Commemorative coins were minted, that were different from typical issues with animals on each — the cent, for instance, had a dove on its reverse. Communities and organizations across Canada were encouraged to engage in Centennial projects to celebrate the anniversary. The projects ranged from special one-time events to local improvement projects, such as the construction of municipal arenas and parks. The Centennial Flame was also added to Parliament Hill. Children born in 1967 were declared Centennial babies.

==Centennial projects==
In 1961, Prime Minister John Diefenbaker announced that the federal government would provide funding for the construction of about 860 buildings as centennial projects. Under the Centennial Commission, convened in January 1963, various projects were commissioned to commemorate the Centennial year. The prime minister, Lester Pearson, appointed in 1965 a committee headed by Ernest Côté to plan events in Ottawa for 1967. The CBC commissioned Gordon Lightfoot to write the song the &quot;Canadian Railroad Trilogy&quot; for broadcast on January 1, 1967. The Canadian Government commissioned typographer Carl Dair to create a new and distinctively Canadian typeface. The first proof of Cartier was published as &quot;the first Canadian type for text composition&quot; to mark the centenary of Canadian Confederation.

===Canadian Armed Forces Tattoo 1967===

The Canadian Armed Forces contributed to Centennial celebrations by producing a military tattoo unlike any other in Canadian history. It was formed in Picton, Ontario in February 1967 by members from the three branches of the military providing service personnel at the Picton base for training purposes. The &quot;show&quot; was produced by Colonel Ian Fraser of the Black Watch and would eventually included 1700 military men and women in a show that would travel across Canada from March to November performing over 150 performances. Some said that Tattoo 1967 was the major event that year and there were calls to have the Tattoo travel through the U.S., Europe and even the Soviet Union but the Prime Minister at the time scuttled the idea. CBC Television and the National Film Board of Canada filmed the Tattoo, as did the Military. Tattoo 1967 was the largest undertaking by the military during peacetime and has never been reproduced since. The Tattoo depicted the military history of Canada from the first French military and settlers in Canada in 1665 right up to Canada&#x27;s UN Peace Keeping role in 1967.

===Challenge for Change===

Challenge for Change (in Quebec &quot;Societé Nouvelle&quot;) was a participatory film and video project created by the National Film Board of Canada in 1967 as a response to the Centennial. Active until 1980, Challenge for Change used film and video production to illuminate the social concerns of various communities within Canada, with funding from eight different departments of the Canadian government. The impetus for the program was the belief that film and video were useful tools for initiating social change and eliminating poverty.

===Caribana (Toronto)===

In Toronto, the Caribana parade and festival was launched in 1967 as a celebration of Caribbean culture, and as a gift from Canada&#x27;s West Indian community in tribute to the Centennial year.

===Centennial Voyageur Canoe Pageant===

The Centennial Voyageur Canoe Pageant was a canoe race started on May 24 in the Rocky Mountains by ten teams representing eight provinces and the two territories. Two provinces were not entered. 3,283 miles were paddled and portaged in 104 days by 100 men using six man shifts per team. They arrived in Montreal on September 4. Other privately sponsored canoes from across the country made similar trips.

===Confederation of Tomorrow===
In November 1967, the &quot;Confederation of Tomorrow&quot; conference was held at the newly built Toronto-Dominion Bank Tower. Called by Ontario Premier John Robarts, the summit of provincial premiers led to a new round of federal-provincial negotiations to amend the Canadian Constitution.
=== Yukon River Flotilla ===
The Yukon River Flotilla was a Centennial project organized and sponsored by the Yukon Fish and Game Association. It was a voyage down the Yukon River from Whitehorse to Dawson City commemorating the memory of the Klondike gold-seekers who sailed the Yukon River from Bennett Lake to Dawson City during the Klondike Gold Rush of 1898. 

On August 6, 54 craft departed Whitehorse on a ten-day voyage to Dawson carrying 108 adults, 45 children, and 9 dogs. Participants came from four provinces, thirteen states and one European country. They sailed in different types of watercraft to include rubber-rafts, canoes, kayaks, river-boats, power-boats, skiffs, cabin cruisers, and four Amphicars.

===Other commemorative projects===
In addition to these major projects there were commemorative projects throughout the country. Municipal funding for approved centennial projects was matched dollar for dollar by both the province and the federal government. Providing a concrete reminder of the centennial year celebrations these projects included the 1,500 seat Norbrock Stadium in Kamloops, British Columbia, the National Arts Centre in Ottawa, the Centennial Building in Fredericton and many others. Approximately $25 million was made available by the Centennial Committee for local projects.

Some projects, such as the Ontario Science Centre, were completed after the 1967 centennial.

==Expo 67==
The 1967 International and Universal Exposition, or Expo 67 as it was commonly known, was the general exhibition, Category One World&#x27;s Fair held in Montreal from April 27 to October 29. Expo 67 was Canada&#x27;s main celebration during the centennial year.

In a political and cultural context, Expo 67 was seen as a landmark moment in Canadian history. Expo 67 in particular was a signifier of the nation&#x27;s mood of extreme optimism and confidence on heading into its second century. In retrospect, the centennial is seen as a high point of Canadian aspirations prior to the anxious decade of the 1970s that saw the nation divided over issues relating to inflation, an economic recession, government budget deficits and Quebec separatism. Popular Canadian historian Pierre Berton referred to the centennial as &quot;the last good year&quot; in his book &quot;1967: The Last Good Year&quot;.

==Confederation train==
In 1961, Prime Minister John Diefenbaker proposed a travelling exhibit on a train that would traverse the country and bring exhibits on the history of Canada to the citizens. The train consisted of six exhibit cars and seven cars for staff and equipment pulled by two diesel locomotives, one from each from Canadian Pacific Railway and Canadian National Railway. The locomotives were painted in purple, grey, and black livery and had a custom air horn that sounded the first four notes of &quot;O Canada.&quot; The train was inaugurated on January 9 in Victoria and made 83 stops across the country before reaching its final stop in Montreal on December 5.

==Centennial banknote==
The Bank of Canada issued into circulation a redesigned version of the $1 banknote from the 1954 Series. The image on the reverse of this version shows the original Parliament Buildings, and the obverse includes a green monochrome adaptation of the stylised maple leaf Centennial logo marked with the years 1867 and 1967. Two variants of the design were printed; the first had the serial number at the top of the obverse, whereas the second and more common variant had the years 1867 and 1967 printed twice flanking the apex of the coat of arms.

==Centennial Medal==

The Canadian Centennial Medal was issued in 1967 to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Confederation of Canada, and was awarded to Canadians who were recommended by governments and associations for having provided valuable service to this country. Some 30,000 Medals were conferred on Canadians selected from all sectors of Canadian society.

==See also==

*History of Canada
*&quot;Canada (The Centennial Song)&quot;
*1967 in Canada
*The Canadian Centenary Series
*Canadian Armed Forces Tattoo 1967
*125th Anniversary of the Confederation of Canada Medal
*150th anniversary of Canada
*Centennial Performance

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5029815" start="4" end="23" title="Canadian Centennial" label="Canadian Centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="102" end="124" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="142" end="148" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q639756" start="196" end="208" title="Canada Day" label="Dominion Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944287" start="318" end="322" title="Canadian cent coin" label="cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42326" start="344" end="348" title="Rock dove" label="dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053543" start="628" end="644" title="Centennial Flame" label="Centennial Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="784" end="800" title="John Diefenbaker" label="John Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="1079" end="1093" title="Lester Pearson" label="Lester Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19362250" start="1135" end="1146" title="Ernest Côté" label="Ernest Côté"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="1186" end="1189" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q359552" start="1203" end="1219" title="Gordon Lightfoot" label="Gordon Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030517" start="1248" end="1273" title="Canadian Railroad Trilogy" label="Canadian Railroad Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="1318" end="1337" title="Government of Canada" label="Canadian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938886" start="1363" end="1372" title="Carl Dair" label="Carl Dair"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="1416" end="1424" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047326" start="1445" end="1452" title="Cartier (typeface)" label="Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="1552" end="1574" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="1622" end="1643" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156702" start="1698" end="1713" title="military tattoo" label="military tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191105" start="1769" end="1784" title="Picton, Ontario" label="Picton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520022" start="1986" end="1997" title="The Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="2318" end="2344" title="Lester B. Pearson" label="Prime Minister at the time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="2364" end="2378" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="2387" end="2416" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="National Film Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659344" start="2591" end="2617" title="military history of Canada" label="military history of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960979" start="2766" end="2786" title="Challenge for Change" label="Challenge for Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140466" start="2834" end="2870" title="Participatory video" label="participatory film and video project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="2886" end="2915" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="National Film Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="3153" end="3172" title="Canadian government" label="Canadian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069874" start="3352" end="3360" title="Caribana" label="Caribana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15949440" start="3474" end="3485" title="West Indian" label="West Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059225" start="3577" end="3610" title="Centennial Voyageur Canoe Pageant" label="Centennial Voyageur Canoe Pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="3653" end="3668" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q120638097" start="3797" end="3804" title="portage" label="portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239847" start="4110" end="4137" title="Toronto-Dominion Centre" label="Toronto-Dominion Bank Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560704" start="4149" end="4164" title="Premier of Ontario" label="Ontario Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q787456" start="4165" end="4177" title="John Robarts" label="John Robarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="4280" end="4301" title="Canadian Constitution" label="Canadian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q104437" start="4471" end="4482" title="Yukon River" label="Yukon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055" start="4488" end="4498" title="Whitehorse" label="Whitehorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q372324" start="4502" end="4513" title="Dawson City" label="Dawson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="4546" end="4554" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q317231" start="4600" end="4612" title="Bennett Lake" label="Bennett Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26998" start="5013" end="5021" title="Amphicar" label="Amphicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050006" start="5389" end="5405" title="NorBrock Stadium" label="Norbrock Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q473209" start="5409" end="5417" title="Kamloops" label="Kamloops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945952" start="5441" end="5461" title="National Arts Centre" label="National Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="5465" end="5471" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104881010" start="5477" end="5496" title="Centennial Building (Fredericton)" label="Centennial Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138" start="5500" end="5511" title="Fredericton" label="Fredericton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500067" start="5650" end="5672" title="Ontario Science Centre" label="Ontario Science Centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5843" end="5855" title="World&amp;#x27;s fair#Types" label="Category One"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="5856" end="5873" title="World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="5882" end="5890" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="6394" end="6403" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="6408" end="6426" title="recession" label="economic recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="6459" end="6476" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="Quebec separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q606553" start="6505" end="6518" title="Pierre Berton" label="Pierre Berton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6598" end="6622" title="1967: The Last Good Year" label="1967: The Last Good Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="6679" end="6695" title="John Diefenbaker" label="John Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="6962" end="6986" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="6991" end="7016" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003090" start="7098" end="7106" title="air horn" label="air horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q93359" start="7150" end="7158" title="O Canada" label="O Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="7208" end="7216" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q806703" start="7341" end="7355" title="Bank of Canada" label="Bank of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121688" start="7368" end="7379" title="Circulation (currency)" label="circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="7411" end="7419" title="banknote" label="banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568145" start="7429" end="7440" title="1954 Series (banknotes)" label="1954 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="7459" end="7466" title="Obverse and reverse" label="reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="7502" end="7522" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029816" start="7910" end="7935" title="Canadian Centennial Medal" label="Canadian Centennial Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945" start="8270" end="8287" title="History of Canada" label="History of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029291" start="8289" end="8329" title="Canada (1967 song)" label="&amp;quot;Canada (The Centennial Song)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812433" start="8331" end="8345" title="1967 in Canada" label="1967 in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029813" start="8347" end="8376" title="The Canadian Centenary Series" label="The Canadian Centenary Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955224" start="8378" end="8411" title="Canadian Armed Forces Tattoo 1967" label="Canadian Armed Forces Tattoo 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548436" start="8413" end="8467" title="125th Anniversary of the Confederation of Canada Medal" label="125th Anniversary of the Confederation of Canada Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730778" start="8469" end="8496" title="150th anniversary of Canada" label="150th anniversary of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515245" start="8498" end="8520" title="Centennial Performance" label="Centennial Performance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577916" wikidata="Q7049170" url="?curid=577916" title="Nonactin">
<text>Nonactin is a member of a family of naturally occurring cyclic ionophores known as the macrotetrolide antibiotics. The other members of this homologous family are monactin, dinactin, trinactin and tetranactin which are all neutral ionophoric substances and higher homologs of nonactin. Collectively, this class is known as the nactins. Nonactin is soluble in methanol, dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and DMSO, but insoluble in water.

==Sources==
Nonactin is commercially available; as of 2006, these bacterial species produce nonactin: &quot;Streptomyces tsukubensis&quot;, &quot;Streptomyces griseus&quot;, &quot;Streptomyces chrysomallus&quot; and &quot;Streptomyces werraensis&quot;. Total syntheses have been reported.

==Structure and properties==
Nonactin was isolated by Corbaz &quot;et al.&quot; in 1955 from bacterial strains. It is composed of four tetrahydrofuran rings and four esters linked by saturated aliphatic chain sections. Nonactin has a 48-member ring, built from 40 carbon and 12 (8 on the ring, 4 as ketones) oxygen atoms. Despite the 16 stereogenic centers, Nonactin is a meso compound, and therefore achiral. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry offers a modern approach to obtain more detailed process control data than the spectrophotometric and chromatographic measurements used in the past.

==Reactions==
Nonactin is known for its ability to form complexes with alkali cations, most notably potassium and sodium. In general, nonactin (and other members of the nactin family) exhibits binding preferences for some ions over others. This ion selectivity is seen in other macrocyclic ligands, such as the cyclic ionophore valinomycin, which is also an antibiotic, and crown ethers. Although nonactin (and all nactins) exhibits an especially high cation selectivity for potassium ions over sodium ions or rubidium ions, it exhibits the highest selectivity for ammonium ions and thallium ions. Due to this property, nonactin is also called &quot;ammonium ionophore&quot;.

During complexation, the nonactin backbone convolutes into a pattern resembling the seam of a tennis ball. In the potassium-nonactin complex, the potassium ion is entirely surrounded by four carbonyl oxygen atoms and the four oxygen atoms of the tetrahydrofuran ring. These eight oxygen atoms surrounding the ion are nearly equidistant from it and adopt a nearly cubic coordination sphere around the ion. In this complex, all polar carbonyl groups point inwards and nonpolar moieties point outwards, thus building up a hydrophobic exterior for the complex and making it soluble in lipid membranes. This is how nonactin is able to transport potassium ions across lipid membranes.

==Biological effects==
Nonactin has been reported to specifically inhibit the processing of cytoplasmic precursor proteins destined for the mitochondria. It is able to uncouple the oxidative phosphorylation of mitochondria of rat liver in a low concentration, and can also carry cations across biological and artificial membranes.

A nactins mixture, purposely enriched in tetranactin and poor in nonactin, known as polynactin(C), was used as a pesticide, but since 2004 is not used any more, presumably because its residuals appeared in food.

== Applications ==
Nactins have no known medical use. Ultrapure nonactin, practically free of other nactins, is used for ammonium-specific electrodes.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7049170" start="0" end="8" title="Nonactin" label="Nonactin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415168" start="63" end="73" title="ionophores" label="ionophores"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="102" end="113" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="327" end="333" title="nactin" label="nactin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="359" end="367" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="369" end="384" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q407153" start="386" end="399" title="ethyl acetate" label="ethyl acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407927" start="404" end="408" title="Dimethyl sulfoxide" label="DMSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q26293097" start="543" end="567" title="Streptomyces tsukubensis" label="Streptomyces tsukubensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623385" start="581" end="601" title="Streptomyces griseus" label="Streptomyces griseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22286915" start="615" end="640" title="Streptomyces chrysomallus" label="Streptomyces chrysomallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26293473" start="657" end="680" title="Streptomyces werraensis" label="Streptomyces werraensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q644785" start="688" end="703" title="Total syntheses" label="Total syntheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q278332" start="860" end="875" title="tetrahydrofuran" label="tetrahydrofuran"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="891" end="897" title="esters" label="esters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="1024" end="1030" title="ketone" label="ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q285842" start="1097" end="1110" title="meso compound" label="meso compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q873864" start="1135" end="1174" title="Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry" label="Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="1396" end="1402" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1403" end="1410" title="cations" label="cations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="1615" end="1621" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q417504" start="1653" end="1664" title="valinomycin" label="valinomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410125" start="1699" end="1710" title="crown ether" label="crown ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="2009" end="2021" title="complexation" label="complexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q675972" start="2371" end="2390" title="coordination sphere" label="coordination sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="2521" end="2532" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q423279" start="2583" end="2597" title="lipid membrane" label="lipid membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="2822" end="2834" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="2873" end="2888" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577918" wikidata="Q7531435" url="?curid=577918" title="Sistina Software">
<text>Sistina Software was a US company that focused on storage solutions designed around a Linux platform. It originated in the University of Minnesota.

Their three primary offerings were Global File System (GFS), logical volume management (LVM) and device mapper (DM).

Sistina Software was acquired by Red Hat in December, 2003 for $31 million in stock. After acquisition GFS was merged into Red Hat Cluster Suite and open sourced.
==GFS==
GFS is a cluster file system on Linux that allows servers to transparently access a single file system on a storage area network (SAN). Its highlights are performance and reliability (journaling filesystem, scalability through parallelism, etc.).

==LVM==
LVM has become a part of the Linux kernel. It is a subsystem which allows arbitrary physical storage to be recognized as a virtual disk device. The physical storage can be remote, or it can even consist of multiple physical devices, but LVM abstracts those distinctions away from the operating system user. LVM also provides services for backing up data.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7531435" start="0" end="16" title="Sistina Software" label="Sistina Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="86" end="91" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486715" start="184" end="202" title="Global File System" label="Global File System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667482" start="210" end="235" title="Logical Volume Manager (Linux)" label="logical volume management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206778" start="246" end="259" title="device mapper" label="device mapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q485593" start="300" end="307" title="Red Hat" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q237576" start="546" end="566" title="storage area network" label="storage area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q579047" start="622" end="643" title="journaling filesystem" label="journaling filesystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="645" end="656" title="scalability" label="scalability"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="665" end="676" title="parallel computing" label="parallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="723" end="735" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577921" wikidata="Q389808" url="?curid=577921" title="Aga Khan Award for Architecture">
<text>The Aga Khan Award for Architecture (AKAA) is an architectural prize established by Aga Khan IV in 1977. It aims to identify and reward architectural concepts that successfully address the needs and aspirations of Muslim societies in the fields of contemporary design, social housing, community development and improvement, restoration, reuse and area conservation, as well as landscape design and improvement of the environment.

The award is associated with the Aga Khan Trust for Culture (AKTC), an agency of the Aga Khan Development Network (AKDN).

== Prize ==
The Aga Khan Award for Architecture is presented in three-year cycles and has a monetary prize totalling US$1 million that is shared by multiple winning projects. It recognizes projects, teams, and stakeholders in addition to buildings and people.

===Chairman&#x27;s Award===
The &quot;Chairman&#x27;s Award&quot; is given in honour of accomplishments that fall outside the mandate of the Master Jury. It recognises lifetime achievements of individuals and has been presented four times: in 1980 to Egyptian architect and urban planner Hassan Fathy, in 1986 to Iraqi architect and educator Rifat Chadirji, in 2001 to Sri Lankan architect Geoffrey Bawa, and in 2010 to historian of Islamic art and architecture Oleg Grabar.

== History ==
Prince Karim Aga Khan IV established the Aga Khan Award for Architecture in 1977. At the time, very few architectural prizes of international scope existed. It has been noted that the award emerged from &quot;the Aga Khan&#x27;s sadness at the state of architecture in the Islamic world of the 1970s&quot;, and his conviction of the importance that the built environment holds in shaping a society&#x27;s quality of life.

Twenty years earlier, upon inheriting the seat of Imamat of the Shia Ismaili Muslims, the Aga Khan had become responsible for the wellbeing of the Ismaili community, which mostly live in the developing countries of Asia, Africa and the Middle East. He was concerned at the absence of design thinking that could respond to specific challenges in those parts of the world.

A relentless push for development had led to cheap copies of foreign architectural designs that held no connection or respect for the places where they were being built. The Aga Khan also worried about the rapid disappearance of centuries of distinctive architectural tradition that embodied a continuity of Islamic values, resulting in an absence of &quot;architecture that could speak to and about the Muslim world&quot;.

These problems were most acutely felt during the planning of the Aga Khan University and teaching hospital in Karachi. Questions raised in this process – including the need for a contemporary visual language for the Islamic built environment, as well as for architects trained in modern technologies and sensitive to the diversity, values and dignity of Muslim culture – would inform the creation of the Award.

=== Reviving creativity ===
By the 1970s, the decline of the built environment of Muslim societies and loss of cultural identity had become apparent to others as well. From the outset the Aga Khan recruited a number of people to help define the award. Among the first were Oleg Grabar a professor at the Harvard Department of Fine Arts, William Porter then Dean of the MIT School of Architecture and Planning, architectural historian Renata Holod, and Pakistani architect Hasan Udhin Khan. They were joined by others, including Nader Ardalan, Hugh Casson, Charles Correa, and Hassan Fathy.

Members of the team travelled widely – from Morocco to Indonesia. They debated the cultural role of architecture, the parameters of the award and how to structure its processes. The award was shaped by consultations held with chambers of architects and ministries of urbanism and culture. The first Aga Khan Award for Architecture Seminar was held during April 1978 in Aiglemont, Gouvieux, France. Subsequent seminars have been held in Istanbul, Jakarta, Fez, Amman, Beijing, Dakar, Sana&#x27;a, Cairo, Granada and elsewhere.

In seeking to define what &quot;Islamic architecture&quot; meant, it became apparent that no singular definition was to be found. Instead, the seminars brought to light the diversity of what constituted Islamic architecture. This was recognized as a strength and a dormant source of creativity that the Award would seek to revive.

=== Knowledge from architecture ===
Unlike conventional prizes that applaud the accomplishments of individual architects, the Aga Khan Award selects projects that improve the quality of life and recognizes all those who have a role in realizing them. This includes clients, builders, artisans and decision makers. Architecture is viewed as a collaborative endeavour in which architects play a role.

In the four decades since its establishment, the Award has documented more than 9,000 projects and actively contributed to the architectural discourse. It has promoted the view that architecture is deeply connected with society and can respond to issues that are of local, national and even international relevance.

The Award has brought together practitioners from different geographies and fields like philosophy, social sciences, and the arts, who have served as jurors, steering committee members, technical reviewers, or attended seminars.

==Award process==
The Aga Khan Award runs in three-year cycles and is governed by a steering committee chaired by the Aga Khan. A new committee is constituted each cycle to establish the eligibility criteria for projects, provide thematic direction with reference to current concerns, and to develop plans for the long-term future of the award. The committee is also responsible for seminars and field visits, the award ceremony, publications and exhibitions. At the commencement of each cycle, the steering committee is convened to select a master jury that is diverse in its perspectives and has in past cycles included sociologists, philosophers, artists as well as architects.

In each cycle, submissions are received from a global network of approximately 500 nominators – women and men who live in Muslim societies and whose identities are kept anonymous throughout the award process. Independent nominations are also accepted in accordance with the award&#x27;s published guidelines and procedures. Several hundred submissions are typically received in each cycle, and the master jury narrows the field to a short-list.

Professional, technical reviewers visit the short-listed projects to understand the living impact of each one on people and the surrounding area. They prepare exhaustive documentation, providing fact-based analysis for the master jury&#x27;s consideration.

Over the decades, many notable figures have served on the award&#x27;s steering committees and master juries, including Homi K. Bhabha, Frank Gehry, Zaha Hadid, Glenn Lowry, Fumihiko Maki, Jacques Herzog, Ricardo Legoretta and Farshid Moussavi. The award is administered from Geneva as part of the Aga Khan Trust for Culture, and Farrokh Derakhshani has served as Director of the Award since 1982.

==Promotion==
The Aga Khan Foundation funded the television series &quot;Architects on the Frontline&quot; which was about entries to the competition. The media watchdog Ofcom criticised BBC World News for breaking United Kingdom broadcasting rules with the series, which praised the competition; viewers were not informed that it was sponsored content.

==Award cycles==
Prizes totalling up to US$1m are presented every three years to projects selected by the Master Jury. Since 1977, documentation has been compiled on over 7500 building projects located throughout the world, of which over 100 projects have received awards.

===First (1978–1980)===
The 1980 award ceremony took place at the Shalimar Gardens in Lahore, Pakistan. During this cycle, the Chairman&#x27;s Award was given to Hassan Fathy in recognition of his lifelong commitment to architecture in the Muslim world. Prominent architect Muzharul Islam was a member of the Master Jury of the first Aga Khan Award for Architecture.

Award recipients:
*Kampung Improvement Programme, Jakarta, Indonesia
*Pondok Pesantren Pabelan, Central Java, Indonesia
*Ertegün House, Bodrum, Turkey
*Library and conference center of the Turkish Historical Society, Ankara, Turkey
*Mughal Sheraton Hotel, Agra, India
*Conservation of Sidi Bou Saïd, Tunis, Tunisia
*Restoration of the Rüstem Pasa Caravanserai, Edirne, Turkey
*National Museum, Doha, Qatar
*Ali Qapu, Chehel Sutun, and Hasht Behesht Restoration, Isfahan, Iran
*Halawa House, Agamy, Egypt, by Abdel-Wahed El-Wakil
*Medical Centre, Mopti, Mali
*Courtyard Houses, Agadir, Morocco
*Water Towers, Kuwait City, Kuwait
*Intercontinental Hotel and Conference Centre, Mecca, Saudi Arabia, by Rolf Gutbrod and Frei Otto
*Agricultural Training Centre, Nianing, Senegal
===Second (1981–1983)===
The 1983 award ceremony took place at the Topkapı Palace in Istanbul.
Award recipients:
*Great Mosque of Niono, Mali
*Šerefudin&#x27;s White Mosque, Visoko, Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Ramses Wissa Wassef Arts Centre, Giza, Egypt
*Nail Çakirhan Residence, Akyaka Village, Muğla, Turkey
*Hafsia Quarter I, Tunis, Tunisia
*Tanjong Jara Beach Hotel and Rantau Abang Visitors&#x27; Centre, Kuala Terengganu, Malaysia
*Résidence Andalous, Sousse, Tunisia
*Hajj Terminal, King Abdulaziz International Airport, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, by Fazlur Khan
*Tomb of Shah Rukn-i-&#x27;Alam, Multan, Pakistan
*Darb Qirmiz Quarter, Cairo, Egypt
*Restoration of Azem Palace, Damascus, Syria

===Third (1984–1986)===

The 1986 award ceremony took place at El Badi Palace in Marrakesh, Morocco. The brief prepared by the Steering Committee for this award cycle focused on the preservation and continuation of cultural heritage, community building and social housing, and excellence in contemporary architectural expression.

Six winners were chosen from among 213 entries. The conservation of Mostar Old Town and restoration of Al-Aqsa Mosque were examples of cultural heritage, the first theme, while the Yama Mosque and Bhong Mosque were noted for their innovation in translating traditional techniques and materials to meet contemporary requirements. The Social Security Complex and Dar Lamane Housing address the issues of community and social housing while remaining sensitive to local culture. The Chairman&#x27;s Award for Lifetime Achievements was given to Iraqi architect Rifat Chadirji.

Award recipients:
*Social Security Complex, Istanbul, Turkey
*Dar Lamane Housing, Casablanca, Morocco
*Conservation of Mostar Old Town, Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Restoration of Al-Aqsa Mosque, Noble Sanctuary, Jerusalem
*Yaama Mosque, Yaama, Tahoua, Niger
*Bhong Mosque, Bhong, Rahim Yar Khan District, Pakistan
===Fourth (1987–1989)===
The 1989 award ceremony took place at the Citadel of Salah Ed-Din in Cairo.
The fourth cycle of the award considered 241 project nominations. Of these, 32 were short-listed for technical review and the Master Jury selected 11 winners. Two themes were noted as areas of focus in this cycle: Revival of past vernacular traditions, and projects that reflect the efforts of individual patrons and of non-governmental organisations in improving society.

Projects such as the Great Omari Mosque and the Rehabilitation of Asilah seek to reconstruct and preserve heritage buildings for continued use, demonstrating the significance of these spaces within their communities. Meanwhile, the Grameen Bank Housing Programme and Sidi el-Aloui Primary School apply architectural solutions to address current socioeconomic issues.

Award recipients:
*Great Omari Mosque (Sidon, Lebanon)
*Rehabilitation of Asilah (Asilah, Morocco)
*Grameen Bank Housing Programme (various locations in Bangladesh)
*Citra Niaga Urban Development (Samarinda, East Kalimantan, Indonesia)
*Gürel Family Summer Residence (Çanakkale, Turkey)
*Hayy Assafarat Landscaping and al-Kindi Plaza (Riyadh, Saudi Arabia)
*Sidi el-Aloui Primary School (Tunis, Tunisia)
*Corniche Mosque (Jeddah, Saudi Arabia), by Abdel-Wahed El-Wakil
*Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Riyadh, Saudi Arabia)
*National Assembly Building (Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka, Bangladesh), by Louis Kahn
*Institut du Monde Arabe (Paris, France), by Jean Nouvel and Architecture-Studio

===Fifth (1990–1992)===
The 1992 award ceremony took place at the Registan Square in Samarkand, Uzbekistan.
Uzbek government also released a postal stamp to commemorate the award ceremony &amp; restoration of Registan Square in Partnership with Aga Khan Trust for Culture.

Award recipients:
*Kairouan Conservation Programme (Kairouan, Tunisia)
*Palace Parks Programme (Istanbul, Turkey)
*Cultural Park for Children (Cairo, Egypt)
*East Wahdat Upgrading Programme (Amman, Jordan)
*Kampung Kali Code (Yogyakarta, Indonesia)
*Stone Building System (Daraa Governorate, Syria)
*Demir Holiday Village (Bodrum, Turkey)
*Pan African Institute for Development (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso), by Association pour le Développement d&#x27;une Architecture et d&#x27;un Urbanisme Africains (A.D.A.U.A. – Association for the Development of African Architecture and Urban Planning)
*Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India (Ahmedabad, India), by Bimal Hasmukh Patel

===Sixth (1993–1995)===
The 1995 award ceremony took place at the Kraton Surakarta in Surakarta, Indonesia.

Award recipients:
*Restoration of Bukhara Old City, Uzbekistan
*Conservation of Old San&#x27;a&#x27;, Yemen
*Hafsia Quarter II, Tunis, Tunisia
*Khuda-ki-Basti Incremental Development Scheme, Hyderabad, Pakistan
*Aranya Community Housing , Indore, India, by B.V. Doshi
*Great Mosque and Redevelopment of the Old City Centre Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
*Menara Mesiniaga, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
*Kaédi Regional Hospital, Kaedi, Mauritania, by ADAUA.
*Mosque of the Grand National Assembly, Ankara, Turkey
*Alliance Franco-Sénégalaise, Kaolack, Senegal
*Re-Forestation Programme of the Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
*Landscaping Integration of the Soekarno-Hatta Airport, Cengkareng, Indonesia

===Seventh (1996–1998)===
The 1998 award ceremony took place at the Alhambra in Granada, Spain. The Master Jury selected seven winning projects of the 424 presented. During this cycle, special emphasis was placed on projects that responded creatively to the emerging forces of globalization. Issues such as demographic pressure, environmental degradation, and the crisis of the nation-state, and the changes in lifestyle, cultural values, and relationships among social groups and between governments and people at large they prompted, were considered.

Of the winning projects, the rehabilitation of the Old City of Hebron and Slum Networking of Indore City sought to reclaim community space in environments strained by social, physical and environmental degradation. The Lepers Hospital created a sustainable and dignified shelter for a marginalized segment of society. The remaining projects were recognized for their contribution in evolving an architectural vocabulary in response to contemporary social and environmental challenges.

Award recipients:
*Rehabilitation of the Old City of Hebron
*Slum Networking of Indore, India by Himanshu Parikh
*Lepers Hospital, Chopda Taluka, Lasur, India by Per Christian Brynildsen and Jan Olav Jensen
*Salinger Residence, Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
*Tuwaiq Palace, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
*Alhamra Arts Council, Lahore, Pakistan, by Nayyar Ali Dada
*Vidhan Bhavan, Bhopal, India by Charles Correa

===Eighth (1999–2001)===
The 2001 Award Presentation Ceremony took place at the Citadel of Aleppo in Syria. During this cycle, the Chairman&#x27;s Award was given to Geoffrey Bawa to honour and celebrate his lifetime achievements in and contribution to the field of architecture.

Award recipients:
*New Life for Old Structures (various locations, Iran)
*Aït Iktel (Abadou, Morocco)
*Kahere Eila Poultry Farming School (Koliagbe, Guinea)
*Nubian Museum (Aswan, Egypt)
*SOS Children&#x27;s Village (Aqaba, Jordan), by Ja&#x27;afar Tuqan
*Olbia Social Centre of Akdeniz University (Antalya, Turkey), by Cengiz Bektaş
*Bagh-e-Ferdowsi (Tehran, Iran)
*Datai Hotel (Langkawi, Malaysia)

===Ninth (2002–2004)===
The 2004 award ceremony took place at the Humayun&#x27;s Tomb in New Delhi, India.
During the ninth cycle, 378 projects were nominated. Of these, 23 were site-reviewed, and the Master Jury selected seven award recipients. Notable among the recipients are the &quot;Sandbag Shelter Prototypes&quot;, developed by Nader Khalili to enable victims of natural disasters and war to build their own shelter using earth-filled sandbags and barbed wire. The resulting structures – made up of arches, domes and vaulted spaces built using superadobe techniques – provide earthquake resistance, shelter from hurricanes and flood resistance, while being aesthetically pleasing.

Other winning projects include a primary school in Gando, Burkina Faso, that combines high-caliber architectural design with local materials, techniques and community participation. The Bibliotheca Alexandria in Egypt and the Petronas Towers in Malaysia are examples of high-profile landmark buildings.

Award recipients:
*Bibliotheca Alexandrina, Alexandria, Egypt, by Norwegian architectural office Snøhetta
*Primary School, Gando, Burkina Faso, by Diébédo Francis Kéré
*Sandbag Shelter Prototypes (various locations), developed by Nader Khalili
*Restoration of Al-Abbas Mosque (Asnaf, Yemen)
*Old City of Jerusalem Revitalisation Programme, Jerusalem
*B2 House, Ayvacik, Turkey, by Han Tümertekin
*Petronas Towers, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, by César Pelli

===Tenth (2005–2007)===
The 2007 Award Presentation Ceremony was held at the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
This cycle marked the 30th anniversary of the award. A total of 343 projects were presented for consideration, and 27 were reviewed on site by international experts.

The award recipients were:
*Samir Kassir Square, Beirut, Lebanon
*Rehabilitation of the City of Shibam, Yemen
*Central Market, Koudougou, Burkina Faso
*University of Technology Petronas, Bandar Seri Iskandar, Malaysia, by Foster + Partners
*Restoration of the Amiriya Madrasa, Rada, Yemen
*Moulmein Rise Residential Tower, Singapore, by WOHA Architects
*Royal Netherlands Embassy, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, by Dick Van Gameren, Bjarne Mastenbroek
*Rehabilitation of the Walled City, Nicosia, Cyprus
*METI School in Rudrapur, Dinajpur, Bangladesh, by Anna Heringer

===Eleventh (2008–2010)===
The 2010 Award Presentation Ceremony was held at the Museum of Islamic Art, Doha, Qatar. A total of 401 projects were nominated of which 19 were shortlisted.

The Chairman&#x27;s Award went to Oleg Grabar.

The award recipients were:
* Wadi Hanifa Wetlands Project, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
*Revitalisation of nineteenth and early twentieth-century architectural heritage of Tunis, Tunisia
*Research Centre and Museum, Madinat Al-Zahra, Cordoba, Spain, by Nieto Sobejano Arquitectos
*Ipekyol Textile Factory, Edirne, Turkey
*Bridge School, Xiashi, Fujian, China
===Twelfth (2011–2013)===
The 2013 Award ceremony was held at the Castle of São Jorge in Lisbon, Portugal in September 2013.

The winning projects are:
* Emergency Salam Centre for Cardiac Surgery, Khartoum, Sudan, by Italian practice Studio Tamassociati, completed in 2010
*Revitalisation of Birzeit Historic Centre, Birzeit, Palestine
*Hassan II Bridge (Rabat-Salé Infrastructure Project, Rabat and Salé, Morocco
*Rehabilitation of Tabriz Bazaar, Tabriz, Iran
* Islamic Cemetery, Altach, Austria, by Austrian architect Bernardo Bader, inaugurated in 2012

===Thirteenth (2014–2016)===
The 2016 Award ceremony for the six winners was held in Al-Ain, UAE on 6 November 2016:
* Bait Ur Rouf Mosque in Uttara, Dhaka, Bangladesh by Marina Tabassum
* Friendship Centre in Gaibandha, Bangladesh by Kashef Mahboob Chowdhury / URBANA
* Hutong Children&#x27;s Library and Art Centre in Beijing China, by ZAO/standardarchitecture and Zhang Ke
* Superkilen in Copenhagen, Denmark by Bjarke Ingels Group, Topotek 1, and Superflex
* Tabiat Pedestrian Bridge in Tehran, Iran by Diba Tensile Architecture / Leila Araghian and Alireza Behzadi
* Issam Fares Institute in Beirut, Lebanon by Zaha Hadid Architects

===Fourteenth (2017–2019)===
The Award ceremony for the 2019 Aga Khan Award for Architecture was held on 13 September 2019 in Kazan, Republic of Tatarstan, Russia

* Revitalization of Muharraq in Muharraq, Bahrain
* Arcadia Education Project in South Kanarchor, Bangladesh
* The Palestinian Museum in Birzeit, West Bank
* Public Spaces Development Programme in Kazan, Republic of Tatarstan, Russia
* Alioune Diop University Teaching and Research Unit in Bambey, Senegal, by IDOM
* Wasit Wetland Centre in Sharjah, United Arab Emirates

===Fifteenth (2020–2022)===
The Award ceremony for the 2022 Aga Khan Award for Architecture was held on 31 October 2022 in Muscat, Oman:

* Urban River Spaces in Jhenaidah, Bangladesh
* Community Spaces in Rohingya Refugee Response in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh
* Banyuwangi International Airport, Blimbingsari in East Java, Indonesia
* Argo Contemporary Art Museum and Cultural Centre in Tehran, Iran
* Renovation of Niemeyer Guest House in Tripoli, Lebanon
* Kamanar Secondary School in Thionck Essyl, Senegal

==See also==

*Aga Khan Historic Cities Support Programme, another architectural initiative of the Aga Khan Trust for Culture.
*Islamic architecture
*List of architecture prizes

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
* Gerry Loughran, &quot;Better by design&quot;, 1989, Saudi Aramco World

==Further reading==
*

== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q389808" start="4" end="35" title="Aga Khan Award for Architecture" label="Aga Khan Award for Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q389808" start="37" end="41" title="Aga Khan Award for Architecture" label="AKAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243186" start="49" end="68" title="List of architecture prizes" label="architectural prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q311793" start="84" end="95" title="Aga Khan IV" label="Aga Khan IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="136" end="149" title="architecture" label="architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="214" end="230" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="261" end="267" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="269" end="283" title="social housing" label="social housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q718998" start="285" end="306" title="community development" label="community development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193950" start="324" end="335" title="Building restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q846574" start="337" end="342" title="reuse" label="reuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193950" start="347" end="364" title="Architectural conservation" label="area conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071177" start="377" end="393" title="landscape design" label="landscape design"/>
<link wikidata="Q188847" start="398" end="428" title="Environmental science" label="improvement of the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634431" start="464" end="490" title="Aga Khan Trust for Culture" label="Aga Khan Trust for Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q389812" start="516" end="544" title="Aga Khan Development Network" label="Aga Khan Development Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q560101" start="1103" end="1115" title="Hassan Fathy" label="Hassan Fathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333210" start="1157" end="1171" title="Rifat Chadirji" label="Rifat Chadirji"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="1184" end="1193" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610582" start="1205" end="1218" title="Geoffrey Bawa" label="Geoffrey Bawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914857" start="1277" end="1288" title="Oleg Grabar" label="Oleg Grabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243186" start="1409" end="1429" title="List of architecture awards" label="architectural prizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986688" start="1658" end="1675" title="built environment" label="built environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812451" start="1770" end="1784" title="Ismaili Imamat" label="seat of Imamat"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="1792" end="1812" title="Ismaili" label="Shia Ismaili Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="1919" end="1939" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="1943" end="1947" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1949" end="1955" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1964" end="1975" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200670" start="2012" end="2027" title="design thinking" label="design thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690953" start="2590" end="2609" title="Aga Khan University" label="Aga Khan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690948" start="2614" end="2631" title="Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi" label="teaching hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659648" start="2717" end="2732" title="visual language" label="visual language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914857" start="3210" end="3221" title="Oleg Grabar" label="Oleg Grabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3241" end="3248" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716318" start="3306" end="3345" title="MIT School of Architecture and Planning" label="MIT School of Architecture and Planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q25454231" start="3371" end="3383" title="Renata Holod" label="Renata Holod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216803" start="3480" end="3491" title="Hugh Casson" label="Hugh Casson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699145" start="3493" end="3507" title="Charles Correa" label="Charles Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q560101" start="3513" end="3525" title="Hassan Fathy" label="Hassan Fathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q311793" start="5452" end="5460" title="Aga Khan IV" label="Aga Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q325741" start="6840" end="6854" title="Homi K. Bhabha" label="Homi K. Bhabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="6856" end="6867" title="Frank Gehry" label="Frank Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47780" start="6869" end="6879" title="Zaha Hadid" label="Zaha Hadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568749" start="6881" end="6892" title="Glenn D. Lowry" label="Glenn Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q312827" start="6894" end="6907" title="Fumihiko Maki" label="Fumihiko Maki"/>
<link wikidata="Q308776" start="6909" end="6923" title="Herzog &amp;amp; de Meuron" label="Jacques Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q732502" start="6925" end="6942" title="Ricardo Legorreta" label="Ricardo Legoretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067023" start="6947" end="6963" title="Farshid Moussavi" label="Farshid Moussavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="6996" end="7002" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634431" start="7018" end="7044" title="Aga Khan Trust for Culture" label="Aga Khan Trust for Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="7289" end="7294" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208491" start="7306" end="7320" title="BBC World News" label="BBC World News"/>
<link wikidata="Q499527" start="7814" end="7830" title="Shalimar Gardens (Lahore)" label="Shalimar Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="7834" end="7840" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="7842" end="7850" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q560101" start="7910" end="7922" title="Hassan Fathy" label="Hassan Fathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="7988" end="8000" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944447" start="8022" end="8036" title="Muzharul Islam" label="Muzharul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="8166" end="8173" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="8175" end="8184" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172267" start="8252" end="8258" title="Bodrum" label="Bodrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q374071" start="8305" end="8331" title="Turkish Historical Society" label="Turkish Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="8333" end="8339" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="8372" end="8376" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="8416" end="8421" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="8477" end="8483" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079715" start="8493" end="8508" title="Qatar National Museum" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="8510" end="8514" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429287" start="8523" end="8531" title="Ālī Qāpū" label="Ali Qapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314130" start="8551" end="8564" title="Hasht Behesht" label="Hasht Behesht"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="8578" end="8585" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641113" start="8593" end="8605" title="Halawa House" label="Halawa House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664731" start="8624" end="8644" title="Abdel-Wahed El-Wakil" label="Abdel-Wahed El-Wakil"/>
<link wikidata="Q211227" start="8662" end="8667" title="Mopti" label="Mopti"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="8693" end="8699" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335640" start="8710" end="8722" title="Kuwait Towers" label="Water Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="8724" end="8735" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="8791" end="8796" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8815" end="8827" title="Rolf Gutbrod" label="Rolf Gutbrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q64412" start="8832" end="8841" title="Frei Otto" label="Frei Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339487" start="8873" end="8880" title="Nianing" label="Nianing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="8957" end="8971" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="8975" end="8983" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115100" start="9004" end="9025" title="Great Mosque of Niono" label="Great Mosque of Niono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409865" start="9033" end="9062" title="Šerefudin&amp;#x27;s White Mosque" label="Šerefudin&amp;#x27;s White Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418644" start="9096" end="9115" title="Ramses Wissa Wassef" label="Ramses Wissa Wassef"/>
<link wikidata="Q424411" start="9167" end="9181" title="Akyaka, Muğla" label="Akyaka Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q846502" start="9297" end="9313" title="Kuala Terengganu" label="Kuala Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180717" start="9345" end="9351" title="Sousse" label="Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q153592" start="9377" end="9413" title="King Abdulaziz International Airport" label="King Abdulaziz International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q62918" start="9440" end="9451" title="Fazlur Khan" label="Fazlur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983527" start="9453" end="9483" title="Tomb of Shah Rukn-e-Alam" label="Tomb of Shah Rukn-i-&amp;#x27;Alam"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="9524" end="9529" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q793784" start="9553" end="9564" title="Azem Palace" label="Azem Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277747" start="9646" end="9660" title="El Badi Palace" label="El Badi Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="9664" end="9673" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="9675" end="9682" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212231" start="9688" end="9693" title="Brief (architecture)" label="brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="10454" end="10458" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333210" start="10470" end="10484" title="Rifat Chadirji" label="Rifat Chadirji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="10569" end="10579" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="10590" end="10621" title="Mostar" label="Conservation of Mostar Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="10647" end="10676" title="Qibli Mosque" label="Restoration of Al-Aqsa Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="10678" end="10693" title="Temple Mount" label="Noble Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814679" start="10706" end="10718" title="Yaama Mosque" label="Yaama Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398837" start="10742" end="10754" title="Bhong Mosque" label="Bhong Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q277531" start="10864" end="10887" title="Citadel of Salah Ed-Din" label="Citadel of Salah Ed-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="11679" end="11684" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="11686" end="11693" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q730328" start="11714" end="11720" title="Asilah" label="Asilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188567" start="11740" end="11770" title="Grameen Bank" label="Grameen Bank Housing Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="11793" end="11803" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14499" start="11837" end="11846" title="Samarinda" label="Samarinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899" start="11848" end="11863" title="East Kalimantan" label="East Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199712" start="11908" end="11917" title="Çanakkale" label="Çanakkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11919" end="11925" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="11975" end="11981" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664731" start="12088" end="12108" title="Abdel-Wahed El-Wakil" label="Abdel-Wahed El-Wakil"/>
<link wikidata="Q497536" start="12162" end="12188" title="Jatiya Sangsad Bhaban" label="National Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494590" start="12190" end="12209" title="Sher-e-Bangla Nagar" label="Sher-e-Bangla Nagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="12211" end="12216" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="12218" end="12228" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q210134" start="12234" end="12244" title="Louis Kahn" label="Louis Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q860166" start="12246" end="12269" title="Arab World Institute" label="Institut du Monde Arabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q214317" start="12290" end="12301" title="Jean Nouvel" label="Jean Nouvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q634960" start="12306" end="12325" title="Architecture-Studio" label="Architecture-Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373583" start="12393" end="12408" title="Registan" label="Registan Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="12412" end="12421" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="12423" end="12433" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="12620" end="12628" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193234" start="12716" end="12742" title="Cultural Park for Children, Egypt" label="Cultural Park for Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="12792" end="12797" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568" start="12827" end="12837" title="Yogyakarta" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689560" start="12874" end="12891" title="Daraa Governorate" label="Daraa Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172267" start="12924" end="12930" title="Bodrum" label="Bodrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="12980" end="12991" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="12993" end="13005" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380756" start="13193" end="13240" title="Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India" label="Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="13242" end="13251" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891088" start="13264" end="13283" title="Bimal Patel (architect)" label="Bimal Hasmukh Patel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13351" end="13367" title="Surakarta Sunanate#Residences" label="Kraton Surakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803" start="13371" end="13380" title="Surakarta" label="Surakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764" start="13428" end="13435" title="Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471" start="13478" end="13494" title="San&amp;#x27;a&amp;#x27;" label="San&amp;#x27;a&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640079" start="13585" end="13594" title="Hyderabad, Pakistan" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q66616" start="13633" end="13639" title="Indore" label="Indore"/>
<link wikidata="Q380449" start="13651" end="13661" title="B.V. Doshi" label="B.V. Doshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816459" start="13739" end="13755" title="Menara Mesiniaga" label="Menara Mesiniaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q144829" start="13781" end="13804" title="Kaédi Regional Hospital" label="Kaédi Regional Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="13850" end="13873" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Grand National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q847677" start="13920" end="13927" title="Kaolack" label="Kaolack"/>
<link wikidata="Q756126" start="13970" end="14002" title="Middle East Technical University" label="Middle East Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q749497" start="14051" end="14073" title="Soekarno-Hatta International Airport" label="Soekarno-Hatta Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="14166" end="14174" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="14178" end="14185" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="14187" end="14192" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="14375" end="14388" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14405" end="14425" title="demographic pressure" label="demographic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="14427" end="14452" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="14476" end="14488" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35584069" start="14703" end="14721" title="Old City of Hebron" label="Old City of Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q35584069" start="15179" end="15197" title="Old City of Hebron" label="Old City of Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542280" start="15199" end="15214" title="Slum Networking" label="Slum Networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q66616" start="15218" end="15224" title="Indore" label="Indore"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="15226" end="15231" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765104" start="15232" end="15250" title="Himanshu Parikh" label="by Himanshu Parikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755453" start="15366" end="15371" title="Bangi, Malaysia" label="Bangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189710" start="15373" end="15381" title="Selangor" label="Selangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857153" start="15393" end="15406" title="Tuwaiq Palace" label="Tuwaiq Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="15408" end="15414" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q558496" start="15430" end="15450" title="Alhamra Arts Council" label="Alhamra Arts Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="15452" end="15458" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972516" start="15473" end="15488" title="Nayyar Ali Dada" label="Nayyar Ali Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727600" start="15490" end="15503" title="Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly" label="Vidhan Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="15505" end="15511" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q699145" start="15522" end="15536" title="Charles Correa" label="Charles Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q206231" start="15618" end="15635" title="Citadel of Aleppo" label="Citadel of Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="15639" end="15644" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610582" start="15704" end="15717" title="Geoffrey Bawa" label="Geoffrey Bawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="15886" end="15890" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663230" start="15904" end="15910" title="Abadou" label="Abadou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="15968" end="15974" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354677" start="15977" end="15990" title="Nubian Museum" label="Nubian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="15992" end="15997" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q462794" start="16007" end="16034" title="SOS Children&amp;#x27;s Villages" label="SOS Children&amp;#x27;s Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="16036" end="16041" title="Aqaba" label="Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156994" start="16055" end="16073" title="Ja&amp;#x27;afar Tuqan" label="Ja&amp;#x27;afar Tuqan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169939" start="16098" end="16116" title="Akdeniz University" label="Akdeniz University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487" start="16118" end="16125" title="Antalya" label="Antalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055988" start="16139" end="16152" title="Cengiz Bektaş" label="Cengiz Bektaş"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="16171" end="16177" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q273303" start="16199" end="16207" title="Langkawi" label="Langkawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189648" start="16286" end="16305" title="Humayun&amp;#x27;s Tomb" label="Humayun&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="16309" end="16318" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q584906" start="16556" end="16569" title="Nader Khalili" label="Nader Khalili"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681882" start="16636" end="16643" title="Refugee shelter" label="shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q754650" start="16772" end="16782" title="superadobe" label="superadobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q490069" start="16961" end="16966" title="List of cities in Burkina Faso" label="Gando"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="16968" end="16980" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q501851" start="17233" end="17256" title="Bibliotheca Alexandrina" label="Bibliotheca Alexandrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="17280" end="17289" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q511335" start="17311" end="17319" title="Snøhetta (company)" label="Snøhetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q490069" start="17337" end="17342" title="List of cities in Burkina Faso" label="Gando"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="17344" end="17356" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q99416" start="17361" end="17381" title="Diébédo Francis Kéré" label="Diébédo Francis Kéré"/>
<link wikidata="Q584906" start="17444" end="17457" title="Nader Khalili" label="Nader Khalili"/>
<link wikidata="Q793377" start="17575" end="17582" title="Ayvacık, Çanakkale" label="Ayvacik"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="17611" end="17626" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="17628" end="17640" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q309483" start="17655" end="17666" title="César Pelli" label="César Pelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="17745" end="17760" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221549" start="17983" end="18002" title="Samir Kassir Square" label="Samir Kassir Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q192518" start="18051" end="18057" title="Shibam" label="Shibam"/>
<link wikidata="Q460697" start="18082" end="18091" title="Koudougou" label="Koudougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096395" start="18107" end="18140" title="Universiti Teknologi Petronas" label="University of Technology Petronas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454630" start="18142" end="18162" title="Seri Iskandar" label="Bandar Seri Iskandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208016" start="18177" end="18194" title="Foster + Partners" label="Foster + Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746764" start="18215" end="18230" title="Amiriya Madrasa" label="Amiriya Madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="18278" end="18287" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q944660" start="18292" end="18296" title="WOHA" label="WOHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="18336" end="18347" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856" start="18435" end="18442" title="Nicosia" label="Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715478" start="18452" end="18463" title="METI Handmade School" label="METI School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377521" start="18467" end="18475" title="Rudrapur, Bangladesh" label="Rudrapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767076" start="18502" end="18515" title="Anna Heringer" label="Anna Heringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148353" start="18597" end="18631" title="Museum of Islamic Art, Doha" label="Museum of Islamic Art, Doha, Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914857" start="18737" end="18748" title="Oleg Grabar" label="Oleg Grabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595382" start="18780" end="18791" title="Wadi Hanifa" label="Wadi Hanifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="18818" end="18830" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="18915" end="18920" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="18922" end="18929" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211252" start="18959" end="18975" title="Madinat Al-Zahra" label="Madinat Al-Zahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="18986" end="18991" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15836823" start="18996" end="19022" title="Nieto Sobejano Arquitectos" label="Nieto Sobejano Arquitectos"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="19049" end="19055" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="19057" end="19063" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="19088" end="19094" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="19096" end="19101" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q636780" start="19168" end="19187" title="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Castle of São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="19191" end="19207" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098771" start="19256" end="19265" title="Emergency (NGO)" label="Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="19300" end="19308" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="19310" end="19315" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096250" start="19337" end="19356" title="Studio Tamassociati" label="Studio Tamassociati"/>
<link wikidata="Q212381" start="19420" end="19427" title="Birzeit" label="Birzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="19493" end="19498" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="19509" end="19516" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4399" start="19536" end="19549" title="Tabriz Bazaar" label="Tabriz Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="19551" end="19557" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q433697" start="19584" end="19590" title="Altach" label="Altach"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="19592" end="19599" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19623" end="19637" title=":de:Bernardo Bader" label="Bernardo Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q234600" start="19745" end="19751" title="Al Ain" label="Al-Ain"/>
<link wikidata="Q85744953" start="19779" end="19798" title="Bait Ur Rouf Mosque" label="Bait Ur Rouf Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346612" start="19802" end="19808" title="Uttara Thana" label="Uttara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="19810" end="19815" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q27451427" start="19831" end="19846" title="Marina Tabassum" label="Marina Tabassum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504370" start="19849" end="19866" title="Friendship (NGO)" label="Friendship Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131907" start="19870" end="19879" title="Gaibandha" label="Gaibandha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374223" start="19895" end="19919" title="Kashef Mahboob Chowdhury" label="Kashef Mahboob Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785284" start="19931" end="19976" title="Micro Yuan&amp;#x27;er Children&amp;#x27;s Library and Art Centre" label="Hutong Children&amp;#x27;s Library and Art Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q39608510" start="20027" end="20035" title="Zhang Ke (architect)" label="Zhang Ke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466525" start="20038" end="20048" title="Superkilen" label="Superkilen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481701" start="20075" end="20094" title="Bjarke Ingels Group" label="Bjarke Ingels Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691633" start="20123" end="20147" title="Tabiat Bridge" label="Tabiat Pedestrian Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830052" start="20195" end="20209" title="Leila Araghian" label="Leila Araghian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088042" start="20232" end="20253" title="Issam Fares Institute for Public Policy and International Affairs" label="Issam Fares Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064602" start="20276" end="20297" title="Zaha Hadid Architects" label="Zaha Hadid Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="20425" end="20430" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="20444" end="20453" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="20455" end="20461" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889313" start="20465" end="20491" title="Bahrain Pearling Trail" label="Revitalization of Muharraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q68635937" start="20515" end="20540" title="Arcadia Education Centre" label="Arcadia Education Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211128" start="20574" end="20596" title="The Palestinian Museum" label="The Palestinian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="20660" end="20665" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551371" start="20699" end="20749" title="Alioune Diop University of Bambey" label="Alioune Diop University Teaching and Research Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908851" start="20773" end="20777" title="IDOM (company)" label="IDOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q48789802" start="20780" end="20800" title="Wasit Wetland Centre" label="Wasit Wetland Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826" start="20958" end="20964" title="Muscat" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="20966" end="20970" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="21008" end="21018" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q598011" start="21096" end="21128" title="Banyuwangi International Airport" label="Banyuwangi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="21157" end="21166" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111939496" start="21169" end="21227" title="Argo Factory" label="Argo Contemporary Art Museum and Cultural Centre in Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="21229" end="21233" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="21283" end="21290" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="21336" end="21343" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690931" start="21360" end="21402" title="Aga Khan Historic Cities Support Programme" label="Aga Khan Historic Cities Support Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="21473" end="21493" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243186" start="21495" end="21522" title="List of architecture prizes" label="List of architecture prizes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577922" wikidata="Q3403801" url="?curid=577922" title="Ouvéa cave hostage taking">
<text>The Ouvéa cave hostage taking occurred from 22 April 1988 to 5 May 1988 on the island of Ouvéa, New Caledonia, a south Pacific archipelago under control of France. During the stand-off and seizure of a brigade of gendarmerie, members of an independence movement, the Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front, killed four gendarmes (including two unarmed) and took 27 unarmed gendarmes hostages (weapons were in the armory during the night), later also taking hostage a public prosecutor who had been sent to negotiate, seven members of the French GIGN military unit and a regular army lieutenant. They demanded talks with the French government about independence for New Caledonia from France. In previous years, about ten gendarmes had been killed in New Caledonia in connection with the independence movement, also some Kanaks had been killed by policiers and gendarmes as well like Richard Kamuda in 1975, Théodore Daye in 1980, Eloi Machoro and Marcel Nonaro in 1985 and a young Kanak of the Saint-Louis tribe in 1987.

The French government said it refused to negotiate with terrorists or agree to the group&#x27;s demands. It sent a joint hostage recovery team that consisted of:
* 12 from Groupe d&#x27;Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale (GIGN)
* 15 from Commando Hubert
* 30 from 11e régiment parachutiste de choc (covert unit part of the Directorate-General for External Security)
* 3 from Escadron Parachutiste d&#x27;Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale (EPIGN) 

Nineteen of the hostage-takers and two members of the hostage recovery team were killed in the assault. There were allegations that most of the dead hostage-takers had been summarily executed after being captured.

After having attacked the Gendarmes, the rebels retreated to a remote part of the island covered by deep jungle. Negotiations began between the government and hostage takers but were not effective. Some GIGN operators became hostages too as the government was trying to find a peaceful solution.

==Assault==

The operation was highly uncommon for the number of hostage takers (more than 30) and the size of the assault force and the location (a rugged jungle looking like New Guinea or Eniwetok).

The assault &quot;Operation Victor&quot; was initiated on 4 May at around 22:15. Around seventy-four operators moved into the forest towards the hostage location. The Kanak independentists numbered around 30 and were heavily armed (assault rifles, rifles and some heavy machine-guns).

The hostages had been located in Gossannah cave, a series of caves on Ouvéa Island. The assault team moved into their final assault positions roughly 300 meters from the cave entrance.

Commando Hubert operators were tasked to neutralize the AA52 7.5mm medium machine gun located at the entrance to the cave as it would pin down any approaching force and increase the risk of the hostages being harmed. 
- The 11e choc was to neutralize other Kanak positions located to the south. 
- A joint GIGN and Commando Hubert team would approach the entrance to the cave where hostages were located. 

The attack started at 06:15 but assault teams soon understood that starting positions were not accurate, leading to some delays as the terrain was often impassable. A Puma helicopter that was supposed to provide a noise distraction was three minutes late and 300 metres off target. As a result, the separatists were warned of the assault and had time to pull back inside the caves. Some Kanak sentries spotted the approaching assault team who had moved further north than they should have and opened fire, wounding a Commando Hubert operator. Another operator shot and killed the sentry that had fired. Another assault force member was killed as he crossed the open ground in front of the cave. The Commando Hubert team then cleared the area in front of the machine gun position with flamethrowers. During the one-hour fight, two operators from 11th Choc (Adjudant Régis Pedrazza and Private Jean-Yves Véron) and twelve independentists were killed.

The hostages managed to hide at the bottom of the cave in the confusion and prevented Kanaks from entering this part of the cave (as a gun had been smuggled to them during the negotiations). The Kanak group surrendered but, by the end of the assault, nineteen hostage-takers and two members of the military had been killed. All the hostages were saved. 

According to a later report of Captain Philippe Legorjus, then GIGN leader: &quot;Some acts of barbarity have been committed by the French military in contradiction with their military duty&quot;. In the post-mortems, it appeared that 3 of the Kanak activists had been executed and the leader of the hostage-takers, Alphonse Dianou, who was severely injured by a gunshot in the leg, had been left without medical care, and died some hours later. Prior to this report, Captain Philippe Legorjus was accused by many of the GIGN agents who took part in the operation of weaknesses in command and to have had &quot;dangerous absences&quot; (some even said he fled) in the final stages of the operation. He was forced to resign from the GIGN after this operation, since nobody wanted him as chief or to fight under him.

The military authorities have always denied the version of events given by Captain Philippe Legorjus. Following a command investigation, Jean-Pierre Chevènement, Minister of Defence of the Michel Rocard government, noted that &quot;no part of the investigation revealed that there had been summary executions&quot;. However, after his capture Alphonse Dianou was left without treatment for four hours with a bullet in the knee, his transfusion apparently torn off by a soldier. After his transfer, he died. The results of his autopsy were clear: the independence leader was beaten up. In addition, according to some participants of the operation interviewed by &quot;Le Figaro&quot;, no shots were heard in the area after the fighting ended.

==&quot;Rebellion&quot; film==
The 2011 docudrama film &quot;Rebellion&quot; was based on the Ouvéa cave hostage crisis, as told from the point of view of the lead hostage negotiator.

==See also==

*List of hostage crises
*Bernard Pons, French Minister for Overseas Territories at the time, who dealt with the matter.

== References ==
*
*
*

==External links==
* A drama of ambiguity: Ouvea 1988-89, Journal of Pacific History, June, 1997 by Jean Guiart, archived from the original on 4 May 2008
* Pacific Magazine: New Caledonia Marks 20th Anniversary Of Ouvea Tragedy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3403801" start="4" end="29" title="Ouvéa cave hostage taking" label="Ouvéa cave hostage taking"/>
<link wikidata="Q9736" start="89" end="94" title="Ouvéa" label="Ouvéa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="96" end="109" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="156" end="162" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="240" end="261" title="independence movement" label="independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723564" start="267" end="312" title="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front" label="Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="326" end="335" title="Gendarmerie" label="gendarmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481" start="552" end="556" title="GIGN" label="GIGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="757" end="770" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481" start="1201" end="1255" title="National Gendarmerie Intervention Group" label="Groupe d&amp;#x27;Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1273" end="1288" title="Commandos Marine#Commando Hubert" label="Commando Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q171605" start="1299" end="1332" title="11e régiment parachutiste de choc" label="11e régiment parachutiste de choc"/>
<link wikidata="Q335827" start="1358" end="1399" title="Directorate-General for External Security" label="Directorate-General for External Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057764" start="1410" end="1479" title="Parachute Intervention Squadron of the National Gendarmerie" label="Escadron Parachutiste d&amp;#x27;Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2523" end="2537" title="Gossannah cave" label="Gossannah cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655796" start="2560" end="2572" title="Ouvéa Island" label="Ouvéa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q280565" start="2732" end="2736" title="AA-52 machine gun" label="AA52"/>
<link wikidata="Q794586" start="3250" end="3265" title="Aérospatiale SA 330 Puma" label="Puma helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45183" start="3867" end="3879" title="flamethrower" label="flamethrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="4592" end="4604" title="autopsies" label="post-mortems"/>
<link wikidata="Q736502" start="5341" end="5364" title="Jean-Pierre Chevènement" label="Jean-Pierre Chevènement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12946" start="5393" end="5406" title="Michel Rocard" label="Michel Rocard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="5494" end="5511" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5547" end="5562" title="Alphonse Dianou" label="Alphonse Dianou"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="5871" end="5880" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="5987" end="5996" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062814" start="6008" end="6017" title="Rebellion (2011 film)" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623737" start="6147" end="6169" title="List of hostage crises" label="List of hostage crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898459" start="6171" end="6183" title="Bernard Pons" label="Bernard Pons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577923" wikidata="Q203068" url="?curid=577923" title="James Alan Gardner">
<text>James Alan Gardner (born January 10, 1955) is a Canadian science fiction author.

==Early life and education==
Born in Simcoe, Ontario, he attended the University of Waterloo, where he published his first story, &quot;The Phantom of the Operator&quot;, in 1984.

==Career==
Gardner has published science fiction short stories in a range of periodicals, including &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction&quot; and &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. 

He has written a number of novels in a &quot;League of Peoples&quot; universe in which humans encounter highly advanced aliens that define murderers as &quot;dangerous non-sentients&quot; and kill them if they try to leave their solar system.

He has also explored themes of gender in novels including &quot;Commitment Hour&quot; in which people reaching adulthood must choose their gender, and &quot;Vigilant&quot;, in which group marriages are traditional.

Gardner is also an educator and technical writer, and published the textbook &quot;Learning UNIX&quot; in 1991.

==Awards==

In 1989, Gardner&#x27;s short story &quot;The Children of Creche&quot; was awarded the Grand Prize in the Writers of the Future contest. Two years later his story &quot;Muffin Explains Teleology to the World at Large&quot; won a Prix Aurora Award. His &quot;Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream&quot; won an Aurora and was nominated for both the Nebula and Hugo Awards.

==Science fiction publications==
Source:

===Lara Croft, Tomb Raider series===
* No. 3 &quot;Lara Croft and the Man of Bronze&quot;

===League of Peoples universe===

* &quot;Commitment Hour&quot; (1998) 
* &quot;Trapped&quot; (2002)
* Festina Ramos series:
# &quot;Expendable&quot; (1997) 
# &quot;Vigilant&quot; (1999)
# &quot;Hunted&quot; (2000)
# &quot;Ascending&quot; (2001)
# &quot;Radiant&quot; (2004)

===Short story collections===
* &quot;Gravity Wells&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Organisms&quot; (2018)

=== The Dark vs. Spark ===
* &quot;All Those Explosions Were Someone Else&#x27;s Fault&quot; (2017)
* &quot;They Promised Me the Gun Wasn&#x27;t Loaded&quot; (2018)
===Anthology===
*&quot;Tesseracts Twenty: Compostela&quot; with Spider Robinson (2017)

==See also==
* List of science fiction authors
* List of University of Waterloo people
* Sex in Science Fiction

== References ==
==External links==
* Official website
* The Two Solitudes: An Interview with James Alan Gardner
* Challenging Destiny: James Alan Gardner Explains Himself to the World at Large
* Strange Horizons Interview: James Alan Gardner</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203068" start="0" end="18" title="James Alan Gardner" label="James Alan Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="57" end="72" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054408" start="119" end="134" title="Simcoe, Ontario" label="Simcoe, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="152" end="174" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="369" end="412" title="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="429" end="444" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509083" start="499" end="516" title="League of Peoples" label="League of Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152900" start="762" end="777" title="Commitment Hour" label="Commitment Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928910" start="855" end="863" title="Vigilant (novel)" label="Vigilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038511" start="1145" end="1166" title="Writers of the Future" label="Writers of the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404447" start="1268" end="1285" title="Prix Aurora Awards" label="Prix Aurora Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="1415" end="1421" title="Nebula Awards" label="Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="1426" end="1437" title="Hugo Awards" label="Hugo Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152900" start="1615" end="1630" title="Commitment Hour" label="Commitment Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835614" start="1653" end="1660" title="Trapped (Gardner novel)" label="Trapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420997" start="1706" end="1716" title="Expendable" label="Expendable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928910" start="1739" end="1747" title="Vigilant (novel)" label="Vigilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386156" start="1769" end="1775" title="Hunted (Gardner novel)" label="Hunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803812" start="1797" end="1806" title="Ascending" label="Ascending"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280304" start="1828" end="1835" title="Radiant (novel)" label="Radiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q106346524" start="1982" end="2033" title="All Those Explosions Were Someone Else&amp;#x27;s Fault" label="All Those Explosions Were Someone Else&amp;#x27;s Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136807" start="2215" end="2246" title="List of science fiction authors" label="List of science fiction authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079758" start="2249" end="2286" title="List of University of Waterloo people" label="List of University of Waterloo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458476" start="2289" end="2311" title="Sex in Science Fiction" label="Sex in Science Fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577928" wikidata="Q4683676" url="?curid=577928" title="Admiral Duncan (pub)">
<text>The Admiral Duncan is a public house in Old Compton Street, Soho, in central London that is well known as one of Soho&#x27;s oldest gay pubs.

In 1999, the pub was bombed by neo-Nazi David Copeland, resulting in three people being killed and 83 being injured.

==Etymology==
The pub is named after Admiral Adam Duncan, who defeated the Dutch fleet at the Battle of Camperdown in 1797.

==History==
=== Early years ===
The Admiral Duncan has been trading since at least 1832.

In June of that year, Dennis Collins, a wooden-legged Irish ex-sailor living at the pub, was charged with high treason for throwing stones at King William IV at Ascot Racecourse. Collins was convicted and sentenced to be hanged, drawn and quartered, as the medieval punishment for high treason was then still in effect. However, his sentence was quickly commuted to life imprisonment and he was subsequently transported to Australia.

In December 1881, a customer received eight years&#x27; penal servitude for various offences in connection with his ejection from the Admiral Duncan public house by keeper William Gordon. In 1887, the Algerian Coffee Stores was established next door to the Admiral Duncan.

During the 1920s, the Admiral Duncan was frequented by mob boss Charles &quot;Darby&quot; Sabini and was a gathering place for members of his gang. On 4 February 1930 there was a fierce brawl in the pub after six members of the Sabini gang&#x27;s rivals, the Hoxton Gang, entered and attacked two of the Sabinis who were drinking there. Both men were slashed with a broken drinking glass; one – George Seawell – was badly beaten by four of the Hoxton gang. Around £200 worth of damage was caused. The fracas was broken up by police and the six Hoxton Gang members were arrested. Three of them – brothers John and Arthur Phillips, and John Daly – were later sentenced to five years, three years and 12 months in prison

In 1953, Dylan Thomas lost the only hand-written copy of his famous radio drama &quot;Under Milk Wood&quot; in the pub, leaving it there during the course of a drinking binge. It was later found by his radio producer, Douglas Cleverdon, who managed to retrace Thomas&#x27; steps.

By the 1980s, the Admiral Duncan had become known as a gay pub, although it was not exclusively so and was still attracting a diverse clientele.

=== Bombing ===


At around 6:05 pm on Friday 30 April 1999, a bomb in a sports bag was planted in the Admiral Duncan by Neo-Nazi, David Copeland. It was the third bomb he had planted in London in a one-man campaign intended to stir up ethnic and homophobic tensions.

Copeland&#x27;s previous bomb attacks, on 17 April in Brixton and on 24 April in Hanbury Street in Whitechapel, had made Londoners wary. The unattended bag aroused the suspicions of people in the pub, but the bag exploded at 6:37 pm just as it was being investigated by the pub manager, Mark Taylor. Three people died and 83 suffered burns and injuries – four of the injured needed amputations.

Copeland was still in the area and was close enough to hear the explosion. Police had identified him as a suspect around an hour before he planted the bomb. He was arrested at his home later that evening.

A large open air meeting was spontaneously organised in Soho Square on the Sunday following the attack, attended by thousands. Among the speeches was one from the Metropolitan Police Assistant Commissioner who undertook to maintain a crime scene van outside the pub to take witness statements and gather evidence until the perpetrator was found; the van would be staffed entirely with openly gay and lesbian police officers. This marked a turning point for the previously often tempestuous relationship between the LGBT community and the Metropolitan Police.

There is a memorial chandelier with an inscription and a plaque in the bar to commemorate those killed and injured in the blast.

The playwright Jonathan Cash, then working for &quot;Gay Times&quot;, was among the injured. He later used the experience as the basis for his play, &quot;The First Domino&quot;, about a fictional terrorist being interviewed by a psychiatrist in a top-security prison.

Assistant bar manager David Morley 37, from Chiswick, west London, was one of those injured in the bombing and was murdered in London after a robbery or homophobic attack on the morning of 30 October 2004. He and a friend were badly beaten near London&#x27;s Hungerford Bridge and Waterloo station on the South Bank. In December 2005, four youths were found guilty of Morley&#x27;s manslaughter. Reece Sargeant (21), Darren Case (18) and David Blenman (17), all from Kennington, South London, were sentenced to 12 years each. A fifteen-year-old girl, Chelsea O&#x27;Mahoney (aged fourteen at the time of the incident) was sentenced to an 8-year custodial sentence. The jury had returned a verdict of manslaughter as they are permitted to do.

=== Rainbow flags controversy ===
In late 2005, Westminster City Council ordered the Admiral Duncan and all other LGBT bars and gay businesses that operated in its jurisdiction, including those in Soho and Covent Garden, to remove their pride flags. The council claimed that the flags constituted advertising, which was forbidden by its local development plan, and said businesses would need to apply for advertising permits to fly the flags. Some businesses who applied to fly flags had their applications refused. Following media allegations of homophobia in the council, the &quot;I Love Soho&quot; campaign and intense pressure from the then Mayor of London, Ken Livingstone, the Council reversed its policy, allowing businesses to fly rainbow flags without applying for permission.

== Ownership ==
In 2004 the pub was bought from the Scottish &amp; Newcastle Brewery by the Tattershall Castle Group (TCG). In 2015, it was acquired by Stonegate Pub Company as one of 53 pubs purchased from TCG.

==See also==

*Violence against LGBT people

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4683676" start="4" end="18" title="Admiral Duncan (pub)" label="Admiral Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="24" end="36" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018322" start="40" end="58" title="Old Compton Street" label="Old Compton Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010" start="60" end="64" title="Soho" label="Soho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="132" end="139" title="gay bar" label="gay pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q61968052" start="160" end="170" title="1999 London nail bombings" label="was bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="174" end="182" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61968052" start="183" end="197" title="David Copeland" label="David Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335334" start="298" end="317" title="Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan of Camperdown" label="Admiral Adam Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q577081" start="355" end="375" title="Battle of Camperdown" label="Battle of Camperdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="582" end="594" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="618" end="633" title="King William IV" label="King William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q723336" start="637" end="653" title="Ascot Racecourse" label="Ascot Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="697" end="724" title="hanged, drawn and quartered" label="hanged, drawn and quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q913919" start="884" end="908" title="Convicts in Australia" label="transported to Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117193189" start="1112" end="1134" title="Algerian Coffee Stores" label="Algerian Coffee Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082310" start="1249" end="1281" title="Charles Sabini" label="Charles &amp;quot;Darby&amp;quot; Sabini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787285" start="1444" end="1455" title="Hoxton Gang" label="Hoxton Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q191023" start="1913" end="1925" title="Dylan Thomas" label="Dylan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497140" start="1990" end="2005" title="Under Milk Wood" label="Under Milk Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301339" start="2122" end="2139" title="Douglas Cleverdon" label="Douglas Cleverdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="2240" end="2247" title="gay bar" label="gay pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="2452" end="2460" title="Neo-Nazism" label="Neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61968052" start="2462" end="2476" title="David Copeland" label="David Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137997" start="2530" end="2546" title="Lone wolf attack" label="one-man campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="2567" end="2573" title="ethnic minority" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="2578" end="2588" title="homophobia" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146690" start="2654" end="2661" title="Brixton" label="Brixton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574269" start="2681" end="2695" title="Hanbury Street" label="Hanbury Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q124539" start="2699" end="2710" title="Whitechapel" label="Whitechapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705335" start="3258" end="3269" title="Soho Square" label="Soho Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="3365" end="3384" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="3587" end="3593" title="coming out" label="openly"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="3594" end="3597" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="3602" end="3609" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="3717" end="3731" title="LGBT community" label="LGBT community"/>
<link wikidata="Q191709" start="3782" end="3792" title="chandelier" label="chandelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="3819" end="3825" title="Commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q575088" start="3945" end="3954" title="Gay Times" label="Gay Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734118" start="4047" end="4063" title="The First Domino" label="The First Domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="4089" end="4098" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="4122" end="4134" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237734" start="4184" end="4196" title="Killing of David Morley" label="David Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="4443" end="4459" title="London Waterloo station" label="Waterloo station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="4544" end="4556" title="manslaughter" label="manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q146696" start="4629" end="4639" title="Kennington" label="Kennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="4641" end="4653" title="South London" label="South London"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="4831" end="4835" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q30313995" start="4862" end="4874" title="Manslaughter in English law" label="manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989145" start="4953" end="4977" title="Westminster City Council" label="Westminster City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742173" start="5033" end="5047" title="Pink pound" label="gay businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010" start="5102" end="5106" title="Soho" label="Soho"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="5111" end="5124" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q51401" start="5142" end="5153" title="Rainbow flag (LGBT movement)" label="pride flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000360" start="5242" end="5264" title="Town and country planning in the United Kingdom" label="local development plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="5551" end="5566" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="5568" end="5583" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777807" start="5745" end="5769" title="Scottish &amp;amp; Newcastle" label="Scottish &amp;amp; Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619176" start="5845" end="5866" title="Stonegate Pub Company" label="Stonegate Pub Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q583261" start="5921" end="5949" title="Violence against LGBT people" label="Violence against LGBT people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577929" wikidata="Q713866" url="?curid=577929" title="Lion dance">
<text>Lion dance () is a form of traditional dance in Chinese culture and other Asian countries in which performers mimic a lion&#x27;s movements in a lion costume to bring good luck and fortune. The Lion dance is usually performed during the Chinese New Year and other traditional, cultural and religious festivals. It may also be performed at important occasions such as business opening events, special celebrations or wedding ceremonies, or may be used to honour special guests by the Chinese communities.

The Chinese Lion dance is normally operated by two dancers, one of whom manipulates the head while the other manipulates the tail of the lion. It is distinguishable from the dragon dance which is performed by many people who hold the long sinuous body of the dragon on poles. Some fundamental movements of the Lion dance can be found in Chinese martial arts, and it is commonly performed to a vigorous drumbeat with gongs and cymbals.

There are many forms of Lion dance in China, but two main forms of the Lion dance are the Northern Lion and the Southern Lion. Around the world, especially in Southeast Asia, the Southern Lion predominates as it was spread by the Chinese diaspora communities who are historically mostly of Southern Chinese origin. Versions of Lion dance related to the Chinese lion are also found in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam. Besides the Chinese-based Lion dance, other forms of Lion dance also exist in India, Indonesia, and East Africa.

==History==
There has been an old tradition in China of dancers wearing masks to resemble animals or mythical beasts since antiquity, and performances described in ancient texts such as &quot;Shujing&quot; where wild beasts and phoenix danced may have been masked dances. In Qin dynasty sources, dancers performing exorcism rituals were described as wearing bearskin mask, and it was also mentioned in Han dynasty texts that &quot;mime people&quot; (象人) performed as fish, dragons, and phoenixes.

However, the animal lion is not native to China (a species found in Northeast China &quot;Panthera youngi&quot; had long become extinct), and the Lion dance therefore has been suggested to have originated outside of China from countries such as India or Persia, and introduced via Central Asia. According to ethnomusicologist Laurence Picken, the Chinese word for lion itself, &quot;shi&quot; (獅, written as 師 in the early periods), may have been derived from the Persian word &quot;šer&quot;. The earliest use of the word &quot;shizi&quot; meaning lion first appeared in Han dynasty texts and had strong association with Central Asia (an even earlier but obsolete term for lion was &quot;suanni&quot; (狻麑 or ), and lions were presented to the Han court by emissaries from Central Asia and the Parthian Empire.

Detailed descriptions of Lion dance appeared during the Tang dynasty and it was already recognized by writers and poets then as a foreign dance, however, Lion dance may have been recorded in China as early as the third century AD where &quot;lion acts&quot; were referred to by a Three Kingdoms scholar Meng Kang in a commentary on &quot;Hanshu&quot;. In the early periods, it had association with Buddhism: it was recorded in a Northern Wei text, &quot;Description of Buddhist Temples in Luoyang&quot; (洛陽伽藍記), that a parade for a statue of Buddha of a temple was led by a lion to drive away evil spirits. An alternative suggestion is therefore that the dance may have developed from a local Chinese tradition that appropriated the Buddhist symbolism of lion.
There were different versions of the dance in the Tang dynasty. In the Tang court, the Lion dance was called the &quot;Great Peace Music&quot; (太平樂, &quot;Taiping yue&quot;) or the &quot;Lion dance of the Five Directions&quot; (五方師子舞) where five large lions of different colours and expressing different moods were each led and manipulated on rope by two persons, and accompanied by 140 singers. In another account, the 5 lions were described as each over 3 metres tall and each had 12 &quot;lion lads&quot;, who may tease the lions with red whisks. Another version of the Lion dance was described by the Tang poet Bai Juyi in his poem &quot;Western Liang Arts&quot; (西凉伎), where the dance was performed by two &quot;hu&quot; (胡, meaning here non-Han people from Central Asia) dancers who wore a lion costume made of a wooden head, a silk tail and furry body, with eyes gilded with gold and teeth plated with silver as well as ears that moved, a form that resembles today&#x27;s Lion dance. By the eighth century, this Lion dance had reached Japan. During the Song dynasty the Lion dance was commonly performed in festivals and it was known as the Northern Lion during the Southern Song.

The Southern Lion is a later development in the south of China originating in the Guangdong province. There are a number of myths associated with the origin of the Southern Lion: one story relates that the dance originated as a celebration in a village where a mythical monster called Nian was successfully driven away; another has it that the Qianlong Emperor dreamt of an auspicious animal while on a tour of Southern China, and ordered that the image of the animal be recreated and used during festivals. However it is likely that the Southern Lion of Guangzhou is an adaptation of the Northern Lion to local myths and characteristics, perhaps during the Ming dynasty.

==Regional types==
The two main types of Lion dance in China are the Northern and Southern Lions. There are however also a number of local forms of Lion dance in different regions of China, and some of these lions may have significant differences in appearance, for example the Green or Hokkien Lion (青獅, &quot;Qing Shi&quot;) and the Taiwanese or Yutien Lion (明獅, &quot;Ming Shi&quot;), popular with the Hokkien and the Taiwanese people.

Other ethnic minorities groups in China also have their own Lion dances, for example, the Lion dance of the Muslim minority in Shenqiu County in Henan called the Wen Lion, the Yongdeng Lion dance in Yongdeng County, Gansu, and the Hakka Lion – popular with the Hakka people. There are related forms of dances with mask figures that represent mythical creatures such as the Qilin and the Pixiu. The Qilin dance and the Pixiu dance are also most commonly performed by the Hakka people who were originally from the Central China, but have largely settled in the south of China and southeast Asia in modern times. Various forms of Lion dance are also found widely in East Asian countries such as Japan, Korea, Vietnam, as well as among the communities in the Himalayan region.

Chinese Lion dances usually involve two dancers but may also be performed by one. The larger lions manipulated by two persons may be referred to as &quot;great lions&quot; (太獅), and those manipulated by one person &quot;little lions&quot; (少獅). The performances may also be broadly divided into civil (文獅) and martial (武獅) styles. The civil style emphasizes the character and mimics and behaviour of the lion, while the martial style is focused on acrobatics and energetic movements.

===Chinese Northern Lion===

The Chinese Northern Lion () Dance is often performed as a pair of male and female lions in the north of China. Northern lions may have a gold-painted wooden head and shaggy red and yellow hair with a red bow on its head to indicate a male lion, or a green bow (sometimes green hair) to represent a female. There are however regional variations of the lion. Regions with Lion dance troupes include Ninghai in Ningbo, Xushui in Hebei province, Dalian in Liaoning province, and Beijing. There are a number of variations of the Lion dance performance, for example the Heavenly Tower Lion dance () from Xiangfen County in Shanxi is a performance whereby a number of lions climb up a tall tower structure constructed out of wooden stools, and there are also high-wire acts involving lions. 

It is said that the Northern lion may have originated from Northern Wei, when Hu dancers performed the dance for the emperor, and it was referred to as Northern Lion by the Song dynasty. Northern lions resemble Pekingese or Foo Dogs/Fu Dogs, and their movements are lifelike during a performance. Acrobatics is very common, with stunts like lifts, or balancing on a tiered platform or on a giant ball. Northern lions sometimes appear as a family, with two large &quot;adult&quot; lions and a pair of small &quot;young&quot; lions. There are usually two performers in one adult lion, and one in the young lion. There may also be a &quot;warrior&quot; character who holds a spherical object and leads the lions.

===Chinese Southern Lion===

The Chinese Southern Lion () or Cantonese Lion dance originated from Guangdong and is the best known lion outside of China. The Southern Lion has a single horn, and is associated with the legend of a mythical monster called Nian. The lion&#x27;s head is traditionally constructed using papier-mâché over a bamboo frame covered with gauze, then painted and decorated with fur. Its body is made of durable layered cloth also trimmed with fur. Newer lions, however, may be made with modern materials such as aluminium instead of bamboo and are lighter. Newer versions may also apply shinier modern material over the traditional lacquer such as sequin or laser sticker.
There are two main styles of Southern Lion: the Fut San or Fo Shan (), and the Hok San or He Shan (), both named after their place of origin. Other minor styles include the Fut-Hok (a hybrid of Fut San and Hok San created in Singapore by Kong Chow Wui Koon in the 1960s), and the Jow Ga (performed by practitioners of Jow family style kung fu). The different lion types can be identified from the design of the lion head.

Fo Shan is the style adopted by many kung fu schools. It uses kung fu moves and postures to help with its movements and stances, and only the most advanced students are allowed to perform. Traditionally, the Fo Shan lion has bristles instead of fur, and is heavier than the modern ones now popularly used. All traditional Fo Shan lions have pop-up teeth, tongue, and eyes that swivel left and right. On the back are gold-foiled rims and a gilded collar where the troupe&#x27;s name may be sewn on. It has a very long tail with a white underside, and is often attached with bells. The designs of the tail are also more square and contain a diamond pattern going down the back. It has a high forehead, curved lips and a sharp horn on its head. Traditional Fo Shan lions are ornate in appearance, a number of regional styles have developed around the world. The newer styles of Fo Shan lions replace all the bristles with fur and the tails are shorter. The eyes are fixed in place, and the tongue and teeth do not pop up. The tail is curvier in design, does not have a diamond pattern, and lacks bells.
The founder of He Shan style is the &quot;Canton Lion King&quot; Feng Gengzhang () in the early 20th century. Feng was born in a village in He Shan county, Guangdong. He developed his version of Lion dance, and introducing new techniques by studying and mimicking the movement of cats, such as &quot;catching mouse, playing, catching birds, high escape, lying low and rolling&quot;. He and his disciples also made changes to the lion head; its forehead is lower, its horn rounded and it has a duck beak mouth with flat lips, the body also has more eye-catching colours. Together with new dance steps and footwork, Feng created a rhythm called the &quot;Seven Star Drum&quot;.

In the early 1920s, the He Shan Lion dance was performed when Sun Yat-sen assumed office in Guangzhou, creating a stir. The He Shan lion performers were invited to perform in many places within China and Southeast Asia during celebratory festivals. The style became popular in Singapore; the He Shan lion acquired the title of &quot;Lion King of Kings&quot;, with a &quot;king&quot; character () added on its forehead. The Singapore Hok San Association made further changes by modifying the design of the lion head, shortening its body, and creating a new drumbeat for the dance.

Different colors are used to signify the age and character of the lions. The lion with white fur is considered to be the oldest of the lions, while the lion with golden yellow fur is the middle child. The black lion is considered the youngest lion, and the movement of this lion should be fast like a young child or a headstrong teenager. The colors may also represent the character of the lion: the golden lion represents liveliness, the red lion courage, and the green lion friendship. There are also three lion types that represent three historical characters in the classic Romance of the Three Kingdoms who were blood oath brothers sworn to restore the Han dynasty:
* The &quot;Liu Bei&quot; (Cantonese: &quot;Lau Pei&quot;) lion is the eldest of the three brothers and has a yellow (actually imperial yellow as he became the first emperor of the Shu-Han Kingdom) based face with a white beard and fur (to denote his wisdom). It sports a multicolored tail signifying the colors of the five elements. There are three coins on the collar. This lion is used by schools with an established martial art master (&quot;Sifu&quot;) or organization and is known as the &quot;Rui Shi&quot; ().
* The &quot;Guan Gong&quot; (Cantonese: &quot;Kwan Kung&quot;) lion has a red based face, black bristles, with a long black beard (as he was also known as the &quot;Duke with the Beautiful Beard&quot;). The tail is red and trimmed with black. He is known as the second brother and sports two coins on the collar. This Lion is known as the &quot;Xing Shi&quot; ().
* The &quot;Zhang Fei&quot; (Cantonese: &quot;Cheung Fei&quot;) lion has a black based face with short black beard, small ears, and black bristles. The tail is black and white. Traditionally this lion also had bells attached to the body. Being the youngest of the three brothers, there is only a single coin on the collar. This Lion is known as the &quot;Dou Shi&quot; () because Zhang Fei had a quick temper and loved to fight. This lion is used by clubs that were just starting out or by those wishing to make a challenge.

Later three more Lions were added to the group. The green-faced lion represented Zhao Yun or Zhao (Cantonese: Chiu) Zi Long. The green lion has a green tail, black beard and fur, and an iron horn. Often called the fourth brother, this lion is also called the Heroic Lion because Zhao was said to ride through Cao Cao&#x27;s million man army to rescue Liu Bei&#x27;s infant and fight his way back out. The yellow lion has yellow/orange face and body with white or silver beard and fur, representing Huang Zhong (Cantonese: Wong Tsung), who was given this color when Liu Bei rose to become Emperor. This lion is called the Righteous Lion. The white lion is known as Ma Chao (Cantonese: Ma Chiu), he was assigned this color because he always wore a white armband in his battle against the ruler of Wei, Cao Cao, to signify that he was in mourning for his father and brother who had been murdered by Cao Cao. This lion is therefore also known as the funeral lion, and is never used except for the funeral of a Master or an important head of a group. In such cases the lion is usually burned right after use as it is considered symbolically inauspicious or ill-fated to be kept around. This lion is sometimes confused with the silver lion which sometimes has a whitish colouring. These three along with Guan Yu and Zhang Fei were known as the &quot;Five Tiger Generals of Shun,&quot; each representing one of the colors of the five elements.

===Green Lion===

Green Lion (青狮) is the Lion dance form associated with the Hokkien-speaking people of Fujian and Taiwan. It is similar to the Chinese southern Lion dance, except that the lion is mainly green in color and has a distinct round flat mask. It is believed to have originated in the anti-Manchu movements after the fall of the Ming dynasty in 1644. The word &quot;green lion&quot; in the Hokkien language sounds similar to &quot;Qing army&quot; (清师). During training sessions for fighters, the Green lion was fitted with blades symbolizing the Manchurian army and would become a moving target for trainees. It is said that after the fall of Qing dynasty in 1912, martial arts expert Gan De Yuan (干德源) organized a performance in Quanzhou where the Green Lion was dismembered to represent the overthrow of the Qing dynasty. From that point onwards, the Green Lion is used without the blades and performed for cultural and ritual purposes.

===Qilin dance===
A related form of dance is the Qilin or Kirin dance, which is traditionally performed by the Hakka people. The Qilin is a mythical creature believed to symbolize good fortune, prosperity, and harmony, and performers wear ornate Qilin costumes with vibrant colors and intricate details to resemble the mythical creature. The Qilin costume features a single horn in the middle, with finned ridges lined with fur. The dance involves graceful and synchronized movements that mimic cats and tigers. The performance routine typically tells of a Qilin exiting its lair, playfully move round, and looking for vegetable to eat. After eating from the vegetable, it spits it out, and it also spits a jade book, before moving around and returning back to its lair. The dance is accompanied by music played on traditional Chinese instruments, including drums, flutes, and cymbals. Today, similar to the Chinese Lion and Dragon dances, the Qilin dance is commonly performed during important Chinese celebrations and festivals, such as Chinese New Year and weddings, it is also performed to preserve cultural traditions and enhance community cohesion.

===Vietnamese Lion===
The Lion dance may be known in Vietnam as the Qilin dance (Vietnamese: or ) based on the mythical creature kỳ lân, which is similar to the Chinese Qilin. Most lions in Vietnam resemble the Southern Lion, specifically Fut San style – they are part of the Chinese Southern Lion tradition but have acquired local characteristics with differences in appearance. There are nevertheless distinct local forms that differ in appearance and performance, for example, the Lion dances of the Tày and Nùng minority people. A court version of the dance is performed at the Duyet Thi Duong Theatre within the ground of the royal palace in Huế. 
The dance is performed primarily at traditional festivals such as Tết Nguyên Đán and Tết Trung Thu, as well as during other occasions such as the opening of a new business, birthdays, and weddings. The dance is typically accompanied by martial artists and acrobatics. A feature of the Vietnamese Lion dance is its dance partner Ông Địa or the god of the earth, depicted as a large-bellied, broadly grinning man holding a palm-leaf fan similar to the Chinese Big Head Buddha (大头佛). The good-hearted god, according to popular beliefs, has the power to summon the auspicious kỳ lân, and thus during the dance, takes the lead in clearing the path for the kỳ lân.

===Japanese Lion===

Japan has a long tradition of the Lion dance and the dance is known as &quot;&quot; () in Japanese. The dance, believed to have originated in India, may have been introduced to Japan via China and Korea as part of the masked drama-dance &quot;gigaku&quot; during the Asuka period. It became associated with the celebration of Buddha&#x27;s Birthday. The first Lion dance recorded in Japan was at the inauguration ceremonies of Tōdai-ji in Nara in 752. The oldest surviving lion mask, made of paulownia wood with an articulated lower jaw, is also preserved in Tōdai-ji. The dance is commonly performed during the New Year to bring good luck and drive away evil spirits, and the Lion dancers may be accompanied by flute and drum musicians. It is also performed at other festivals and celebrations. In some of these performances, the lions may bite people on the head to bring good luck.
The Lion dance has been absorbed into Japanese tradition. There are many different Lion dances in Japan and the style of dancing and design of the lion may differ by region – it is believed that as many as 9,000 variations of the dance exist in the country. The Lion dance is also used in religious Shinto festivals as part of a performing art form called &#x27;. &#x27; may be found in different forms – for example the &#x27; which is mainly acrobatic, the &#x27;, a type of theatrical performance done by &quot;yamabushi&quot; ascetics, and also in &quot;bangaku&quot; and others. Various forms of &quot;shishi&quot; dances are also found in &quot;noh&quot;, &quot;kabuki&quot; (where the Lion dances form a group of plays termed &quot;shakkyōmono&quot;, examples include &quot;Renjishi&quot;), and &quot;bunraku&quot; theatres.
The Japanese lion usually consists of a wooden, lacquered head called a &#x27; (), often with a characteristic body of green dyed cloth with white designs. It can be manipulated by a single person, or by two or more persons, one of whom manipulates the head. The one-man variety is most often seen in eastern Japan. As with Chinese lions, the make of the head and designs on the body will differ from region to region, and even from school to school. The mask however may sometimes have horns appearing to be a deer (&#x27;), and &#x27; written with different Kanji characters can mean beast, deer, or wild boar, for example as in &#x27; (鹿踊, ). Historically, the word &quot;shishi&quot; may refer to any wild four-legged animal, and some of these dances with different beasts may therefore also be referred to as &quot;shishi-mai&quot;. The dance may also sometimes feature tigers (&#x27;) or &quot;qilin&quot; (&#x27;).
In Okinawa, a similar dance exists, though the lion there is considered to be a legendary &#x27;. The heads, bodies, and behavior of the shisa in the dance are quite different from the &#x27; on mainland Japan. Instead of dancing to the sounds of flutes and drums, the Okinawan &quot;shisa&quot; dance is often performed to folk songs played with the &quot;&quot;.

===Korean Lion===
Lion dance was recorded in the Korean historical work &quot;Samguk Sagi&quot; as &quot;&#x27;&quot; (, the old word for &quot;lion&quot;), one of the five poems on the dances of the Silla kingdom written by Ch&#x27;oe Ch&#x27;i-wŏn. It may have been recorded as early as King Jinheung&#x27;s reign in the 6th century, during which a tune titled &quot;The Lion&#x27;s Talent&quot; was composed that could be a reference to a Lion dance. Two main traditions of Lion dance survive in Korea: the &#x27;, which is performed as an exorcism drama, and the &quot;&quot; performed in association with masked dramas. In many of the traditional masked dance dramas, the Lion dance appears as one part of a number of acts. Examples of these dramas are &quot;Ŭnyul t&#x27;alch&#x27;um&quot;, &quot;Pongsan t&#x27;alch&#x27;um&quot; (봉산탈춤), &quot;Suyong Yayu&quot; (수영야류), and &quot;T&#x27;ongyong Ogwangdae&quot; (통영오광대). There was also once a court version of the Lion dance.
Lion dance as an exorcism ritual began to be performed in the New Year in Korea during the Goryeo dynasty. The best known of the Korean &quot;saja-noreum&quot; Lion dances is the &quot;Bukcheong sajanoreum&quot; or lion mask play from Bukcheong. In this Lion dance, the lion with a large but comic lion mask and brown costume may be performed together with performers wearing other masks. The dancers may be accompanied by musicians playing a double-headed drum, an hourglass-shaped drum, a large gong, and a six-holed bamboo flute. The dance was originally performed every night of the first fifteen nights of the Lunar New Year, where the dance troupe in lion masks and costumes visited every house in the villages of the Bukcheong region, and the Lion dance is meant to expel evil spirits and attract good luck for the coming year. The eyes of the lion mask may be painted gold to expel negative spirits. The lion masks of Pongsan and Gangnyeong may feature rolling eyes and bells meant to frighten demons when they make a sound as the lion moves. It is also believed that children who sat on the back of the lion during such performances would enjoy good health and a long life.

===Tibetan Lion===

In the Himalayan and Tibetan area, there is also a Lion dance called the snow Lion dance. This dance may be found in Tibet and also among Tibetan diaspora communities where it is called &quot;&quot;, Nepal, Bhutan, and parts of Northeastern India – among the Monpa people in Arunachal Pradesh, in Sikkim where it is called &quot;Singhi Chham&quot;, and in some parts of Uttar Pradesh and Ladakh. The name &quot;seng ge&quot; and its related forms come from Sanskrit for lion, , and &quot;cham&quot; is a Buddhist ritual dance. The snow lion has white fur, and in Tibet, it may also have a green mane or green fringes, while in Sikkim, the mane may be blue.

The Snow Lion is regarded as an emblem of Tibet and the Snow Lion dance is a popular dance in Tibetan communities and it is performed during festivals such as during the ritual dance (cham) festival and the New Year. The snow lion represents the snowy mountain ranges and glaciers of Tibet and is considered highly auspicious, and it may also symbolize a number of characteristics, such as power and strength, and fearlessness and joy. Some local versions of the snow Lion dance may also have been influenced by Chinese Lion dance in the Sino-Tibetan borderland – for example, it was recorded that the local chief in Songpan, Sichuan, gave a lion costume to the Jamyang Zhépa II of the Amdo region in the 18th century. The snow Lion dance may be performed as a secular dance or as a ritual dance performed by bon po monks.

===India===

Excluding the snow Lion dances found in the Himalayan regions, lion costumes may be used in various forms of dances in other parts of India. In West Bengal&#x27;s Purulia district, a version of the Chhau dance is the only one to incorporate lion costumes. In this dance, the lions are associated with the Hindu goddess Durga as her mount. The lion Chhau masks are made of papier-mâché with dried grass as fur.

In Songi Mukhawate or Songi Mukhota dance, a masked folk dance from Maharastra performed during Chaitra Purnima, Navaratri, and other special occasions, the lion costumes may also be use. The lion costumes represent Narasimha. In Honnavar Taluk in Uttara Kannada, a Lion dance called &quot;simha nrutya&quot; may be performed in Yakshagana plays. The dancers wear a cotton mask that resembles a lion with two silver fangs, and they dance in imitation of the movements and behaviour of lion.

===Indonesia===
The Chinese Lion dance is referred to as &quot;barongsai&quot; in Indonesia, often performed by Chinese Indonesians during &quot;Imlek&quot;. The majority of Lion dance troupes in Medan perform the southern Lion dance brought by the Chinese immigrants in the nineteenth century. They are divided into the &quot;Fo Shan Shi&quot; and the &quot;He Shan Shi&quot; types. Indonesians, however, have developed their own style of Lion dances. The Lion dance (Indonesian: &quot;&quot;) in Indonesia has different forms that are distinct to the local cultures in Indonesia, and it is not known if these have any relation to the Chinese lion.
In Hindu Balinese culture, the Barong is the king of good spirits and the enemy of the demon queen Rangda. Like the Chinese lion, it requires more dancers than in the Javanese Reog, typically involving two dancers called Juru Saluk. The Reog dance of Ponorogo in Java involves a lion figure known as the &#x27;. It is held on special occasions such as the &quot;Lebaran&quot; (Eid al-Fitr), city or regency anniversary, or independence day carnival. A single dancer, or &#x27;, carries the heavy lion mask, about 30–40 kg in weight, with their teeth. The &quot;&quot; may also carry an adolescent boy or girl on its head. The mask that usually spans over 2.5 meters may be made out of real peacock feathers. It has gained recognition as the world&#x27;s largest mask.
Another form of Indonesian Lion dance is called Sisingaan from West Java. Sisingaan marked by a form of a lion-shaped effigy palanquin that is carried by a group of dancers who perform various attractions accompanied by traditional music. Thus lion palanquin is being ride by a children, and usually performed to celebrate the circumcision ceremony, where the child is carried on a lion around the &quot;kampung&quot; (village).

===Africa===
Around the world there are Lion dances that are local to their area and unrelated to the Chinese dance. For example, various tribes in East Africa, such as the Maasai and Samburu people of Kenya, used to perform a Lion dance to celebrate a successful lion hunt, considered by these tribes to be a prestigious act and a sign of bravery. The dancers may also reenact a lion hunt. Some of them make a headdress out of the mane of the slain lion (or out of other animals) and wear the headdress in the dance. Young men may also wear the lion-mane headdress and dance in a coming-of-age ceremony. However, as lion-hunting has been made illegal, the dance is seldom performed in a real scenario nowadays, but they may continue to perform the dance for tourists. In The Gambia, a mask dance called Simba or Zimba, meaning &quot;lion dancer&quot; in the Wolof language, is perform in festivals and on the streets by the Wolof people.

==Music and instruments==

The Chinese Lion dance is performed accompanied by the music of beating of tanggu (in Singapore, &quot;datanggu&quot;), cymbals, and gongs. Instruments synchronize to the Lion dance movements and actions. The drums may have springs inside of them to produce the characteristic echo. Developments in electronic devices have allowed music to be played without the need to carry around instruments (which can be quite large).

==During Chinese New Years and festivals==

During the Chinese New Year, Lion dance troupes may visit the houses and shops of the Asian community to perform the traditional custom of &quot;cai qing&quot; (採青), literally meaning &quot;plucking the greens&quot;, whereby the lion plucks the auspicious green lettuce either hung on a pole or placed on a table in front of the premises. The &quot;greens&quot; (&quot;qing&quot;) are tied together with a &quot;red envelope&quot; containing money and may also include auspicious fruit like oranges. In Chinese, &quot;cǎi&quot; (採, pluck) also sounds like &quot;cài&quot; (菜, meaning vegetable) and &quot;cái&quot; (财, meaning fortune). The lion will dance and approach the &quot;greens&quot; and &quot;red envelope&quot; like a curious cat to &quot;eat the green&quot; and &quot;spit&quot; it out. In the process, they will keep the &quot;red envelope&quot;, which is the reward for the lion troupe.

The Lion dance is believed to bring good luck and fortune to any business that receives one. During the Qing dynasty, there may be additional hidden meanings in the performances. For example, the green vegetables (&quot;qing&quot;) eaten by the lion may represent the Qing Manchus. The Lion dance troupes are sometimes accompanied by various characters such as the Big Head Buddha.

==Evolution and competition==

Lion dance has spread across the world due to the worldwide presence of the diaspora Chinese communities and immigrant settlers in many countries in the Americas, Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, Pacific Polynesia, and in particular, in Southeast Asia, where there is a large overseas Chinese presence. The dance has evolved since the early days when it was performed as a skill part of Chinese martial arts, and has grown into a more artistic art. This development has led to competitions and performances. The competition is judged based on the skill and liveliness of the lion together with the creativity of the moves. The Chinese Lion dance has close relations to kung fu or Wǔshù. In general, it is seen that if a school has a capable troupe with many &#x27;lions&#x27;, it demonstrates the success of the school. It is also generally practised together with Dragon dance in some area.

International Lion dance championships are held in many countries, for example, in Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. The competition mostly involves Southern Lion dance teams and may be performed on a series of small circular platforms raised on poles called &quot;jongs&quot;, and there are a total of 21 or even 22 poles in the traditional set. These poles ranged from in height, but championship poles can go up to . The poles can be added with props or obstacles as well, such as a small wooden bridge that can be easily broken in half or a pair of wire lines. The first &quot;jongs&quot; built were introduced in 1983 for a competition in Malaysia, made out of wood with a circular rubber platform on top and an iron fitting on the bottom, with a height of and a width of . Later, 16–17 poles were added in the set, but all poles were higher and are made out of iron. 

The main judging rubric was developed by the International Dragon and Lion Dance Federation, scored out of 10 total points. Their rubric is mostly used in professional competitions including Genting, Malaysia, which is recently held at Arena of Stars since it was opened in 1998. The Genting World and National Lion dance Championships are held every two years in Malaysia. The event is mostly dominated by Malaysia, with consecutive winner Kun Seng Keng from Muar, Malaysia, being the winner of 11 out of the 13 Genting competitions in 2018, as well as other competitors from Malaysia such as Gor Chor from Segamat, Hong Teik from Alor Setar, Khuan Loke from Sungai Way, and Guang Yi Kwong Ngai from Seri Kembangan. However, in 2024, Singapore&#x27;s Yi Wei Athletic Association sent out two teams; team A finally won and break a 13-year win streak held by Malaysian.

By 2001 and 2002, dragon dance teams were also involved in competitions at Genting as well. Another competition event held in Malaysia was the Tang Long Imperial World Dragon and Lion dance Championship at Putra Indoor Stadium, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in December 2002. It also involves both Northern and Southern Lion dance teams, but dragon dance teams as well. Another competition called the Ngee Ann City National Lion Dance Championships are held every year in Ngee Ann City, Orchard Road, Singapore, starting in the 1990s.

==In politics==
The Lion dance is seen as a representative part of Chinese culture in many overseas Chinese communities, and in some Southeast Asian countries, there were attempts to ban or discourage the dance in order to suppress the Chinese cultural identity in those countries. For example, in Malaysia, Lion dance was criticized by a Malay politician in the 1970s as not Malaysian in style and suggested that it be changed to a tiger dance, and the permits were not given by the government, except at Chinese New Year, after the National Cultural Policy (&quot;Dasar Kebudayaan Negara&quot;) in 1981 was implemented until 1990. Lion dance became a matter of political and public debate about the national culture of the country.

During the Suharto era in Indonesia, public expression of Chinese culture was also banned in consolidation with anti-communism sentiment, and the &quot;barongsai&quot; (Lion dance) procession was considered &quot;provocative&quot; and &quot;an affront to Indonesian nationalism&quot;. This ban was however overturned after the collapse of the Suharto regime in 1998, with then-president Abdurrahman Wahid lifting the ban. Nevertheless, the occasional local banning of the Lion dance still occurred.

During the 1950s–60s, in some areas with high populations of Chinese and Asian communities (especially the Chinatowns in many foreign countries outside of China), people who joined Lion dance troupes were &quot;gangster-like&quot;. This caused a lot of fighting between Lion dance troupes and kung fu schools. A few performers hid daggers in their shoes and clothes, which could be used to injure other Lion dancers&#x27; legs. At one point, the Hong Kong government banned Lion dances completely. More recently, Lion dance troupes must attain a permit from the government in order to perform Lion dance. It has been argued that the regulation was there to prevent lawbreakers from being involved. The Building and Construction Authority (BCA) stated that Lion dances involving the &quot;cai qing&quot; ritual are not allowed to take place in condominiums and inside units during Chinese New Year. BCA also urged the Management Corporation Strata Titles (MCSTs) to increase surveillance at common areas during the festivities.

==In popular culture==
In the 1960s and 1970s, kung fu movies including Jet Li&#x27;s &quot;Wong Fei Hung&quot; has indirectly shows and indicates how Lion dance was practiced with the kung fu close co-relation and kung fu during that time, e.g., &quot;Dreadnaught&quot; and &quot;Martial Club&quot;. In those days, the Lion dance was mostly practised and performed as Wushu or kung fu skills, with the challenge for the &#x27;lion&#x27; built of chairs and tables stacked up together for the &#x27;lion&#x27; to perform its stunts. In the 1976 musical, &quot;Pacific Overtures&quot; by Stephen Sondheim, the first act ends with a musical number titled &quot;Lion dance&quot;. The Commodore Perry character performed a mixture of a kabuki version of Lion dance and a cakewalk wearing an Uncle Sam costume and the long white wig and makeup of a kabuki lion, here used to express his feelings of success at having met with Japanese officials and opened Japan to trade for the first time in 250 years. The kabuki Lion dance also appeared in the 1957 film &quot;Sayonara&quot; with Ricardo Montalbán.

Several 1990s movies, including a remade version of &quot;Wong Fei Hung&quot;, and the sequels of &quot;Once Upon a Time in China&quot;, involve plots centered on lion dancing, especially &quot;Once Upon a Time in China III&quot; and &quot;IV&quot;. The series&#x27; main actor, Jet Li, has performed as a Lion dancer in several of his films, including Northern style lion dancing in &quot;Shaolin Temple&quot;, &quot;Shaolin Temple 2: Kids from Shaolin&quot;, &quot;Shaolin Temple 3: North and South Shaolin&quot;, and Southern style lion dancing in &quot;Once Upon a Time in China III&quot; and &quot;Once Upon a Time in China and America&quot;.

Other films include &quot;The Young Master&quot;, &quot;Dancing Lion&quot;, &quot;The Lion Men&quot;, &quot;The Lion Men: Ultimate Showdown&quot;, and &quot;I Am What I Am&quot;. Northern Lion dancing appeared in Disney&#x27;s 1998 film &quot;Mulan&quot;, when the Hun villains use it to sneak into the imperial city under the disguise of a large imperial Lion. Lion dance has also appeared in popular music videos, such as Chinese hip hop group Higher Brothers music video for their single &quot;Open It Up&quot;, Adam Lambert&#x27;s music video &quot;If I Had You&quot;, and Zayn Malik featuring Sia&#x27;s music video &quot;Dusk Till Dawn&quot;. The same traditional dance also appeared in a music video &quot;True To Your Heart&quot; by 98 Degrees featuring Stevie Wonder, which was used to advertise the 1998 film &quot;Mulan&quot;.

The version 4.4 of the video game &quot;Genshin Impact&quot; introduced the playable character Yip Gaming, a &quot;Wushou Dance&quot; performer, which is Liyue&#x27;s version of the Lion dance. In &quot;Honkai Star Rail&quot;, Diting is a type of Ingenium lion-dog created by the Xianzhou Artisanship Commission, which resembles the type of lion-dogs seen in the Lion dance. Another video game, &quot;Wuthering Waves&quot;, features the character Lingyang, a &quot;Liondancer&quot; from the city of Jinzhou. The &quot;Elden Ring: Shadow of the Erdtree&quot; downloadable content introduces a new boss named Divine Beast Dancing Lion. Its appearance is more akin to that of the Chinese Northern Lion.

==See also==

*Chinese New Year
*Japanese New Year
*Vietnamese New Year (Tết)
*Korean New Year
*Culture of China
*Chinese guardian lions
*Dance in China
*Pantomime horse
*Dragon dance
*Tiger dance
*Qilin dance
*Shisa

==References==
==External links==

*The Genuine History Of Lion dance 
*The Beginner’s Guide to Chinese Lion dance
*An in-depth article on the Chinese Lion dance
*Information about Green Lions
*Additional information about Lion dance
*The Chinese Lion dance
*Malaysia Muar Lion dance Troupe is World Champion, &quot;New Straits Times&quot; 11 February 1994
*Korean Insights – Madangguk: Mask Dance-Drama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q713866" start="0" end="10" title="Lion dance" label="Lion dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="39" end="44" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="48" end="63" title="Culture of China" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q182347" start="118" end="122" title="Asiatic lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="237" end="253" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q636304" start="679" end="691" title="dragon dance" label="dragon dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="842" end="862" title="Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1100" end="1114" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="1171" end="1187" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Chinese diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1325" end="1330" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="1332" end="1343" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1345" end="1351" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1357" end="1364" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1444" end="1449" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="1451" end="1460" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="1466" end="1477" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q875313" start="1672" end="1679" title="Shujing" label="Shujing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="1755" end="1766" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1882" end="1893" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260339" start="2068" end="2083" title="Panthera youngi" label="Panthera youngi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808013" start="2304" end="2319" title="Laurence Picken" label="Laurence Picken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="2722" end="2731" title="Han dynasty" label="Han court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="2772" end="2787" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="2846" end="2858" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="3070" end="3084" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q846905" start="3128" end="3134" title="Hanshu" label="Hanshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q875305" start="3219" end="3231" title="Northern Wei" label="Northern Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489780" start="3523" end="3541" title="Buddhist symbolism" label="Buddhist symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q313324" start="4166" end="4174" title="Bai Juyi" label="Bai Juyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q994451" start="4193" end="4206" title="Western Liang (Sixteen Kingdoms)" label="Western Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="4611" end="4623" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="4724" end="4737" title="Southern Song" label="Southern Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038564" start="4788" end="4802" title="South China" label="south of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="4822" end="4831" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074728" start="5025" end="5029" title="Nian" label="Nian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="5084" end="5100" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="5295" end="5304" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="5398" end="5410" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="5818" end="5825" title="Hokkien people" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q707133" start="5834" end="5850" title="Taiwanese people" label="Taiwanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="5961" end="5976" title="Hui people" label="Muslim minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198988" start="5980" end="5994" title="Shenqiu County" label="Shenqiu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="5998" end="6003" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338336" start="6052" end="6067" title="Yongdeng County" label="Yongdeng County"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="6069" end="6074" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="6114" end="6126" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka people"/>
<link wikidata="Q14138" start="6226" end="6231" title="Qilin" label="Qilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q758079" start="6240" end="6245" title="Pixiu" label="Pixiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q858536" start="6365" end="6378" title="Central China" label="Central China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="6608" end="6624" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayan region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334251" start="7539" end="7546" title="Ninghai" label="Ninghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="7550" end="7556" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196521" start="7558" end="7564" title="Xushui" label="Xushui"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="7568" end="7573" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="7584" end="7590" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="7594" end="7602" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7617" end="7624" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197358" start="7740" end="7755" title="Xiangfen County" label="Xiangfen County"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="7759" end="7765" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q875305" start="7987" end="7999" title="Northern Wei" label="Northern Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q38959" start="8139" end="8148" title="Pekingese" label="Pekingese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069772" start="8152" end="8168" title="Chinese guardian lions" label="Foo Dogs/Fu Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="8737" end="8746" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074728" start="8892" end="8896" title="Nian" label="Nian"/>
<link wikidata="Q899363" start="8954" end="8966" title="papier-mâché" label="papier-mâché"/>
<link wikidata="Q674273" start="9309" end="9315" title="sequin" label="sequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34412" start="9393" end="9400" title="Foshan" label="Fo Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023921" start="9424" end="9431" title="Heshan, Guangdong" label="He Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288576" start="9614" end="9620" title="Jow-Ga Kung Fu" label="Jow Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="9794" end="9801" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023921" start="10997" end="11011" title="Heshan, Guangdong" label="He Shan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="11596" end="11607" title="Sun Yat-Sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641005" start="11608" end="11635" title="Constitutional Protection Movement" label="assumed office in Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q70806" start="12693" end="12722" title="Romance of the Three Kingdoms" label="Romance of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="12773" end="12784" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q245315" start="12798" end="12805" title="Liu Bei" label="Liu Bei"/>
<link wikidata="Q320925" start="12967" end="12974" title="Shu-Han" label="Shu-Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q222797" start="13316" end="13325" title="Guan Yu" label="Guan Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q197183" start="13680" end="13689" title="Zhang Fei" label="Zhang Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q197481" start="14275" end="14283" title="Zhao Yun" label="Zhao Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q378547" start="14692" end="14703" title="Huang Zhong" label="Huang Zhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q468743" start="14858" end="14865" title="Ma Chao" label="Ma Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="15709" end="15716" title="Southern Min Chinese" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="15726" end="15732" title="Hoklo people" label="people"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="15736" end="15742" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="15747" end="15753" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="15933" end="15939" title="Manchu" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="15972" end="15984" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="16286" end="16298" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q68695" start="16373" end="16381" title="Quanzhou" label="Quanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q14138" start="16632" end="16637" title="Qilin" label="Qilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="16694" end="16706" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka people"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="17622" end="17638" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="17820" end="17830" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q14138" start="17868" end="17874" title="kỳ lân" label="kỳ lân"/>
<link wikidata="Q14138" start="17908" end="17913" title="Qilin" label="Qilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q72484" start="18242" end="18245" title="Tay people" label="Tày"/>
<link wikidata="Q72810" start="18250" end="18254" title="Nùng people" label="Nùng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447747" start="18274" end="18287" title="Nhã nhạc" label="court version"/>
<link wikidata="Q10769129" start="18370" end="18382" title="Imperial City, Huế" label="royal palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="18386" end="18389" title="Huế" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q912988" start="18458" end="18472" title="Tết Nguyên Đán" label="Tết Nguyên Đán"/>
<link wikidata="Q112075710" start="18477" end="18490" title="Tết Trung Thu" label="Tết Trung Thu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="18628" end="18643" title="martial artists" label="martial artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q193036" start="18648" end="18658" title="acrobatics" label="acrobatics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18720" end="18727" title="Ông Địa" label="Ông Địa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="19163" end="19171" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132648" start="19316" end="19322" title="gigaku" label="gigaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q210688" start="19340" end="19352" title="Asuka period" label="Asuka period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348941" start="19399" end="19421" title="Buddha&amp;#x27;s Birthday" label="Buddha&amp;#x27;s Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q460367" start="19500" end="19508" title="Tōdai-ji" label="Tōdai-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q169134" start="19512" end="19516" title="Nara, Nara" label="Nara"/>
<link wikidata="Q165173" start="19565" end="19574" title="paulownia" label="paulownia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253481" start="19632" end="19640" title="List of Cultural Properties of Tōdai-ji" label="Tōdai-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="20257" end="20263" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309838" start="20472" end="20481" title="yamabushi" label="yamabushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q226887" start="20609" end="20612" title="noh" label="noh"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="20626" end="20632" title="kabuki" label="kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989583" start="20739" end="20747" title="Renjishi" label="Renjishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q243170" start="20766" end="20773" title="bunraku" label="bunraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="21350" end="21355" title="Kanji" label="Kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801521" start="21665" end="21671" title="Tiger dance" label="tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14138" start="21690" end="21695" title="qilin" label="qilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="21715" end="21722" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q485552" start="22156" end="22167" title="Samguk Sagi" label="Samguk Sagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456" start="22278" end="22283" title="Silla" label="Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q487042" start="22303" end="22327" title="Ch&amp;#x27;oe Ch&amp;#x27;i-wŏn" label="Ch&amp;#x27;oe Ch&amp;#x27;i-wŏn"/>
<link wikidata="Q488385" start="22367" end="22380" title="Jinheung of Silla" label="King Jinheung"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255632" start="22842" end="22867" title="Eunyul talchum" label="Ŭnyul t&amp;#x27;alch&amp;#x27;um"/>
<link wikidata="Q905351" start="22889" end="22908" title="Talchum" label="t&amp;#x27;alch&amp;#x27;um"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="23151" end="23157" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986823" start="23245" end="23265" title="Bukcheong sajanoreum" label="Bukcheong sajanoreum"/>
<link wikidata="Q715922" start="23295" end="23304" title="Bukcheong" label="Bukcheong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944136" start="23675" end="23689" title="Lunar New Year" label="Lunar New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q705524" start="23986" end="23993" title="Pongsan" label="Pongsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q501999" start="23998" end="24008" title="Gangnyeong" label="Gangnyeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="24271" end="24280" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="24381" end="24386" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109135" start="24402" end="24418" title="Tibetan diaspora" label="Tibetan diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="24464" end="24469" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="24471" end="24477" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="24505" end="24510" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q840534" start="24523" end="24535" title="Monpa people" label="Monpa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162" start="24539" end="24556" title="Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="24561" end="24567" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523498" start="24593" end="24605" title="Singhi Chham" label="Singhi Chham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="24634" end="24647" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="24652" end="24658" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="24721" end="24729" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q138567" start="24752" end="24756" title="cham dance" label="cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262691" start="24926" end="24935" title="Snow Lion" label="Snow Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q138567" start="25106" end="25110" title="Cham dance" label="cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339425" start="25539" end="25546" title="Songpan County" label="Songpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="25548" end="25555" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013402" start="25584" end="25597" title="Jamyang Zhépa" label="Jamyang Zhépa"/>
<link wikidata="Q427621" start="25608" end="25612" title="Amdo" label="Amdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q815628" start="25731" end="25737" title="bon" label="bon po"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="25903" end="25914" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q307474" start="25922" end="25938" title="Purulia district" label="Purulia district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071518" start="25957" end="25968" title="Chhau dance" label="Chhau dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="26064" end="26069" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q382973" start="26078" end="26083" title="Durga" label="Durga"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607265" start="26107" end="26117" title="Chhau mask" label="Chhau mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q899363" start="26131" end="26143" title="papier-mâché" label="papier-mâché"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26173" end="26188" title="Songi Mukhawate" label="Songi Mukhawate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="26238" end="26248" title="Maharastra" label="Maharastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979868" start="26266" end="26281" title="Chaitra Purnima" label="Chaitra Purnima"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269" start="26283" end="26292" title="Navaratri" label="Navaratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q237543" start="26386" end="26395" title="Narasimha" label="Narasimha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892390" start="26400" end="26414" title="Honnavar Taluk" label="Honnavar Taluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q579205" start="26418" end="26432" title="Uttara Kannada" label="Uttara Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584013" start="26499" end="26509" title="Yakshagana" label="Yakshagana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945786" start="26774" end="26793" title="Chinese Indonesian" label="Chinese Indonesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="26807" end="26812" title="Chinese new year" label="Imlek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972" start="26858" end="26863" title="Medan" label="Medan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="27131" end="27141" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="27160" end="27169" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850935" start="27315" end="27329" title="Balinese Hinduism" label="Hindu Balinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q204753" start="27343" end="27349" title="Barong (mythology)" label="Barong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026528" start="27411" end="27417" title="Rangda" label="Rangda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263743" start="27488" end="27492" title="Reog" label="Reog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263743" start="27549" end="27553" title="Reog" label="Reog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11118" start="27563" end="27571" title="Ponorogo" label="Ponorogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="27591" end="27595" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511221" start="27674" end="27681" title="Lebaran" label="Lebaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="27689" end="27700" title="Eid al-Fitr" label="Eid al-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q12515442" start="28128" end="28137" title="Sisingaan" label="Sisingaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724" start="28143" end="28152" title="West Java" label="West Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q476850" start="28205" end="28214" title="palanquin" label="palanquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="28407" end="28419" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q9017117" start="28484" end="28491" title="kampung" label="kampung"/>
<link wikidata="Q163022" start="28683" end="28689" title="Maasai people" label="Maasai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261878" start="28694" end="28708" title="Samburu people" label="Samburu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="29282" end="29292" title="The Gambia" label="The Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="29369" end="29383" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof language"/>
<link wikidata="Q217397" start="29435" end="29447" title="Wolof people" label="Wolof people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682928" start="29552" end="29558" title="tanggu (drum)" label="tanggu"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="29563" end="29572" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="29597" end="29603" title="cymbal" label="cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="29610" end="29614" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="29776" end="29794" title="Electronics" label="electronic devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="29956" end="29972" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q716009" start="30357" end="30369" title="red envelope" label="red envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="30951" end="30963" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="31414" end="31422" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="31424" end="31430" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="31432" end="31436" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="31438" end="31444" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="31446" end="31455" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="31465" end="31474" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="31498" end="31512" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="31537" end="31553" title="overseas Chinese" label="overseas Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="31648" end="31668" title="Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="31930" end="31937" title="Chinese martial arts" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="31941" end="31946" title="martial arts" label="Wǔshù"/>
<link wikidata="Q636304" start="32126" end="32138" title="Dragon dance" label="Dragon dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="32237" end="32245" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="32247" end="32256" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="32258" end="32267" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="32273" end="32279" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144734" start="33230" end="33237" title="Genting Highlands" label="Genting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788927" start="33275" end="33289" title="Arena of Stars" label="Arena of Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832744" start="33499" end="33503" title="Muar (town)" label="Muar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858171" start="33647" end="33654" title="Segamat" label="Segamat"/>
<link wikidata="Q474868" start="33671" end="33681" title="Alor Setar" label="Alor Setar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12710063" start="33699" end="33709" title="Sungai Way" label="Sungai Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454632" start="33740" end="33754" title="Seri Kembangan" label="Seri Kembangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326215" start="34115" end="34135" title="Putra Indoor Stadium" label="Putra Indoor Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133228" start="34375" end="34388" title="Ngee Ann City" label="Ngee Ann City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735712" start="34390" end="34402" title="Orchard Road" label="Orchard Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801521" start="34872" end="34883" title="tiger dance" label="tiger dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="35185" end="35192" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35286" end="35310" title="Suharto#Abortive coup and anti-communist purge" label="anti-communism sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35497" end="35539" title="Suharto#Fall and resignation" label="the collapse of the Suharto regime in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q76167" start="35561" end="35578" title="Abdurrahman Wahid" label="Abdurrahman Wahid"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="35829" end="35834" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986523" start="36376" end="36411" title="Building and Construction Authority" label="Building and Construction Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="36749" end="36756" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q159577" start="36774" end="36780" title="Jet Li" label="Jet Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q317869" start="36794" end="36807" title="Wong Fei Hung" label="Wong Fei Hung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="36887" end="36894" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528347" start="36955" end="36966" title="Dreadnaught (film)" label="Dreadnaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295248" start="36983" end="36995" title="Martial Club" label="Martial Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479346" start="37071" end="37076" title="Wushu (sport)" label="Wushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277671" start="37262" end="37279" title="Pacific Overtures" label="Pacific Overtures"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="37289" end="37305" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="37383" end="37398" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Commodore Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="37434" end="37440" title="kabuki" label="kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026113" start="37469" end="37477" title="cakewalk" label="cakewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184689" start="37489" end="37498" title="Uncle Sam" label="Uncle Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989583" start="37546" end="37557" title="Renjishi" label="kabuki lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q614864" start="37760" end="37768" title="Sayonara" label="Sayonara"/>
<link wikidata="Q333595" start="37780" end="37797" title="Ricardo Montalbán" label="Ricardo Montalbán"/>
<link wikidata="Q947446" start="37904" end="37929" title="Once Upon a Time in China" label="Once Upon a Time in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q259332" start="37994" end="38023" title="Once Upon a Time in China III" label="Once Upon a Time in China III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148591" start="38040" end="38042" title="Once Upon a Time in China IV" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q600709" start="38190" end="38204" title="Shaolin Temple (1982 film)" label="Shaolin Temple"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38218" end="38253" title="Shaolin Temple 2: Kids from Shaolin" label="Shaolin Temple 2: Kids from Shaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039395" start="38267" end="38308" title="Martial Arts of Shaolin" label="Shaolin Temple 3: North and South Shaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q259332" start="38357" end="38386" title="Once Upon a Time in China III" label="Once Upon a Time in China III"/>
<link wikidata="Q691478" start="38403" end="38440" title="Once Upon a Time in China and America" label="Once Upon a Time in China and America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474616" start="38475" end="38491" title="The Young Master" label="The Young Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185422" start="38505" end="38517" title="Dancing Lion" label="Dancing Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q55694159" start="38531" end="38543" title="The Lion Men" label="The Lion Men"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38557" end="38588" title="The Lion Men: Ultimate Showdown" label="The Lion Men: Ultimate Showdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q110813337" start="38606" end="38620" title="I Am What I Am (2021 film)" label="I Am What I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q537407" start="38686" end="38703" title="Mulan (1998 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mulan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42309975" start="38895" end="38910" title="Higher Brothers" label="Higher Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190231" start="38964" end="38976" title="Adam Lambert" label="Adam Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q542721" start="39002" end="39014" title="If I Had You (Adam Lambert song)" label="If I Had You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626950" start="39026" end="39036" title="Zayn Malik" label="Zayn Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q181484" start="39047" end="39050" title="Sia" label="Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38913315" start="39076" end="39090" title="Dusk Till Dawn (Zayn song)" label="Dusk Till Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q277230" start="39190" end="39200" title="98 Degrees" label="98 Degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="39211" end="39224" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059474" start="39328" end="39342" title="Genshin Impact" label="Genshin Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q107263730" start="39442" end="39447" title="Liyue (Genshin Impact)" label="Liyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q108896777" start="39491" end="39507" title="Honkai Star Rail" label="Honkai Star Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q117750031" start="39689" end="39704" title="Wuthering Waves" label="Wuthering Waves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39806" end="39839" title="Elden Ring#Shadow of the Erdtree" label="Elden Ring: Shadow of the Erdtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="40004" end="40020" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q701398" start="40022" end="40039" title="Japanese New Year" label="Japanese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q912988" start="40041" end="40066" title="Tết" label="Vietnamese New Year (Tết)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8249787" start="40068" end="40083" title="Korean New Year" label="Korean New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="40085" end="40101" title="Culture of China" label="Culture of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069772" start="40103" end="40125" title="Chinese guardian lions" label="Chinese guardian lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215262" start="40127" end="40141" title="Dance in China" label="Dance in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131886" start="40143" end="40158" title="Pantomime horse" label="Pantomime horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q636304" start="40160" end="40172" title="Dragon dance" label="Dragon dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801521" start="40174" end="40185" title="Tiger dance" label="Tiger dance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40187" end="40198" title="Qilin#In ritual dances" label="Qilin dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q705750" start="40200" end="40205" title="Shisa" label="Shisa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577930" wikidata="Q636304" url="?curid=577930" title="Dragon dance">
<text>Dragon dance () is a form of traditional dance and performance in Chinese culture. Like the lion dance, it is most often seen during festive celebrations. The dance is performed by a team of experienced dancers who manipulate a long flexible giant puppet of a dragon using poles positioned at regular intervals along the length of the dragon. The dance team simulates the imagined movements of this mythological creature in a sinuous, undulating manner.

The dragon dance is often performed during Chinese New Year. The Chinese dragon is a symbol of China&#x27;s culture, and it is believed to bring good luck to people, therefore the longer the dragon is in the dance, the more luck it will bring to the community. The dragons are believed to possess qualities that include great power, dignity, fertility, wisdom and auspiciousness. The appearance of a dragon is both fearsome and bold but it has a benevolent disposition, and it was an emblem to represent imperial authority. The movements in a performance traditionally symbolize the power and dignity of the dragon.

== History ==

During the Han dynasty, different forms of the dragon dance were described in ancient texts. Rain dance performed at times of drought may involve the use of figures of dragon as Chinese dragon was associated with rain in ancient China, for example the dragon Yinglong was considered a rain deity, and the Shenlong had the power to determine how much wind and rain to bring. According to the Han dynasty text &quot;Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals&quot; by Dong Zhongshu, as part of a ritual to appeal for rain, clay figures of the dragons were made and children or adults may then perform a dance. The number of dragons, their length and color, as well as the performers may vary according to the time of year. Other dances involving dragons may be found in a popular form of entertainment during the Han dynasty, the &quot;baixi&quot; () variety shows, where performers called &quot;mime people&quot; () dressed up as various creatures such as beasts, fish and dragons. In his &quot;Lyric Essay on Western Capital&quot; () Zhang Heng recorded various performances such as performers who dressed as a green dragon playing a flute, and a fish-dragon act where fish transformed into a dragon. A version of the fish-dragon dance called &quot;fish-dragon extending&quot; () was also performed at the Han court to entertain foreign guests – in this dance a mythical beast of Shenli () transforms into flounder, then to a dragon. These ancient dances however do not resemble modern Dragon Dance in their descriptions, and depictions of dragon dance in Han dynasty stone relief engravings suggest that the props used may also be cumbersome, unlike modern Dragon Dance where light-weight dragons are manipulated by performers. 

The dragon acts of the Han dynasty were also mentioned in the Tang and Song dynasty. Figures similar to the dragon lantern () used during Lantern Festival were described in the Song dynasty work &quot;Dreams of Splendor of the Eastern Capital&quot;, where figures of dragon mounted for display were constructed out of grass and cloth and inside which numerous candle lights may be placed. Such dragon lanterns may also be carried and paraded by performers in the street during the Lantern festival at nighttime. A wide variety of dragon dances have developed in various regions in China, for example, the Fenghua Cloth Dragon () from Zhejiang was made with bamboo frame and covered with cloth, and is said to have been developed in the 1200s. A form of dragon dance from Tongliang County (), which originated as snake totem worship, began during the Ming dynasty and became popular in the Qing dynasty. In the modern era, the government of People&#x27;s Republic of China adapted and promoted various traditional folk dances, which contributed to the popularity of the current form of the dragon dance now found widely in China as well as Chinese communities around the world.

Aside from the popular form of dragon dance, other regional dragon dances include one from Zhanjiang, Guangdong province whereby the body of the dragon is formed entirely of a human chain of dozens to hundreds of performers, and in Pujiang County, Zhejiang Province, the body of the dragon is formed using wooden stools. The number of different dragon dances has been put at over 700.

Typically, retired dragons are burned and not saved. The head of the oldest surviving dragon, dating back to 1878 and named &quot;Moo Lung&quot;, is preserved and on display at the Bok Kai Temple in Marysville, California. Other fragments of dragons of similar age are kept at the Sweetwater County Historical Museum in Green River, Wyoming (1893, eyes only), Gold Museum in Ballarat (1897, head only), and the Golden Dragon Museum in Bendigo (1901, the oldest complete dragon, named &quot;Loong&quot;). Bendigo&#x27;s &quot;Loong&quot; was used regularly in that city&#x27;s Easter parade until 1970, and occasionally has come out of storage since then to welcome newer dragons to Bendigo.

== Dragon structure ==

The dragon is a long serpentine body formed of a number of sections on poles, with a dragon head and a tail. The dragon is assembled by joining the series of hoops on each section and attaching the ornamental head and tail pieces at the ends. Traditionally, dragons were constructed of wood, with bamboo hoops on the inside and covered with a rich fabric, however in the modern era lighter materials such as aluminium and plastics have replaced the wood and heavy material.

Dragons can range in length from as little as operated by two people for small displays, around for the more acrobatic models, and up to for the larger parade and ceremonial styles. The size and length of a dragon depends on the human power available, financing, materials, skills and size of the field. A small organization cannot afford to run a very long dragon because it requires considerable human power, great expense and special skills.
The normal length and size of the body recommended for the dragon is and is divided into nine major sections. The distance of each minor (rib-like) section is apart; therefore, the body has 81 rings. Many may also be up to 15 sections long, and some dragons are as long as 46 sections. Occasionally, dragons with far more sections may be constructed in Chinese communities around the world to produce the longest dragon possible, since part of the myth of the dragon is that the longer the creature, the more luck it will bring. Sun Loong in Bendigo, Australia was, at the time it was made in 1970, the longest dragon in the world measuring approximately and is believed to be the longest regularly used dragon. Much longer dragons have been created for one-off events. The world record for the longest dragon is , set in Hong Kong on 1 October 2012.

Historically the dragon dance may be performed in a variety of ways with different types and colours of dragon. Green is sometimes selected as a main colour of the dragon, which symbolizes a great harvest. Other colours include: yellow, symbolizing the solemn empire; gold or silver, symbolizing prosperity; red, representing excitement. The dragon&#x27;s scales and tail are mostly beautiful silvery and glittery to create a joyous atmosphere. As the dragon dance is not performed every day, the cloth of the dragon is removed and touched up with ultra-paint before each performance.

== Performance ==


The dragon dance is performed by a skilled team whose job is to bring the motionless puppet body to life. The correct combination and proper timing of the different parts of the dragon are very important to make a successful dance. Any mistakes made by even some of the performers would spoil the whole performance. To be very successful in the dance, the head of the Dragon must be able to coordinate with the body movement to match the timing of the drum. For larger ceremonial and parade style dragons, the head can weigh as much as 12 katis (14.4 kg, almost 32 lb). The dragon tail also has an important role to play as it will have to keep in time with head movements. The fifth section is considered to be the middle portion and the performers must be very alert as the body movements change from time to time. The dragon is often led by a person holding a spherical object representing a pearl.
The patterns of the dragon dance are choreographed according to the skills and experiences acquired by the performers. Some of the patterns of the dragon dance are &quot;Cloud Cave&quot;, &quot;Whirlpool&quot;, tai chi pattern, &quot;threading the money&quot;, &quot;looking for pearl&quot;, and &quot;dragon encircling the pillar&quot;. The movement &quot;dragon chasing the pearl&quot; shows that the dragon is continually in the pursuit of wisdom.

The dragon moves in a wave-like pattern achieved by the co-ordinated swinging of each section in succession. Whilst this swinging constitutes the basic movement of the dragon, executing more complex formations is only limited by a team&#x27;s creativity. The patterns and tricks that are performed generally involve running into spiraled formations to make the dragon body turn and twist on itself. This causes performers to jump over or through the dragon&#x27;s body sections, adding to the visual display. Other advanced manoeuvres include various corkscrew-like rotating tricks and more acrobatic moves where the performers stand on each other&#x27;s legs and shoulders to increase the height of the dragon&#x27;s movements.
Performing in a dragon dance team incorporates several elements and skills; it is something of a cross-over activity, combining the training and mentality of a sports team with the stagecraft and flair of a performing arts troupe. The basic skills are simple to learn, however to become a competent performer takes dedicated training until movements become second nature and complex formations can be achieved – which rely not only on the skill of the individual member, but on concentration by the team as a whole to move in co-operation.

A double dragon dance, rarely seen in Western exhibitions, involves two troupes of dancers intertwining the dragons. Even rarer are dances with the full array of nine dragons, since nine is a &quot;perfect&quot; number. Such dances involve large number of participants from various organizations, and are often only possible under the auspices of a regional or national government.

=== Competition ===
A number of dragon dance competitions have been organized around the world. In competition performances however, there are strict rules governing the specifications of the dragon body and the routine performed, and so dragons made for these events and what are mostly seen in the impressive stage shows are made for speed and agility, to be used by the performing team for maximum trick difficulty. In these dragons, the head is smaller and light enough to be whipped around, and must be a minimum of 3 kg, the body pieces are a light aluminium with cane and the majority of the hoops will be very thin PVC tubing. Performances are typically 8- to 10-minute routines with an accompanying percussion set.

In more recent times, luminous dragons whereby the dragons are painted with luminous paints that fluoresce under black light are also used in competition.

== Outside China ==

The Chinese dragon is &quot;perhaps the most recognized form of parade puppet&quot;. Unlike the lion dance in many Asian countries where there are numerous native versions of the dance, the dragon dance is found in other countries primarily among overseas Chinese communities. In Japan, the dragon dance (, &quot;Ja Odori&quot; or &quot;Snake Dance&quot; ) is one of the main attractions in the Nagasaki Kunchi festival. The dance was originally performed by Chinese residents who settled in Nagasaki, the only port said to be open for foreign trade in Japan during the Edo period. The dragon dance has also been adapted for other local festivities by the Japanese – a golden dragon dance (, &quot;Kinryū no Mai&quot;) has been performed at the Sensō-ji in Tokyo since 1958. There is however a form that is unique to Japan – the &quot;Orochi&quot; (a great serpent or Japanese dragon) which may be found in a &quot;kagura&quot; performance.

In Vietnam, the dragon dance (múa rồng) may be performed during Tết, the Vietnamese Lunar New Year, as well as during Tết Trung Thu, the Vietnamese Mid-Autumn Festival. It is often referred to, collectively, as múa lân sư rồng (lion/qilin, monk, and dragon dance).

In Indonesia, the dragon dance is called &quot;liang liong&quot;.

== In literature ==
Lawrence Ferlinghetti&#x27;s poem &quot;The Great Chinese Dragon&quot;, published in his 1961 anthology &quot;Starting from San Francisco&quot;, was inspired by the dragon dance.
Gregory Stephenson says the dragon &quot;... represents &#x27;the force and mystery of life,&#x27; the true sight that &#x27;sees the spiritual everywhere translucent in the material world&#x27;&quot;.

Earl Lovelace&#x27;s 1979 novel &quot;The Dragon Can&#x27;t Dance&quot; uses the theme of the Carnival dance to explore social change and history in the West Indies.

Arthur Ransome incorporates dragon dances in his children&#x27;s book &quot;Missee Lee&quot; (1941), part of the &quot;Swallows and Amazons&quot; series, which is set in 1930s China.

== See also ==
* &quot;Tai Hang Fire Dragon Dance&quot;
* &quot;Dance Dance Dragon&quot; (2012)

== References ==
== External links ==
*Lion Directory – Worldwide Lion &amp; Dragon Dance Resource Centre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q636304" start="0" end="12" title="Dragon dance" label="Dragon dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="41" end="46" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="66" end="73" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="74" end="81" title="culture of China" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q713866" start="92" end="102" title="lion dance" label="lion dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q110239824" start="242" end="254" title="giant puppet" label="giant puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="498" end="514" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="520" end="534" title="Chinese dragon" label="Chinese dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1098" end="1109" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="1265" end="1279" title="Chinese dragon" label="Chinese dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378070" start="1346" end="1354" title="Yinglong" label="Yinglong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242181" start="1392" end="1400" title="Shenlong" label="Shenlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706447" start="1501" end="1546" title="Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q445626" start="1556" end="1569" title="Dong Zhongshu" label="Dong Zhongshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100959" start="1939" end="1952" title="Chinese variety art" label="variety shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q197206" start="2124" end="2134" title="Zhang Heng" label="Zhang Heng"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="2883" end="2887" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="2892" end="2904" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q718636" start="2959" end="2975" title="Lantern Festival" label="Lantern Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241399" start="3022" end="3063" title="Dongjing Meng Hua Lu" label="Dreams of Splendor of the Eastern Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q713372" start="3426" end="3433" title="Fenghua District" label="Fenghua"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="3455" end="3463" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331358" start="3592" end="3601" title="Tongliang" label="Tongliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="3671" end="3683" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="3710" end="3722" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3761" end="3792" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q59144" start="4090" end="4099" title="Zhanjiang" label="Zhanjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="4101" end="4110" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335006" start="4231" end="4245" title="Pujiang County, Zhejiang" label="Pujiang County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="4247" end="4255" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938700" start="4566" end="4580" title="Bok Kai Temple" label="Bok Kai Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q950966" start="4584" end="4606" title="Marysville, California" label="Marysville, California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4666" end="4701" title="Sweetwater County Historical Museum" label="Sweetwater County Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q983538" start="4705" end="4725" title="Green River, Wyoming" label="Green River, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4745" end="4756" title="Gold Museum (Australia)" label="Gold Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17856" start="4760" end="4768" title="Ballarat" label="Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579334" start="4796" end="4816" title="Golden Dragon Museum" label="Golden Dragon Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q497793" start="4820" end="4827" title="Bendigo" label="Bendigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023159" start="6550" end="6559" title="Sun Loong" label="Sun Loong"/>
<link wikidata="Q497793" start="6563" end="6570" title="Bendigo" label="Bendigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6572" end="6581" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="6795" end="6807" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="6843" end="6852" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7564" end="7570" title="Puppet#Rod puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q892596" start="8018" end="8023" title="catty" label="katis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="8592" end="8599" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q266545" start="11287" end="11301" title="luminous paint" label="luminous paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q961734" start="11324" end="11335" title="black light" label="black light"/>
<link wikidata="Q713866" start="11484" end="11494" title="lion dance" label="lion dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q114712" start="11783" end="11798" title="Nagasaki Kunchi" label="Nagasaki Kunchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="11880" end="11888" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="11958" end="11968" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q615183" start="12133" end="12141" title="Sensō-ji" label="Sensō-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054437" start="12223" end="12229" title="Yamata no Orochi" label="Orochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366503" start="12256" end="12271" title="Japanese dragon" label="Japanese dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348260" start="12303" end="12309" title="kagura" label="kagura"/>
<link wikidata="Q912988" start="12394" end="12397" title="Tết" label="Tết"/>
<link wikidata="Q112075710" start="12448" end="12461" title="Tết Trung Thu" label="Tết Trung Thu"/>
<link wikidata="Q379519" start="12478" end="12497" title="Mid-Autumn Festival" label="Mid-Autumn Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q14138" start="12563" end="12568" title="qilin" label="qilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314269" start="12683" end="12704" title="Lawrence Ferlinghetti" label="Lawrence Ferlinghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602596" start="12793" end="12820" title="Starting from San Francisco" label="Starting from San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046390" start="13065" end="13078" title="Earl Lovelace" label="Earl Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730836" start="13103" end="13130" title="The Dragon Can&amp;#x27;t Dance" label="The Dragon Can&amp;#x27;t Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q515845" start="13232" end="13246" title="Arthur Ransome" label="Arthur Ransome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878230" start="13308" end="13318" title="Missee Lee" label="Missee Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q996970" start="13345" end="13384" title="Swallows and Amazons series" label="&amp;quot;Swallows and Amazons&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13439" end="13465" title="Tai Hang#Tai Hang Fire Dragon Dance" label="Tai Hang Fire Dragon Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215052" start="13480" end="13498" title="Dance Dance Dragon" label="Dance Dance Dragon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="577944" wikidata="Q2073795" url="?curid=577944" title="Ivor Cutler">
<text>Ivor Cutler (born Isadore Cutler, 15 January 1923 – 3 March 2006) was a Scottish poet, singer, musician, songwriter, artist and humorist. He became known for his regular performances on BBC radio, and in particular his numerous sessions recorded for John Peel&#x27;s influential eponymous late-night radio programme (on BBC Radio 1), and later for Andy Kershaw&#x27;s programme. He appeared in the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; film in 1967, and on Neil Innes&#x27; television programmes. Cutler also wrote books for children and adults, and was a teacher at A. S. Neill&#x27;s Summerhill School and for 30 years in inner-city schools in London.

In live performances Cutler would often accompany himself on a harmonium. Phyllis King appears on several of his records, and for several years was a part of his concerts. She usually read small phrases but also read a few short stories. The two starred in a BBC radio series, &quot;King Cutler&quot;, in which they performed their material jointly and singly. Cutler also collaborated with pianist Neil Ardley, singer Robert Wyatt, guitarist Fred Frith, and musicians David Toop and Steve Beresford.

==Early life==
Ivor Cutler was born on 15 January 1923 in Govan, Glasgow, into a middle-class Jewish family of Eastern European descent. His father Jack Moris Cutler was a draper and jeweller. He cited his childhood as the source of his artistic temperament, recalling a sense of displacement when his younger brother was born: &quot;Without that I would not have been so screwed up as I am, and therefore not as creative.&quot; He was educated at the Shawlands Academy. In 1939 Cutler was evacuated to Annan. He joined the Royal Air Force as a navigator in 1942 but was soon grounded for &quot;dreaminess&quot; and worked as a storeman. He moved to London where he was employed by the Inner London Education Authority to teach music, dance, drama and poetry to 7-to-11-year-olds. Cutler&#x27;s deeply held views on humanity meant he disliked corporal punishment and on leaving a teaching job he held in the 1950s he cut up his tawse and handed the pieces to the class.

==Musical career==

Cutler began writing songs and poetry in the late 1950s, making the first of many appearances on BBC radio on the Home Service, where he featured on the &quot;Monday Night at Home&quot; programme on 38 occasions between 1959 and 1963. He gained popularity playing songs where he would often accompany himself on either a piano or the harmonium, and this success led to the release of a series of records starting with 1959&#x27;s &quot;Ivor Cutler of Y&#x27;Hup&quot; EP. Cutler appeared in the pop musical film &quot;It&#x27;s All Over Town&quot; in 1964, and continued to make appearances on the BBC&#x27;s programmes during the 1960s, and as a result of an appearance on the television show &quot;Late Night Line-Up&quot;, he was noticed by Paul McCartney, who invited Cutler to appear in the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; film. In the film, Cutler plays would-be courier Buster Bloodvessel who becomes passionately attracted to Ringo Starr&#x27;s Aunt Jessie. Following this film role, Cutler recorded an LP, &quot;Ludo&quot; (1967), produced by George Martin, and credited to the Ivor Cutler Trio, made up of Cutler with bassist Gill Lyons and percussionist Trevor Tomkins. The album, taking inspiration from trad jazz and boogie-woogie, sees Cutler playing the piano as well as his usual harmonium, and is considered the most traditionally musical of all his records. After its release Cutler continued to perform for BBC radio, recording the first of his sessions for John Peel in 1969. Cutler&#x27;s work on Peel&#x27;s shows would introduce him to successive generations of fans, and in the early 1990s, Cutler said, &quot;Thanks to Peel, I gained a whole new audience, to the amazement of my older fans, who find themselves among 16-to-35s in theatres, and wonder where they came from.&quot;

In the 1970s, Neil Ardley had Cutler sing on his album &quot;A Symphony of Amaranths&quot; (1971), and former-Soft Machine drummer Robert Wyatt asked Cutler to play harmonium and sing on two of the tracks on his album &quot;Rock Bottom&quot; (1974). The collaboration with Wyatt led to Cutler being signed to Wyatt&#x27;s record label Virgin Records, for whom Cutler recorded three albums in the mid-1970s: &quot;Dandruff&quot; (1974), &quot;Velvet Donkey&quot; (1975) and &quot;Jammy Smears&quot; (1976). Each of these discs intersperses Cutler&#x27;s poems and songs with readings by his performing companion Phyllis King. Wyatt would later cover Cutler&#x27;s song &quot;Go and Sit upon the Grass&quot;.

During the decade Cutler used his sessions for John Peel to introduce numerous episodes of his &quot;Life in a Scotch Sitting Room&quot; series, culminating in the 1978 album &quot;Life in a Scotch Sitting Room, Vol. 2&quot;, regarded as a particularly autobiographical work, on which Cutler recounts tales from his childhood amid an environment of exaggerated Scottishness. Cutler also produced the work as a book, which was published in 1984 with illustrations by Martin Honeysett.

Cutler contributed the track &quot;Brooch Boat&quot; to the cult 1980 album &quot;Miniatures&quot;, produced and edited by Morgan Fisher, which consisted entirely of one-minute-long recordings. In the 1980s, Rough Trade Records released three albums—&quot;Privilege&quot; (1983), &quot;Prince Ivor&quot; (1986) and &quot;Gruts&quot; (1986). Cutler also released the single &quot;Women of the World&quot;, recorded with Linda Hirst, through the label in 1983. In the 1990s, Creation Records released two new volumes of poems and spoken word work: &quot;A Wet Handle&quot; (1997) and &quot;A Flat Man&quot; (1998).

== Books and poetry ==
Poetry and books for children were an important part of Cutler&#x27;s literary output. There were crossovers, where parts of the public performances, albums, and books had the same name; the most notable and regular favourite at performances was &quot;Life in a Scotch Sitting Room, Volume 2&quot;, combining the book with the album.

==Reception and legacy==
Cutler was a noted eccentric, dressing in a distinctive style including plus-fours and hats adorned with many badges, travelling mainly by bicycle and often communicating by means of sticky labels printed with &quot;Cutlerisms&quot;, one of which, &quot;never knowingly understood&quot; came to be applied by supporters and detractors alike (the latter phrase is a play on &#x27;never knowingly undersold&#x27;, which was for many years the slogan of the John Lewis Partnership). Others included &quot;Kindly disregard&quot;, reserved for official correspondence, and &quot;to remove this label take it off&quot;. The reception room of his home contained some pieces of ivory cutlery, a pun on his name. He was a member of the Noise Abatement Society and the Voluntary Euthanasia Society. 

Composer, multi-instrumentalist and producer Jim O&#x27;Rourke covered Cutler&#x27;s 1983 song &quot;Women of the World&quot; on his album &quot;Eureka&quot; (1999). In October 2012 in Seattle, Washington, the Mark Morris Dance Group premiered a work entitled &quot;Wooden Tree,&quot; featuring recordings of Cutler&#x27;s renditions of his songs. In 2014 a new play, &quot;The Beautiful Cosmos of Ivor Cutler&quot;, a co-production by Vanishing Point and National Theatre of Scotland, was performed.

Cutler earned a faithful cult following. John Peel once remarked that Cutler was probably the only performer whose work had been featured on Radio 1, 2, 3 and 4.

He retired from performing in 2004, and died on 3 March 2006, from a stroke, while at his home in London.

Reflections upon his poetry, humour and legacy continued well after his death.

==Discography==
*1959 &quot;Ivor Cutler of Y&#x27;Hup&quot; (EP, Decca)
*1961 &quot;Who Tore Your Trousers?&quot; (Decca)
*1961 &quot;Get Away from the Wall&quot; (EP, Decca)
*1967 &quot;Ludo&quot; (EMI) 
*1974 &quot;Dandruff&quot; (Virgin)
*1975 &quot;Velvet Donkey&quot; (Virgin)
*1976 &quot;Jammy Smears&quot; (Virgin)
*1978 &quot;Life in a Scotch Sitting Room, Vol. 2&quot; (Harvest)
*1983 &quot;Privilege&quot; (with Linda Hirst, Rough Trade)
*1986 &quot;Prince Ivor&quot; (Rough Trade)
*1986 &quot;Gruts&quot; (Rough Trade)
*1989 &quot;Peel Sessions&quot; (EP, Strange Fruit, 1969 recordings)
*1997 &quot;A Wet Handle&quot; (Creation)
*1997 &quot;Ludo&quot; (Rev-Ola, 1967 recordings)
*1998 &quot;A Flat Man&quot; (Creation)
*2019 &quot;Singing While Dead&quot; (EP, Hoorgi House, 4 unreleased 1950s recordings)
===Compilations===
*1980 &quot;Brooch Boat&quot; Ivor&#x27;s contribution to Morgan Fisher&#x27;s &quot;Miniatures&quot; LP. A compilation of 51 one minute masterpieces by 51 different artists (Cherry Red)
*2005 &quot;An Elpee and Two Epees&quot; (the Decca recordings)
*2012 &quot;Essential Masters 1959-1961&quot; (Comedy Classics, the Decca recordings in a different order)
*2017 &quot;Gruts For Tea Again&quot; (Coda)

===Vídeo===
*2005 &quot;Looking for Truth with a Pin, and Cutler&#x27;s Last Stand&quot; documentary and live performance (Claptrap)

==Bibliography==
;Poetry
*&quot;Many Flies Have Feathers&quot; (1973). Trigram Press.
*&quot;A Flat Man&quot; (1977). Trigram Press. 
*&quot;Private Habits&quot; (1981). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;LARGE et Puffy&quot; (1984). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;Fresh Carpet&quot; (1986). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;A Nice Wee Present from Scotland&quot; (1988). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;A Fly Sandwich and Other Menu&quot; (1991). Methuen. 
*&quot;Is That Your Flap, Jack?&quot; (1992). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;A Stuggy Pren&quot; (1994). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;A Wet Handle&quot; (1996). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;South American Bookworms&quot; (1999). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;Under the spigot&quot; (2001). Arc Publications. 
*&quot;Scots Wa&#x27; Straw&quot; (2003). Arc Publications 

;Prose
*&quot;Gruts&quot; (1962). Museum Press.
*&quot;Cockadoodledon&#x27;t!!!&quot; (1966). Dennis Dobson.
*&quot;Life in a Scotch Sitting Room, Vol.2&quot; (1984). Methuen. 
*&quot;Gruts&quot; (1986). Methuen. 
*&quot;Fremsley&quot; (1987). Methuen. 
*&quot;Glasgow Dreamer&quot; (1990). Methuen. 

;Children&#x27;s books
*&quot;Meal One&quot;. (1971) Armada Lions Edition (1988) 
*&quot;Balooky Klujypop&quot;. (1975) Heinemann.
*&quot;The Animal House&quot;. (1976) Armada Lions.
*&quot;The Vermillion Door&quot; (1984). Walker Books.
*&quot;The Pomegranate Door&quot; (1984). Walker Books.
*&quot;Herbert the Chicken&quot; (1984). Walker Books.
*&quot;Herbert the Elephant&quot; (1984). Walker Books.
*&quot;Herbert the Questionmark&quot; (1984). Walker Books.
*&quot;Herbert the Herbert&quot; (1984). Walker Books.
*&quot;One and a Quarter&quot; (1987). 
*&quot;Herbert: 5 Stories&quot; (1988). Walker Books. 
*&quot;Grape Zoo&quot; (1991). Walker Books. 
*&quot;Doris the Hen&quot; (1992). Heinemann. 
*&quot;The New Dress&quot; (1995). The Bodley Head. 

;Other
*&quot;Befriend a Bacterium: Stickies by Ivor Cutler&quot; (1992). Pickpocket Books. (A collection of stickers that Cutler used to hand out to people).

==DVD video==
*&quot;Looking for Truth with a Pin&quot; (BBC Four documentary, 2005)
* &quot;I&#x27;m going in a field&quot; - musical performance/outtake on the &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; Blu-ray. (2012)

==References==
==External links==

* Cutler&#x27;s drawers — interview at &quot;The Guardian,&quot; 15 January 2004
* John Peel Sessions - Ivor Cutler
* 
* BBC Radio 4 - Great Lives — singer-songwriter KT Tunstall tells Matthew Parris why she adores the Scottish poet, author, artist and humorist Ivor Cutler (with biographer Bruce Lindsay, 27 April 2021)
* &quot;Ivor Cutler: A life outside the sitting room&quot; Author Bruce Lindsay&#x27;s autobiography of Ivor Cutler, published by Equinox, 2023.
* &quot;SONGS OF IVOR CUTLER: SLIGHTLY IMPERFECT&quot; at thehook2017</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2073795" start="0" end="11" title="Ivor Cutler" label="Ivor Cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073795" start="18" end="32" title="Ivor Cutler" label="Isadore Cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406482" start="128" end="136" title="humorist" label="humorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="186" end="189" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="250" end="259" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="320" end="331" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754508" start="348" end="360" title="Andy Kershaw" label="Andy Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="394" end="405" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q901203" start="418" end="438" title="Magical Mystery Tour (film)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q918538" start="466" end="476" title="Neil Innes" label="Neil Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q316792" start="576" end="587" title="A. S. Neill" label="A. S. Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q482459" start="595" end="612" title="Summerhill School" label="Summerhill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="727" end="736" title="harmonium" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188587" start="738" end="750" title="Phyllis King" label="Phyllis King"/>
<link wikidata="Q923538" start="1063" end="1074" title="Neil Ardley" label="Neil Ardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q312693" start="1083" end="1095" title="Robert Wyatt" label="Robert Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q460325" start="1107" end="1117" title="Fred Frith" label="Fred Frith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176873" start="1133" end="1143" title="David Toop" label="David Toop"/>
<link wikidata="Q976089" start="1148" end="1163" title="Steve Beresford" label="Steve Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414040" start="1224" end="1229" title="Govan" label="Govan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869778" start="1260" end="1273" title="History of the Jews in Scotland" label="Jewish family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491273" start="1618" end="1635" title="Shawlands Academy" label="Shawlands Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q564495" start="1669" end="1674" title="Annan, Dumfries and Galloway" label="Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1690" end="1705" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035456" start="1852" end="1884" title="Inner London Education Authority" label="Inner London Education Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="2009" end="2028" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643904" start="2094" end="2099" title="tawse" label="tawse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631716" start="2271" end="2283" title="BBC Home Service" label="Home Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="2478" end="2483" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="2491" end="2500" title="harmonium" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="2625" end="2627" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045064" start="2675" end="2698" title="It&amp;#x27;s All Over Town" label="It&amp;#x27;s All Over Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="2901" end="2915" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2949" end="2960" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q901203" start="2973" end="2993" title="Magical Mystery Tour (film)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="3106" end="3117" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="3183" end="3185" title="LP record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5805421" start="3193" end="3197" title="Ludo (Ivor Cutler album)" label="Ludo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="3224" end="3237" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571432" start="3337" end="3351" title="Trevor Tomkins" label="Trevor Tomkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q492643" start="3388" end="3397" title="trad jazz" label="trad jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="3402" end="3415" title="boogie-woogie (music)" label="boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="3649" end="3658" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q923538" start="3991" end="4002" title="Neil Ardley" label="Neil Ardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q729505" start="4087" end="4099" title="Soft Machine" label="Soft Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q312693" start="4108" end="4120" title="Robert Wyatt" label="Robert Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="4142" end="4151" title="harmonium" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q263938" start="4201" end="4212" title="Rock Bottom (album)" label="Rock Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="4312" end="4326" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215750" start="4390" end="4398" title="Dandruff (album)" label="Dandruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919393" start="4419" end="4432" title="Velvet Donkey" label="Velvet Donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148051" start="4456" end="4468" title="Jammy Smears" label="Jammy Smears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188587" start="4588" end="4600" title="Phyllis King" label="Phyllis King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545182" start="4866" end="4903" title="Life in a Scotch Sitting Room, Vol. 2" label="Life in a Scotch Sitting Room, Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q113883828" start="5034" end="5045" title="exaggerated" label="exaggerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775704" start="5151" end="5167" title="Martin Honeysett" label="Martin Honeysett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344565" start="5293" end="5306" title="Morgan Fisher" label="Morgan Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q385558" start="5378" end="5397" title="Rough Trade Records" label="Rough Trade Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246298" start="5426" end="5435" title="Privilege (Ivor Cutler album)" label="Privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244093" start="5456" end="5467" title="Prince Ivor" label="Prince Ivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612366" start="5491" end="5496" title="Gruts" label="Gruts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139341" start="5643" end="5659" title="Creation Records" label="Creation Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660618" start="5722" end="5734" title="A Wet Handle" label="A Wet Handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50013" start="6186" end="6195" title="Eccentricity (behavior)" label="eccentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491661" start="6239" end="6249" title="plus-fours" label="plus-fours"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="6306" end="6313" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244782" start="6622" end="6644" title="John Lewis Partnership" label="John Lewis Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q25168699" start="6894" end="6917" title="Noise Abatement Society" label="Noise Abatement Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276342" start="6926" end="6954" title="Voluntary Euthanasia Society" label="Voluntary Euthanasia Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q547373" start="7003" end="7020" title="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke (musician)" label="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411136" start="7103" end="7109" title="Eureka (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022779" start="7394" end="7409" title="Vanishing Point (theatre company)" label="Vanishing Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932368" start="7414" end="7442" title="National Theatre of Scotland" label="National Theatre of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="7692" end="7698" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="7875" end="7880" title="Decca Records" label="Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="8009" end="8012" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215750" start="8027" end="8035" title="Dandruff (album)" label="Dandruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="8043" end="8049" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919393" start="8063" end="8076" title="Velvet Donkey" label="Velvet Donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148051" start="8104" end="8116" title="Jammy Smears" label="Jammy Smears"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545182" start="8144" end="8181" title="Life in a Scotch Sitting Room, Vol. 2" label="Life in a Scotch Sitting Room, Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324712" start="8189" end="8196" title="Harvest Records" label="Harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246298" start="8210" end="8219" title="Privilege (Ivor Cutler album)" label="Privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q385558" start="8245" end="8256" title="Rough Trade Records" label="Rough Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244093" start="8270" end="8281" title="Prince Ivor (Ivor Cutler album)" label="Prince Ivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612366" start="8314" end="8319" title="Gruts" label="Gruts"/>
<link wikidata="Q679126" start="8377" end="8390" title="Strange Fruit Records" label="Strange Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660618" start="8421" end="8433" title="A Wet Handle" label="A Wet Handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5805421" start="8463" end="8467" title="Ludo (Ivor Cutler album)" label="Ludo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494570" start="8822" end="8832" title="Cherry Red Records" label="Cherry Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="11252" end="11260" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11487" end="11499" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q230601" start="11609" end="11620" title="KT Tunstall" label="KT Tunstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q334191" start="11627" end="11641" title="Matthew Parris" label="Matthew Parris"/>
</links>
</doc>
