<doc id="567471" wikidata="Q41407" url="?curid=567471" title="Sea otter">
<text>The sea otter (Enhydra lutris) is a marine mammal native to the coasts of the northern and eastern North Pacific Ocean. Adult sea otters typically weigh between , making them the heaviest members of the weasel family, but among the smallest marine mammals. Unlike most marine mammals, the sea otter&#x27;s primary form of insulation is an exceptionally thick coat of fur, the densest in the animal kingdom. Although it can walk on land, the sea otter is capable of living exclusively in the ocean.

The sea otter inhabits nearshore environments, where it dives to the sea floor to forage. It preys mostly on marine invertebrates such as sea urchins, various mollusks and crustaceans, and some species of fish. Its foraging and eating habits are noteworthy in several respects. Its use of rocks to dislodge prey and to open shells makes it one of the few mammal species to use tools. In most of its range, it is a keystone species, controlling sea urchin populations which would otherwise inflict extensive damage to kelp forest ecosystems. Its diet includes prey species that are also valued by humans as food, leading to conflicts between sea otters and fisheries.

Sea otters, whose numbers were once estimated at 150,000–300,000, were hunted extensively for their fur between 1741 and 1911, and the world population fell to 1,000–2,000 individuals living in a fraction of their historic range. A subsequent international ban on hunting, sea otter conservation efforts, and reintroduction programs into previously populated areas have contributed to numbers rebounding, and the species occupies about two-thirds of its former range. The recovery of the sea otter is considered an important success in marine conservation, although populations in the Aleutian Islands and California have recently declined or have plateaued at depressed levels. For these reasons, the sea otter remains classified as an endangered species.

== Evolution ==
The sea otter is the heaviest (the giant otter is longer, but significantly slimmer) member of the family Mustelidae, a diverse group that includes the 13 otter species and terrestrial animals such as weasels, badgers, and minks. It is unique among the mustelids in not making dens or burrows, in having no functional anal scent glands, and in being able to live its entire life without leaving the water. The only living member of the genus &quot;Enhydra&quot;, the sea otter is so different from other mustelid species that, as recently as 1982, some scientists believed it was more closely related to the earless seals. Genetic analysis indicates the sea otter and its closest extant relatives, which include the African speckle-throated otter, Eurasian otter, African clawless otter and Asian small-clawed otter, shared an ancestor approximately 5 million years ago.

Fossil evidence indicates the &quot;Enhydra&quot; lineage became isolated in the North Pacific approximately 2 million years ago, giving rise to the now-extinct &quot;Enhydra macrodonta&quot; and the modern sea otter, &quot;Enhydra lutris&quot;. One related species has been described, &quot;Enhydra reevei&quot;, from the Pleistocene of East Anglia. The modern sea otter evolved initially in northern Hokkaidō and Russia, and then spread east to the Aleutian Islands, mainland Alaska, and down the North American coast. In comparison to cetaceans, sirenians, and pinnipeds, which entered the water approximately 50, 40, and 20 million years ago, respectively, the sea otter is a relative newcomer to a marine existence. In some respects, though, the sea otter is more fully adapted to water than pinnipeds, which must haul out on land or ice to give birth. The full genome of the northern sea otter (&quot;Enhydra lutris kenyoni&quot;) was sequenced in 2017 and may allow for examination of the sea otter&#x27;s evolutionary divergence from terrestrial mustelids.
Following their divergence from their most common ancestor five million years ago, sea otters have developed traits dependent on polygenic selection, or the evolution of numerous traits to create hallmark features like thick and oily fur and large bones, compared to their freshwater sister species. Sea otters require these traits to survive the cold waters of the northern Pacific Ocean, in which they spend their entire lives despite occasionally coming out of the water as pups. Sea otters have the thickest fur of any animal (~1,000,000 hairs per square inch), as they do not have a blubber layer, while their oil glands help matt down their fur and keep it from holding air. Thick bones also prove crucial in increasing buoyancy, as sea otters spend long hours floating atop the ocean. In a study, southern and northern Sea Otter populations were compared against the African clawless otter, and it was determined that aquatic traits like loss of smell and hair thickness independently evolved, evidencing a complex genome of polygenic traits resulting in complex systems. This study was only able to take place after sequencing of Sea Otter nuclear genomes and through phylogeny to find a close ancestor with which to compare genomes. 

Previously, it was suspected that sea otters came from the same evolutionary branch as earless seals, such as harbor and monk seals. Sea Otters have experienced numerous population bottlenecks throughout their history, with significant numbers being wiped out 9,000-10,000 generations ago and 300–700 generations ago, long before the fur trade. These previous genetic bottlenecks are responsible for already low genetic diversity amongst species members, making the secondary bottleneck caused by the fur trade more significant. These primary bottlenecks were most likely caused by disease, a common cause for genetic bottlenecks. Estimates place these bottlenecks at leaving around ten to forty animals for about eight to forty-four years. This led to genetic drift, as the populations of northern and southern sea otters were cut off from one another by thousands of miles, leading to significant genomic differences. However, the modern population bottleneck caused by the fur trade of the eighteenth and early twentieth centuries presents the most significant concern to scientists and conservationists attempting to recover population numbers and genetic diversity. Each bottleneck has lowered genomic diversity and thus increased the chance of deleterious genetic drift.

=== Taxonomy ===

The first scientific description of the sea otter is contained in the field notes of Georg Steller from 1751, and the species was described by Carl Linnaeus in his landmark 1758 10th edition of &quot;Systema Naturae&quot;. Originally named &quot;Lutra marina&quot;, it underwent numerous name changes before being accepted as &quot;Enhydra lutris&quot; in 1922. The generic name &quot;Enhydra&quot;, derives from the Ancient Greek &quot;en&quot;/εν &quot;in&quot; and &quot;hydra&quot;/ύδρα &quot;water&quot;, meaning &quot;in the water&quot;, and the Latin word &quot;lutris&quot;, meaning &quot;otter&quot;. It was formerly sometimes referred to as the &quot;sea beaver&quot;.

=== Subspecies ===
Three subspecies of the sea otter are recognized with distinct geographical distributions. &quot;Enhydra lutris lutris&quot; (nominate), the Asian sea otter, ranges across Russia&#x27;s Kuril Islands northeast of Japan, and the Commander Islands in the northwestern Pacific Ocean. In the eastern Pacific Ocean, &quot;E. l. kenyoni&quot;, the northern sea otter, is found from Alaska&#x27;s Aleutian Islands to Oregon and &quot;E. l. nereis&quot;, the southern sea otter, is native to central and southern California. The Asian sea otter is the largest subspecies and has a slightly wider skull and shorter nasal bones than both other subspecies. Northern sea otters possess longer mandibles (lower jaws) while southern sea otters have longer rostrums and smaller teeth.

== Description ==


The sea otter is one of the smallest marine mammal species, but it is the heaviest mustelid. Male sea otters usually weigh and are in length, though specimens up to have been recorded. Females are smaller, weighing and measuring in length. The average weight for adult sea otters that are in more densely populated areas, at in males and in females, was considerably lighter than the average weight of otters in more sparse populations, at in males and in females Presumably less populous otters are more able to monopolize food sources, For its size, the male otter&#x27;s baculum is very large, massive and bent upwards, measuring in length and at the base.

Unlike most other marine mammals, the sea otter has no blubber and relies on its exceptionally thick fur to keep warm. With up to , its fur is the densest of any animal. The fur consists of long, waterproof guard hairs and short underfur; the guard hairs keep the dense underfur layer dry. There is an air compartment between the thick fur and the skin where air is trapped and heated by the body. Cold water is kept completely away from the skin and heat loss is limited. However, a potential disadvantage of this form of insulation is compression of the air layer as the otter dives, thereby reducing the insulating quality of fur at depth when the animal forages. The fur is thick year-round, as it is shed and replaced gradually rather than in a distinct molting season. As the ability of the guard hairs to repel water depends on utmost cleanliness, the sea otter has the ability to reach and groom the fur on any part of its body, taking advantage of its loose skin and an unusually supple skeleton. The coloration of the pelage is usually deep brown with silver-gray speckles, but it can range from yellowish or grayish brown to almost black. In adults, the head, throat, and chest are lighter in color than the rest of the body.

The sea otter displays numerous adaptations to its marine environment. The nostrils and small ears can close. The hind feet, which provide most of its propulsion in swimming, are long, broadly flattened, and fully webbed. The fifth digit on each hind foot is longest, facilitating swimming while on its back, but making walking difficult. The tail is fairly short, thick, slightly flattened, and muscular. The front paws are short with retractable claws, with tough pads on the palms that enable gripping slippery prey. The bones show osteosclerosis, increasing their density to reduce buoyancy.

The sea otter presents an insight into the evolutionary process of the mammalian invasion of the aquatic environment, which has occurred numerous times over the course of mammalian evolution. Having only returned to the sea about 3 million years ago, sea otters represent a snapshot at the earliest point of the transition from fur to blubber. In sea otters, fur is still advantageous, given their small nature and division of lifetime between the aquatic and terrestrial environments. However, as sea otters evolve and adapt to spending more and more of their lifetimes in the sea, the convergent evolution of blubber suggests that the reliance on fur for insulation would be replaced by a dependency on blubber. This is particularly true due to the diving nature of the sea otter; as dives become lengthier and deeper, the air layer&#x27;s ability to retain heat or buoyancy decreases, while blubber remains efficient at both of those functions. Blubber can also additionally serve as an energy source for deep dives, which would most likely prove advantageous over fur in the evolutionary future of sea otters. 

The sea otter propels itself underwater by moving the rear end of its body, including its tail and hind feet, up and down, and is capable of speeds of up to . When underwater, its body is long and streamlined, with the short forelimbs pressed closely against the chest. When at the surface, it usually floats on its back and moves by sculling its feet and tail from side to side. At rest, all four limbs can be folded onto the torso to conserve heat, whereas on particularly hot days, the hind feet may be held underwater for cooling. The sea otter&#x27;s body is highly buoyant because of its large lung capacity – about 2.5 times greater than that of similar-sized land mammals – and the air trapped in its fur. The sea otter walks with a clumsy, rolling gait on land, and can run in a bounding motion.

Long, highly sensitive whiskers and front paws help the sea otter find prey by touch when waters are dark or murky. Researchers have noted when they approach in plain view, sea otters react more rapidly when the wind is blowing towards the animals, indicating the sense of smell is more important than sight as a warning sense. Other observations indicate the sea otter&#x27;s sense of sight is useful above and below the water, although not as good as that of seals. Its hearing is neither particularly acute nor poor.

An adult&#x27;s 32 teeth, particularly the molars, are flattened and rounded for crushing rather than cutting food. Seals and sea otters are the only carnivores with two pairs of lower incisor teeth rather than three; the adult dental formula is . The teeth and bones are sometimes stained purple as a result of ingesting sea urchins.
The sea otter has a metabolic rate two or three times that of comparatively sized terrestrial mammals. It must eat an estimated 25 to 38% of its own body weight in food each day to burn the calories necessary to counteract the loss of heat due to the cold water environment. Its digestive efficiency is estimated at 80 to 85%, and food is digested and passed in as little as three hours. Most of its need for water is met through food, although, in contrast to most other marine mammals, it also drinks seawater. Its relatively large kidneys enable it to derive fresh water from sea water and excrete concentrated urine.

== Behavior ==

The sea otter is diurnal. It has a period of foraging and eating in the morning, starting about an hour before sunrise, then rests or sleeps in mid-day. Foraging resumes for a few hours in the afternoon and subsides before sunset, and a third foraging period may occur around midnight. Females with pups appear to be more inclined to feed at night. Observations of the amount of time a sea otter must spend each day foraging range from 24 to 60%, apparently depending on the availability of food in the area.

Sea otters spend much of their time grooming, which consists of cleaning the fur, untangling knots, removing loose fur, rubbing the fur to squeeze out water and introduce air, and blowing air into the fur. To casual observers, it appears as if the animals are scratching, but they are not known to have lice or other parasites in the fur. When eating, sea otters roll in the water frequently, apparently to wash food scraps from their fur.
=== Foraging ===

The sea otter hunts in short dives, often to the sea floor. Although it can hold its breath for up to five minutes, its dives typically last about one minute and not more than four minutes. It is the only marine animal capable of lifting and turning over rocks, which it often does with its front paws when searching for prey. The sea otter may also pluck snails and other organisms from kelp and dig deep into underwater mud for clams. It is the only marine mammal that catches fish with its forepaws rather than with its teeth. 

Under each foreleg, the sea otter has a loose pouch of skin that extends across the chest. In this pouch (preferentially the left one), the animal stores collected food to bring to the surface. This pouch also holds a rock, unique to the otter, that is used to break open shellfish and clams. At the surface, the sea otter eats while floating on its back, using its forepaws to tear food apart and bring it to its mouth. It can chew and swallow small mussels with their shells, whereas large mussel shells may be twisted apart. It uses its lower incisor teeth to access the meat in shellfish.
To eat large sea urchins, which are mostly covered with spines, the sea otter bites through the underside where the spines are shortest, and licks the soft contents out of the urchin&#x27;s shell.

The sea otter&#x27;s use of rocks when hunting and feeding makes it one of the few mammal species to use tools. To open hard shells, it may pound its prey with both paws against a rock on its chest. To pry an abalone off its rock, it hammers the abalone shell using a large stone, with observed rates of 45 blows in 15 seconds. Releasing an abalone, which can cling to rock with a force equal to 4,000 times its own body weight, requires multiple dives.

=== Social structure ===
Although each adult and independent juvenile forages alone, sea otters tend to rest together in single-sex groups called &quot;rafts&quot;. A raft typically contains 10 to 100 animals, with male rafts being larger than female ones. The largest raft ever seen contained over 2000 sea otters. To keep themselves from drifting out to sea when resting and eating, sea otters may wrap themselves in kelp.

A male sea otter is most likely to mate if he maintains a breeding territory in an area that is also favored by females. As autumn is the peak breeding season in most areas, males typically defend their territory only from spring to autumn. During this time, males patrol the boundaries of their territories to exclude other males, although actual fighting is rare. Adult females move freely between male territories, where they outnumber adult males by an average of five to one. Males that do not have territories tend to congregate in large, male-only groups, and swim through female areas when searching for a mate.

The species exhibits a variety of vocal behaviors. The cry of a pup is often compared to that of a gull. Females coo when they are apparently content; males may grunt instead. Distressed or frightened adults may whistle, hiss, or in extreme circumstances, scream. Although sea otters can be playful and sociable, they are not considered to be truly social animals. They spend much time alone, and each adult can meet its own hunting, grooming, and defense needs.

=== Reproduction and life cycle ===
Sea otters are polygynous: males have multiple female partners, typically those that inhabit their territory. If no territory is established, they seek out females in estrus. When a male sea otter finds a receptive female, the two engage in playful and sometimes aggressive behavior. They bond for the duration of estrus, or 3 days. The male holds the female&#x27;s head or nose with his jaws during copulation. Visible scars are often present on females from this behavior.

Births occur year-round, with peaks between May and June in northern populations and between January and March in southern populations. Gestation appears to vary from four to twelve months, as the species is capable of delayed implantation followed by four months of pregnancy. In California, sea otters usually breed every year, about twice as often as those in Alaska.

Birth usually takes place in the water and typically produces a single pup weighing . Twins occur in 2% of births; however, usually only one pup survives. At birth, the eyes are open, ten teeth are visible, and the pup has a thick coat of baby fur. Mothers have been observed to lick and fluff a newborn for hours; after grooming, the pup&#x27;s fur retains so much air, the pup floats like a cork and cannot dive. The fluffy baby fur is replaced by adult fur after about 13 weeks.

Nursing lasts six to eight months in Californian populations and four to twelve months in Alaska, with the mother beginning to offer bits of prey at one to two months. The milk from a sea otter&#x27;s two abdominal nipples is rich in fat and more similar to the milk of other marine mammals than to that of other mustelids. A pup, with guidance from its mother, practices swimming and diving for several weeks before it is able to reach the sea floor. Initially, the objects it retrieves are of little food value, such as brightly colored starfish and pebbles. Juveniles are typically independent at six to eight months, but a mother may be forced to abandon a pup if she cannot find enough food for it; at the other extreme, a pup may be nursed until it is almost adult size. Pup mortality is high, particularly during an individual&#x27;s first winter – by one estimate, only 25% of pups survive their first year. Pups born to experienced mothers have the highest survival rates.

Females perform all tasks of feeding and raising offspring, and have occasionally been observed caring for orphaned pups. Much has been written about the level of devotion of sea otter mothers for their pups – a mother gives her infant almost constant attention, cradling it on her chest away from the cold water and attentively grooming its fur. When foraging, she leaves her pup floating on the water, sometimes wrapped in kelp to keep it from floating away; if the pup is not sleeping, it cries loudly until she returns. Mothers have been known to carry their pups for days after the pups&#x27; deaths.

Females become sexually mature at around three or four years of age and males at around five; however, males often do not successfully breed until a few years later. A captive male sired offspring at age 19. In the wild, sea otters live to a maximum age of 23 years, with lifespans ranging from 10 to 15 years for males and 15–20 years for females. Several captive individuals have lived past 20 years. The Seattle Aquarium was home to both the oldest recorded female, Etika, who lived to the age of 28, and the oldest recorded male, Adaa, who lived to be 22 years 8 months. Sea otters in the wild often develop worn teeth, which may account for their apparently shorter lifespans.

== Population and distribution ==

Sea otters live in coastal waters deep, and usually stay within a kilometre ( mi) of the shore. They are found most often in areas with protection from the most severe ocean winds, such as rocky coastlines, thick kelp forests, and barrier reefs. Although they are most strongly associated with rocky substrates, sea otters can also live in areas where the sea floor consists primarily of mud, sand, or silt. Their northern range is limited by ice, as sea otters can survive amidst drift ice but not land-fast ice. Individuals generally occupy a home range a few kilometres long, and remain there year-round.

The sea otter population is thought to have once been 150,000 to 300,000, stretching in an arc across the North Pacific from northern Japan to the central Baja California Peninsula in Mexico. The fur trade that began in the 1740s reduced the sea otter&#x27;s numbers to an estimated 1,000 to 2,000 members in 13 colonies. Hunting records researched by historian Adele Ogden place the westernmost limit of the hunting grounds off the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido and the easternmost limit off Punta Morro Hermosa about south of Punta Eugenia, Baja California&#x27;s westernmost headland in Mexico.

In about two-thirds of its former range, the species is at varying levels of recovery, with high population densities in some areas and threatened populations in others. Sea otters currently have stable populations in parts of the Russian east coast, Alaska, British Columbia, Washington, and California, with reports of recolonizations in Mexico and Japan. Population estimates made between 2004 and 2007 give a worldwide total of approximately 107,000 sea otters.

=== Japan ===
Adele Ogden wrote in &quot;The California Sea Otter Trade&quot; that western sea otter were hunted &quot;from Yezo northeastward past the Kuril Group and Kamchatka to the Aleutian Chain&quot;. &quot;Yezo&quot; refers to the island province of Hokkaido, in northern Japan, where the country&#x27;s only confirmed population of western sea otter resides. Sightings have been documented in the waters of Cape Nosappu, Erimo, Hamanaka and Nemuro, among other locations in the region.

=== Russia ===
Currently, the most stable and secure part of the western sea otter&#x27;s range is along the Russian Far East coastline, in the northwestern Pacific waters off of the country (namely Kamchatka and Sakhalin Island), occasionally being seen in and around the Sea of Okhotsk. Before the 19th century, around 20,000 to 25,000 sea otters lived near the Kuril Islands, with more near Kamchatka and the Commander Islands. After the years of the Great Hunt, the population in these areas, currently part of Russia, was only 750. By 2004, sea otters had repopulated all of their former habitat in these areas, with an estimated total population of about 27,000. Of these, about 19,000 are at the Kurils, 2,000 to 3,500 at Kamchatka and another 5,000 to 5,500 at the Commander Islands. Growth has slowed slightly, suggesting the numbers are reaching carrying capacity.

=== British Columbia ===
Along the North American coast south of Alaska, the sea otter&#x27;s range is discontinuous. A remnant population survived off Vancouver Island into the 20th century, but it died out despite the 1911 international protection treaty, with the last sea otter taken near Kyuquot in 1929. From 1969 to 1972, 89 sea otters were flown or shipped from Alaska to the west coast of Vancouver Island. This population increased to over 5,600 in 2013 with an estimated annual growth rate of 7.2%, and their range on the island&#x27;s west coast extended north to Cape Scott and across the Queen Charlotte Strait to the Broughton Archipelago and south to Clayoquot Sound and Tofino. In 1989, a separate colony was discovered in the central British Columbia coast. It is not known if this colony, which numbered about 300 animals in 2004, was founded by transplanted otters or was a remnant population that had gone undetected. By 2013, this population exceeded 1,100 individuals, was increasing at an estimated 12.6% annual rate, and its range included Aristazabal Island, and Milbanke Sound south to Calvert Island. In 2008, Canada determined the status of sea otters to be &quot;special concern&quot;.

===United States===

==== Alaska ====
Alaska is the central area of the sea otter&#x27;s range. In 1973, the population in Alaska was estimated at between 100,000 and 125,000 animals. By 2006, though, the Alaska population had fallen to an estimated 73,000 animals. A massive decline in sea otter populations in the Aleutian Islands accounts for most of the change; the cause of this decline is not known, although orca predation is suspected. The sea otter population in Prince William Sound was also hit hard by the &quot;Exxon Valdez&quot; oil spill, which killed thousands of sea otters in 1989.

==== Washington ====
In 1969 and 1970, 59 sea otters were translocated from Amchitka Island to Washington, and released near La Push and Point Grenville. The translocated population is estimated to have declined to between 10 and 43 individuals before increasing, reaching 208 individuals in 1989. As of 2017, the population was estimated at over 2,000 individuals, and their range extends from Point Grenville in the south to Cape Flattery in the north and east to Pillar Point along the Strait of Juan de Fuca.

In Washington, sea otters are found almost exclusively on the outer coasts. They can swim as close as six feet off shore along the Olympic coast. Reported sightings of sea otters in the San Juan Islands and Puget Sound almost always turn out to be North American river otters, which are commonly seen along the seashore. However, biologists have confirmed isolated sightings of sea otters in these areas since the mid-1990s.

==== Oregon ====
The last native sea otter in Oregon was probably shot and killed in 1906. In 1970 and 1971, a total of 95 sea otters were transplanted from Amchitka Island, Alaska to the Southern Oregon coast. However, this translocation effort failed and otters soon again disappeared from the state. In 2004, a male sea otter took up residence at Simpson Reef off of Cape Arago for six months. This male is thought to have originated from a colony in Washington, but disappeared after a coastal storm. On 18 February 2009, a male sea otter was spotted in Depoe Bay off the Oregon Coast. It could have traveled to the state from either California or Washington.

==== California ====
The historic population of California sea otters was estimated at 16,000 before the fur trade decimated the population, leading to their assumed extinction. Today&#x27;s population of California sea otters are the descendants of a single colony of about 50 sea otters located near Bixby Creek Bridge in March 1938. Their principal range has gradually expanded and extends from Pigeon Point in San Mateo County to Santa Barbara County.

Sea otters were once numerous in San Francisco Bay. Historical records revealed the Russian-American Company snuck Aleuts into San Francisco Bay multiple times, despite the Spanish capturing or shooting them while hunting sea otters in the estuaries of San Jose, San Mateo, San Bruno and around Angel Island. The founder of Fort Ross, Ivan Kuskov, finding otters scarce on his second voyage to Bodega Bay in 1812, sent a party of Aleuts to San Francisco Bay, where they met another Russian party and an American party, and caught 1,160 sea otters in three months. By 1817, sea otters in the area were practically eliminated and the Russians sought permission from the Spanish and the Mexican governments to hunt further and further south of San Francisco. In 1833, fur trappers George Nidever and George Yount canoed &quot;along the Petaluma side of [the] Bay, and then proceeded to the San Joaquin River&quot;, returning with sea otter, beaver, and river otter pelts. Remnant sea otter populations may have survived in the bay until 1840, when the Rancho Punta de Quentin was granted to Captain John B. R. Cooper, a sea captain from Boston, by Mexican Governor Juan Bautista Alvarado along with a license to hunt sea otters, reportedly then prevalent at the mouth of Corte Madera Creek.

In the late 1980s, the USFWS relocated about 140 southern sea otters to San Nicolas Island in southern California, in the hope of establishing a reserve population should the mainland be struck by an oil spill. To the surprise of biologists, the majority of the San Nicolas sea otters swam back to the mainland. Another group of twenty swam north to San Miguel Island, where they were captured and removed. By 2005, only 30 sea otters remained at San Nicolas, although they were slowly increasing as they thrived on the abundant prey around the island. The plan that authorized the translocation program had predicted the carrying capacity would be reached within five to 10 years. The spring 2016 count at San Nicolas Island was 104 sea otters, continuing a 5-year positive trend of over 12% per year. Sea otters were observed twice in Southern California in 2011, once near Laguna Beach and once at Zuniga Point Jetty, near San Diego. These are the first documented sightings of otters this far south in 30 years.

When the USFWS implemented the translocation program, it also attempted, in 1986, to implement &quot;zonal management&quot; of the Californian population. To manage the competition between sea otters and fisheries, it declared an &quot;otter-free zone&quot; stretching from Point Conception to the Mexican border. In this zone, only San Nicolas Island was designated as sea otter habitat, and sea otters found elsewhere in the area were supposed to be captured and relocated. These plans were abandoned after many translocated otters died and also as it proved impractical to capture the hundreds of otters which ignored regulations and swam into the zone. However, after engaging in a period of public commentary in 2005, the Fish and Wildlife Service failed to release a formal decision on the issue. Then, in response to lawsuits filed by the Santa Barbara-based Environmental Defense Center and the Otter Project, on 19 December 2012 the USFWS declared that the &quot;no otter zone&quot; experiment was a failure, and will protect the otters re-colonizing the coast south of Point Conception as threatened species. Although abalone fisherman blamed the incursions of sea otters for the decline of abalone, commercial abalone fishing in southern California came to an end from overfishing in 1997, years before significant otter moved south of Point Conception. In addition, white abalone (&quot;Haliotis sorenseni&quot;), a species never overlapping with sea otter, had declined in numbers 99% by 1996, and became the first marine invertebrate to be federally listed as endangered.

Although the southern sea otter&#x27;s range has continuously expanded from the remnant population of about 50 individuals in Big Sur since protection in 1911, from 2007 to 2010, the otter population and its range contracted and since 2010 has made little progress. As of spring 2010, the northern boundary had moved from about Tunitas Creek to a point southeast of Pigeon Point, and the southern boundary has moved along the Gaviota Coast from approximately Coal Oil Point to Gaviota State Park. A toxin called microcystin, produced by a type of cyanobacteria (&quot;Microcystis&quot;), seems to be concentrated in the shellfish the otters eat, poisoning them. Cyanobacteria are found in stagnant water enriched with nitrogen and phosphorus from septic tank and agricultural fertilizer runoff, and may be flushed into the ocean when streamflows are high in the rainy season. A record number of sea otter carcasses were found on California&#x27;s coastline in 2010, with increased shark attacks an increasing component of the mortality. Great white sharks do not consume relatively fat-poor sea otters but shark-bitten carcasses have increased from 8% in the 1980s to 15% in the 1990s and to 30% in 2010 and 2011.

For southern sea otters to be considered for removal from threatened species listing, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) determined that the population should exceed 3,090 for three consecutive years. In response to recovery efforts, the population climbed steadily from the mid-20th century through the early 2000s, then remained relatively flat from 2005 to 2014 at just under 3,000. There was some contraction from the northern (now Pigeon Point) and southern limits of the sea otter&#x27;s range during the end of this period, circumstantially related to an increase in lethal shark bites, raising concerns that the population had reached a plateau. However, the population increased markedly from 2015 to 2016, with the United States Geological Survey (USGS) California sea otter survey 3-year average reaching 3,272 in 2016, the first time it exceeded the threshold for delisting from the Endangered Species Act (ESA). If populations continued to grow and ESA delisting occurred, southern sea otters would still be fully protected by state regulations and the Marine Mammal Protection Act, which set higher thresholds for protection, at approximately 8,400 individuals. However, ESA delisting seems unlikely due to a precipitous population decline recorded in the spring 2017 USGS sea otter survey count, from the 2016 high of 3,615 individuals to 2,688, a loss of 25% of the California sea otter population.

=== Mexico ===
Historian Adele Ogden described sea otters as being particularly abundant in &quot;Lower California&quot;, now the Baja California Peninsula, where &quot;seven bays...were main centers&quot;. The southernmost limit was Punta Morro Hermoso about south of Punta Eugenia, in turn a headland at the southwestern end of Sebastián Vizcaíno Bay, on the west coast of the Baja Peninsula. Otter were also taken from San Benito Island, Cedros Island, and Isla Natividad in the Bay. By the early 1900s, Baja&#x27;s sea otters were extirpated by hunting. In a 1997 survey, small numbers of sea otters, including pups, were reported by local fishermen, but scientists could not confirm these accounts. However, male and female otters have been confirmed by scientists off shores of the Baja Peninsula in a 2014 study, who hypothesize that otter dispersed there beginning in 2005. These sea otters may have dispersed from San Nicolas Island, which is away, as individuals have been recorded traversing distances of over . Genetic analysis of most of these animals were consistent with California, i.e. United States, otter origins, however one otter had a haplotype not previously reported, and could represent a remnant of the original native Mexican otter population.

== Ecology ==

=== Diet ===
High energetic requirements of sea otter metabolism require them to consume at least 20% of their body weight a day. Surface swimming and foraging are major factors in their high energy expenditure due to drag on the surface of the water when swimming and the thermal heat loss from the body during deep dives when foraging. Sea otter muscles are specially adapted to generate heat without physical activity.

Sea otters are apex predators that consume over 100 prey species. In most of its range, the sea otter&#x27;s diet consists almost exclusively of marine benthic invertebrates, including sea urchins (such as &quot;Strongylocentrotus franciscanus&quot; and &quot;S. purpuratus&quot;), sea cucumbers, fat innkeeper worms, crustaceans, a variety of mollusks such as chitons (such as &quot;Katharina tunicata&quot;), snails such as abalones and limpets (such as &quot;Diodora aspera&quot;), and bivalves such as clams, mussels (such as &quot;Mytilus edulis&quot;), and scallops (such as &quot;Crassadoma gigantea&quot;). Its prey ranges in size from tiny limpets and crabs to giant octopuses. Where prey such as sea urchins, clams, and abalone are present in a range of sizes, sea otters tend to select larger items over smaller ones of similar type. In California, they have been noted to ignore Pismo clams smaller than across.

In a few northern areas, fish are also eaten. In studies performed at Amchitka Island in the 1960s, where the sea otter population was at carrying capacity, 50% of food found in sea otter stomachs was fish. The fish species were usually bottom-dwelling and sedentary or sluggish forms, such as &quot;Hemilepidotus hemilepidotus&quot; and family Tetraodontidae. However, south of Alaska on the North American coast, fish are a negligible or extremely minor part of the sea otter&#x27;s diet. Contrary to popular depictions, sea otters rarely eat starfish, and any kelp that is consumed apparently passes through the sea otter&#x27;s system undigested. Sea otters will also occasionally prey on seabirds. In California, the most commonly eaten species were western grebes, although cormorants, gulls, common loons, and surf scoters were also consumed.

The individuals within a particular area often differ in their foraging methods and prey types, and tend to follow the same patterns as their mothers. The diet of local populations also changes over time, as sea otters can significantly deplete populations of highly preferred prey such as large sea urchins, and prey availability is also affected by other factors such as fishing by humans. Sea otters can thoroughly remove abalone from an area except for specimens in deep rock crevices, however, they never completely wipe out a prey species from an area. A 2007 Californian study demonstrated, in areas where food was relatively scarce, a wider variety of prey was consumed. Surprisingly, though, the diets of individuals were more specialized in these areas than in areas where food was plentiful.

=== As a keystone species ===
Sea otters are a classic example of a keystone species; their presence affects the ecosystem more profoundly than their size and numbers would suggest. They keep the population of certain benthic (sea floor) herbivores, particularly sea urchins, in check. Sea urchins graze on the lower stems of kelp, causing the kelp to drift away and die. Loss of the habitat and nutrients provided by kelp forests leads to profound cascade effects on the marine ecosystem. North Pacific areas that do not have sea otters often turn into urchin barrens, with abundant sea urchins and no kelp forest. Kelp forests are extremely productive ecosystems. Kelp forests sequester (absorb and capture) CO2 from the atmosphere through photosynthesis. Sea otters may help mitigate effects of climate change by their cascading trophic influence.

Reintroduction of sea otters to British Columbia has led to a dramatic improvement in the health of coastal ecosystems, and similar changes have been observed as sea otter populations recovered in the Aleutian and Commander Islands and the Big Sur coast of California. However, some kelp forest ecosystems in California have also thrived without sea otters, with sea urchin populations apparently controlled by other factors. The role of sea otters in maintaining kelp forests has been observed to be more important in areas of open coast than in more protected bays and estuaries.

Sea otters affect rocky ecosystems that are dominated by mussel beds by removing mussels from rocks. This allows space for competing species and increases species diversity.

=== Predators ===
The leading mammalian predators of this species is the orca. Sea lions and bald eagles may prey on pups. On land, young sea otters may face attack from bears and coyotes. In California, great white sharks are their primary predator, though this is the result of mistaking otters for seals and they do not consume otters after biting them. In Katmai National Park, grey wolves have been recorded to hunt and kill sea otters.

Urban runoff transporting cat feces into the ocean brings &quot;Toxoplasma gondii&quot;, an obligate parasite of felids, which has killed sea otters. Parasitic infections of &quot;Sarcocystis neurona&quot; are also associated with human activity. According to the U.S. Geological Survey and the CDC, northern sea otters off Washington have been infected with the H1N1 flu virus and &quot;may be a newly identified animal host of influenza viruses&quot;.

== Relationship with humans ==

=== Fur trade ===
Sea otters have the thickest fur of any mammal, which makes them a common target for many hunters. Archaeological evidence indicates that for thousands of years, indigenous peoples have hunted sea otters for food and fur. Large-scale hunting, part of the Maritime Fur Trade, which would eventually kill approximately one million sea otters, began in the 18th century when hunters and traders began to arrive from all over the world to meet foreign demand for otter pelts, which were one of the world&#x27;s most valuable types of fur.

In the early 18th century, Russians began to hunt sea otters in the Kuril Islands and sold them to the Chinese at Kyakhta. Russia was also exploring the far northern Pacific at this time, and sent Vitus Bering to map the Arctic coast and find routes from Siberia to North America. In 1741, on his second North Pacific voyage, Bering was shipwrecked off Bering Island in the Commander Islands, where he and many of his crew died. The surviving crew members, which included naturalist Georg Steller, discovered sea otters on the beaches of the island and spent the winter hunting sea otters and gambling with otter pelts. They returned to Siberia, having killed nearly 1,000 sea otters, and were able to command high prices for the pelts. Thus began what is sometimes called the &quot;Great Hunt&quot;, which would continue for another hundred years. The Russians found the sea otter far more valuable than the sable skins that had driven and paid for most of their expansion across Siberia. If the sea otter pelts brought back by Bering&#x27;s survivors had been sold at Kyakhta prices they would have paid for one tenth the cost of Bering&#x27;s expedition.
Russian fur-hunting expeditions soon depleted the sea otter populations in the Commander Islands, and by 1745, they began to move on to the Aleutian Islands. The Russians initially traded with the Aleuts inhabitants of these islands for otter pelts, but later enslaved the Aleuts, taking women and children hostage and torturing and killing Aleut men to force them to hunt. Many Aleuts were either murdered by the Russians or died from diseases the hunters had introduced. The Aleut population was reduced, by the Russians&#x27; own estimate, from 20,000 to 2,000. By the 1760s, the Russians had reached Alaska. In 1799, Tsar Paul I consolidated the rival fur-hunting companies into the Russian-American Company, granting it an imperial charter and protection, and a monopoly over trade rights and territorial acquisition.
Under Aleksander I, the administration of the merchant-controlled company was transferred to the Imperial Navy, largely due to the alarming reports by naval officers of native abuse; in 1818, the indigenous peoples of Alaska were granted civil rights equivalent to a townsman status in the Russian Empire.

Other nations joined in the hunt in the south. Along the coasts of what is now Mexico and California, Spanish explorers bought sea otter pelts from Native Americans and sold them in Asia. In 1778, British explorer Captain James Cook reached Vancouver Island and bought sea otter furs from the First Nations people. When Cook&#x27;s ship later stopped at a Chinese port, the pelts rapidly sold at high prices, and were soon known as &quot;soft gold&quot;. As word spread, people from all over Europe and North America began to arrive in the Pacific Northwest to trade for sea otter furs.

Russian hunting expanded to the south, initiated by American ship captains, who subcontracted Russian supervisors and Aleut hunters in what are now Washington, Oregon, and California. Between 1803 and 1846, 72 American ships were involved in the otter hunt in California, harvesting an estimated 40,000 skins and tails, compared to only 13 ships of the Russian-American Company, which reported 5,696 otter skins taken between 1806 and 1846. In 1812, the Russians founded an agricultural settlement at what is now Fort Ross in northern California, as their southern headquarters.
Eventually, sea otter populations became so depleted, commercial hunting was no longer viable. It had stopped in the Aleutian Islands, by 1808, as a conservation measure imposed by the Russian-American Company. Further restrictions were ordered by the company in 1834. When Russia sold Alaska to the United States in 1867, the Alaska population had recovered to over 100,000, but Americans resumed hunting and quickly extirpated the sea otter again. Prices rose as the species became rare. During the 1880s, a pelt brought $105 to $165 in the London market, but by 1903, a pelt could be worth as much as $1,125. In 1911, Russia, Japan, Great Britain (for Canada) and the United States signed the Treaty for the Preservation and Protection of Fur Seals, imposing a moratorium on the harvesting of sea otters. So few remained, perhaps only 1,000–2,000 individuals in the wild, that many believed the species would become extinct.

=== Recovery and conservation ===

During the 20th century, sea otter numbers rebounded in about two-thirds of their historic range, a recovery considered one of the greatest successes in marine conservation. However, the IUCN still lists the sea otter as an endangered species, and describes the significant threats to sea otters as oil pollution, predation by orcas, poaching, and conflicts with fisheries – sea otters can drown if entangled in fishing gear. The hunting of sea otters is no longer legal except for limited harvests by indigenous peoples in the United States. Poaching was a serious concern in the Russian Far East immediately after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991; however, it has declined significantly with stricter law enforcement and better economic conditions. 

The most significant threat to sea otters is oil spills, to which they are particularly vulnerable, since they rely on their fur to keep warm. When their fur is soaked with oil, it loses its ability to retain air, and the animals can quickly die from hypothermia. The liver, kidneys, and lungs of sea otters also become damaged after they inhale oil or ingest it when grooming. The &quot;Exxon Valdez&quot; oil spill of 24 March 1989 killed thousands of sea otters in Prince William Sound, and as of 2006, the lingering oil in the area continues to affect the population. Describing the public sympathy for sea otters that developed from media coverage of the event, a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service spokesperson wrote:

The small geographic ranges of the sea otter populations in California, Washington, and British Columbia mean a single major spill could be catastrophic for that state or province. Prevention of oil spills and preparation to rescue otters if one happens is a major focus for conservation efforts. Increasing the size and range of sea otter populations would also reduce the risk of an oil spill wiping out a population. However, because of the species&#x27; reputation for depleting shellfish resources, advocates for commercial, recreational, and subsistence shellfish harvesting have often opposed allowing the sea otter&#x27;s range to increase, and there have even been instances of fishermen and others illegally killing them.
With a population size of fifty, the low genetic diversity amongst the population post-fur trade but pre-discovery produced an evolutionary bottleneck. The recent population constraints put on the sea otter have led to low genomic diversity among species members, with much evidence of inbreeding. This inbreeding has led to the mutation of deleterious missense mutations, which may make fast-paced population growth difficult for conservation reasons. While longer-term recovery goals bolstering genetic diversity by inbreeding are costly and challenging, they could significantly aid in avoiding the further evolution of deleterious variation, thus aiding sea otter population stabilization. This method has already been utilized in returning cheetah populations to higher numbers and higher genetic diversity, and captive breeding programs through organizations such as the Monterey Bay Aquarium and The Marine Mammal Center make the chances of getting sea otter populations back up to pre-fur trade numbers possible. The population of sea otters in California has risen to around 3,000 in the wild. While this figure is far below pre-fur trade numbers, it represents a massive improvement in the conservation of the species and a massive increase in genetic diversity. On the other hand, northern sea otters have reached back up to pre-fur trade population numbers, with populations living all along the state&#x27;s coast from Ketchikan in the south to Attu in the west. Historical populations, however, are estimated to have been between 150,000 and 300,000 individuals living along the northern Pacific rim from Baja California to Hokkaido Island in Japan. Modern conservation techniques have included breeding northern and southern populations of sea otters to increase genetic diversity and prevent both inbreeding and genetic drift. Moreover, the introduction of the Marine Mammal Protection Act in the 1970s made their hunting highly illegal in the United States.

In the Aleutian Islands, a massive and unexpected disappearance of sea otters has occurred in recent decades. In the 1980s, the area was home to an estimated 55,000 to 100,000 sea otters, but the population fell to around 6,000 animals by 2000. The most widely accepted, but still controversial, hypothesis is that killer whales have been eating the otters. The pattern of disappearances is consistent with a rise in predation, but there has been no direct evidence of orcas preying on sea otters to any significant extent.
Another area of concern is California, where recovery began to fluctuate or decline in the late 1990s. Unusually high mortality rates amongst adult and subadult otters, particularly females, have been reported. In 2017 the US Geological Survey found a 3% drop in the sea otter population of the California coast. This number still keeps them on track for removal from the endangered species list, although just barely. Necropsies of dead sea otters indicate diseases, particularly &quot;Toxoplasma gondii&quot; and acanthocephalan parasite infections, are major causes of sea otter mortality in California. The &quot;Toxoplasma gondii&quot; parasite, which is often fatal to sea otters, is carried by wild and domestic cats and may be transmitted by domestic cat droppings flushed into the ocean via sewage systems. Although disease has clearly contributed to the deaths of many of California&#x27;s sea otters, it is not known why the California population is apparently more affected by disease than populations in other areas.

Sea otter habitat is preserved through several protected areas in the United States, Russia and Canada. In marine protected areas, polluting activities such as dumping of waste and oil drilling are typically prohibited. An estimated 1,200 sea otters live within the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary, and more than 500 live within the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary.

=== Economic impact ===
Some of the sea otter&#x27;s preferred prey species, particularly abalone, clams, and crabs, are also food sources for humans. In some areas, massive declines in shellfish harvests have been blamed on the sea otter, and intense public debate has taken place over how to manage the competition between sea otters and humans for seafood.

The debate is complicated because sea otters have sometimes been held responsible for declines of shellfish stocks that were more likely caused by overfishing, disease, pollution, and seismic activity. Shellfish declines have also occurred in many parts of the North American Pacific coast that do not have sea otters, and conservationists sometimes note the existence of large concentrations of shellfish on the coast is a recent development resulting from the fur trade&#x27;s near-extirpation of the sea otter. Although many factors affect shellfish stocks, sea otter predation can deplete a fishery to the point where it is no longer commercially viable. Scientists agree that sea otters and abalone fisheries cannot exist in the same area, and the same is likely true for certain other types of shellfish, as well.

Many facets of the interaction between sea otters and the human economy are not as immediately felt. Sea otters have been credited with contributing to the kelp harvesting industry via their well-known role in controlling sea urchin populations; kelp is used in the production of diverse food and pharmaceutical products. Although human divers harvest red sea urchins both for food and to protect the kelp, sea otters hunt more sea urchin species and are more consistently effective in controlling these populations. &quot;E. lutris&quot; is a controlling predator of the red king crab (&quot;Paralithodes camtschaticus&quot;) in the Bering Sea, which would otherwise be out of control as it is in its invasive range, the Barents Sea. (Berents otters, &quot;Lutra lutra&quot;, occupy the same ecological niche and so are believed to help to control them in the Berents but this has not been studied.) The health of the kelp forest ecosystem is significant in nurturing populations of fish, including commercially important fish species. In some areas, sea otters are popular tourist attractions, bringing visitors to local hotels, restaurants, and sea otter-watching expeditions.

=== Roles in human cultures ===

For many maritime indigenous cultures throughout the North Pacific, especially the Ainu in the Kuril Islands, the Koryaks and Itelmen of Kamchatka, the Aleut in the Aleutian Islands, the Haida of Haida Gwaii and a host of tribes on the Pacific coast of North America, the sea otter has played an important role as a cultural, as well as material, resource. These cultures, many of which have strongly animist traditions full of legends and stories in which many aspects of the natural world are associated with spirits, regarded the sea otter as particularly kin to humans. The Nuu-chah-nulth, Haida, and other First Nations of coastal British Columbia used the warm and luxurious pelts as chiefs&#x27; regalia. Sea-otter pelts were given in potlatches to mark coming-of-age ceremonies, weddings, and funerals. The Aleuts carved sea otter bones for use as ornaments and in games, and used powdered sea-otter baculum as a medicine for fever.

Some Ainu folk-tales portray the sea-otter as an occasional messenger between humans and the creator. The sea otter is a recurring figure in Ainu folklore. A major Ainu epic, the &quot;Kutune Shirka&quot;, tells the tale of wars and struggles over a golden sea-otter. Versions of a widespread Aleut legend tell of lovers or despairing women who plunge into the sea and become otters. These stories have been associated with the many human-like behavioral features of the sea otter, including apparent playfulness, strong mother-pup bonds and tool use, yielding to ready anthropomorphism. The beginning of commercial exploitation had a great impact on the human, as well as animal, populations. The Ainu and Aleuts have been displaced or their numbers are dwindling, while the coastal tribes of North America, where the otter is in any case greatly depleted, no longer rely as intimately on sea mammals for survival.

Since the mid-1970s, the beauty and charisma of the species have gained wide appreciation, and the sea otter has become an icon of environmental conservation. The round, expressive face and soft, furry body of the sea otter are depicted in a wide variety of souvenirs, postcards, clothing, and stuffed toys.

=== Aquariums and zoos ===
Sea otters can do well in captivity, and are featured in over 40 public aquariums and zoos. The Seattle Aquarium became the first institution to raise sea otters from conception to adulthood with the birth of Tichuk in 1979, followed by three more pups in the early 1980s. In 2007, a YouTube video of two sea otters holding paws drew 1.5 million viewers in two weeks, and had over 22 million views . Filmed five years previously at the Vancouver Aquarium, it was YouTube&#x27;s most popular animal video at the time, although it has since been surpassed. The lighter-colored otter in the video is Nyac, a survivor of the 1989 &quot;Exxon Valdez&quot; oil spill. Nyac died in September 2008, at the age of 20. Milo, the darker one, died of lymphoma in January 2012. 

Other sea otters at the Vancouver Aquarium have also gone viral. During the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, the livestream of Joey, a rescued sea otter pup at the Marine Mammal Rescue Center, attracted millions of viewers from across the world on YouTube and Twitch. Many viewers said the stream helped them cope with the anxiety and depression caused by the pandemic lockdowns. In June 2024, a video of another rescued sea otter pup, Tofino, received over 120,000,000 views and 5,000,000 likes on Instagram.

Beginning in 2019, the streamer Douglas Wreden, popularly known as DougDoug, has held charity streams for the Monterey Bay Aquarium to celebrate the birthday of Rosa the sea otter. As of 2024, DougDoug and his community have raised over $1,000,000 in Rosa&#x27;s name. 

=== Current conservation ===
Sea otters, being a known keystone species, need a humanitarian effort to be protected from endangerment through &quot;unregulated human exploitation&quot;. This species has increasingly been impacted by the large oil spills and environmental degradation caused by overfishing and entanglement in fishing gear. Current efforts have been made in legislation: the international Fur Seal Treaty, The Endangered Species Act, IUCN/The World Conservation Union, Convention on international Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, and the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972. Other conservation efforts are done through reintroduction and zoological parks.

Sea Otter Awareness Week is held every year during the last full week of September. Zoos, aquariums, and other educational institutions hold events highlighting sea otters, their ecological importance, and the challenges facing their conservation. It is organized and sponsored by Defenders of Wildlife, the Monterey Bay Aquarium, the California Department of Parks and Recreation, Sea Otter Savvy, and the Elakha Alliance.

==See also==
* California Fur Rush

==Notes==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Cited works ===
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* &quot;Enhydra lutris&quot; (Linnaeus, 1758) at the Integrated Taxonomic Information System
* &quot;Enhydra lutris&quot; (Linnaeus, 1758) at the World Register of Marine Species
* &quot;De Bestiis Marinis, or, The Beasts of the Sea&quot; (1751) (PDF), pp. 68–82, transcribed field notes from 18th-century German zoologist Georg Wilhelm Steller
* Precipice of Survival: The Southern Sea Otter (Adobe Flash), a 48-minute program on the southern sea otter&#x27;s history by the United States Geological Survey</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="4" end="13" title="Sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="36" end="49" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="99" end="118" title="Pacific Ocean" label="North Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="130" end="135" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="203" end="216" title="Mustelidae" label="weasel family"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="367" end="370" title="fur" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916569" start="581" end="587" title="Foraging" label="forage"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="615" end="628" title="Invertebrate" label="invertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="637" end="647" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="658" end="665" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="671" end="681" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="704" end="708" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190928" start="781" end="793" title="Tool use by sea otters" label="use of rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q518808" start="913" end="929" title="keystone species" label="keystone species"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="943" end="953" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q575913" start="1016" end="1027" title="kelp forest" label="kelp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="1028" end="1037" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440116" start="1440" end="1462" title="sea otter conservation" label="sea otter conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916831" start="1703" end="1722" title="marine conservation" label="marine conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="1752" end="1768" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1773" end="1783" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="1904" end="1922" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q83774" start="1976" end="1987" title="giant otter" label="giant otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="2047" end="2057" title="Mustelidae" label="Mustelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="2096" end="2101" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28521" start="2142" end="2148" title="weasel" label="weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="2151" end="2157" title="badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17700" start="2164" end="2168" title="mink" label="mink"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2218" end="2222" title=":Category:Shelters built or used by animals" label="dens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410542" start="2226" end="2232" title="burrow" label="burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q484645" start="2259" end="2276" title="anal scent glands" label="anal scent glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25587" start="2549" end="2561" title="earless seal" label="earless seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="2564" end="2571" title="Molecular phylogeny" label="Genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="2621" end="2627" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q577677" start="2665" end="2687" title="speckle-throated otter" label="speckle-throated otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="2689" end="2703" title="Eurasian otter" label="Eurasian otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q46148" start="2705" end="2727" title="African clawless otter" label="African clawless otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q244277" start="2732" end="2756" title="Asian small-clawed otter" label="Asian small-clawed otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2813" end="2819" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q92891178" start="2980" end="2998" title="Enhydra macrodonta" label="Enhydra macrodonta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3105" end="3119" title="Enhydra reevei" label="Enhydra reevei"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="3136" end="3147" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="3151" end="3162" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="3215" end="3223" title="Hokkaidō" label="Hokkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="3264" end="3280" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="3291" end="3297" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="3351" end="3358" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25431" start="3362" end="3370" title="sirenian" label="sirenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="3377" end="3385" title="pinniped" label="pinniped"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="3754" end="3763" title="DNA sequencing" label="sequenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="3826" end="3849" title="Speciation" label="evolutionary divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="4112" end="4115" title="fur" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4253" end="4266" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q885539" start="4466" end="4473" title="blubber" label="blubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q212328" start="4493" end="4503" title="Sebaceous gland" label="oil glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="4565" end="4570" title="Bone" label="bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q46148" start="4752" end="4774" title="African clawless otter" label="African clawless otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q853421" start="4910" end="4926" title="Quantitative trait locus" label="polygenic traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q25587" start="5209" end="5222" title="Earless seal" label="earless seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="5232" end="5238" title="Harbor seal" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q676454" start="5243" end="5253" title="Monk seal" label="monk seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="5875" end="5888" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="6021" end="6028" title="Genomics" label="genomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="6384" end="6397" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q57222" start="6503" end="6516" title="Georg Steller" label="Georg Steller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="6561" end="6574" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="6596" end="6639" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="10th edition of &amp;quot;Systema Naturae&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="6835" end="6848" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6970" end="6975" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="7083" end="7089" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="7243" end="7251" title="Nominate subspecies" label="nominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="7303" end="7316" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q208268" start="7345" end="7362" title="Commander Islands" label="Commander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="7507" end="7523" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7798" end="7807" title="Jaw#Mammals" label="mandibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233438" start="7859" end="7867" title="Rostrum (anatomy)" label="rostrums"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="7945" end="7958" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q835986" start="8482" end="8489" title="baculum" label="baculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q885539" start="8624" end="8631" title="blubber" label="blubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="8670" end="8673" title="fur" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181974" start="8776" end="8787" title="guard hairs" label="guard hairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="9328" end="9332" title="molt" label="molt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="9565" end="9573" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="9597" end="9603" title="pelage" label="pelage"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740471" start="10021" end="10027" title="webbed foot" label="webbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233526" start="10342" end="10356" title="osteosclerosis" label="osteosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289906" start="10501" end="10520" title="Aquatic ecosystem" label="aquatic environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="10991" end="11011" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="11272" end="11280" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="12091" end="12098" title="buoyant" label="buoyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q206120" start="12120" end="12133" title="lung capacity" label="lung capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="12349" end="12357" title="vibrissa" label="whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="12405" end="12410" title="touch" label="touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="12599" end="12604" title="Olfaction" label="smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="12628" end="12633" title="Visual perception" label="sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="12798" end="12805" title="hearing (sense)" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="12866" end="12871" title="teeth" label="teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="12890" end="12896" title="Molar (tooth)" label="molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="12963" end="12968" title="Pinniped" label="Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="12997" end="13006" title="carnivore" label="carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="13032" end="13039" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="13075" end="13089" title="dentition" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q623293" start="13202" end="13216" title="metabolic rate" label="metabolic rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="13264" end="13275" title="Terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313244" start="13710" end="13723" title="Reniculate kidney" label="large kidneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="13837" end="13844" title="Diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="14633" end="14637" title="lice" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q468469" start="14837" end="14846" title="sea floor" label="sea floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="15144" end="15149" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192868" start="15218" end="15222" title="clam" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="15267" end="15271" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="15771" end="15777" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="15866" end="15873" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190928" start="16132" end="16144" title="Tool use by sea otters" label="use of rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="16194" end="16200" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857439" start="16320" end="16327" title="abalone" label="abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="16985" end="16989" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="17712" end="17716" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307505" start="17962" end="17975" title="social animal" label="social animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105315" start="18128" end="18138" title="Polygyny in animals" label="polygynous"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="18725" end="18734" title="Gestation" label="Gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456044" start="18808" end="18828" title="delayed implantation" label="delayed implantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="19444" end="19451" title="Lactation" label="Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188641" start="19659" end="19665" title="nipple" label="nipple"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="19757" end="19765" title="mustelid" label="mustelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349" start="19983" end="19991" title="starfish" label="starfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849544" start="21441" end="21457" title="Seattle Aquarium" label="Seattle Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q126811295" start="21568" end="21572" title="Adaa (sea otter)" label="Adaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="21651" end="21656" title="teeth" label="teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q575913" start="21965" end="21976" title="kelp forest" label="kelp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="21983" end="21996" title="barrier reefs" label="barrier reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632159" start="22052" end="22062" title="substrate (marine biology)" label="substrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378564" start="22233" end="22242" title="drift ice" label="drift ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q576515" start="22251" end="22264" title="land-fast ice" label="land-fast ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="22516" end="22541" title="Baja California Peninsula" label="Baja California Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="22822" end="22830" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22861" end="22880" title="Punta Morro Hermosa" label="Punta Morro Hermosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15269273" start="22896" end="22909" title="Punta Eugenia" label="Punta Eugenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46508" start="22911" end="22933" title="Baja California Sur" label="Baja California&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="22958" end="22964" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197023" start="23103" end="23113" title="threatened species" label="threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="23586" end="23597" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="23602" end="23611" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="23619" end="23633" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="23691" end="23699" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057904" start="23849" end="23861" title="Cape Nosappu" label="Cape Nosappu"/>
<link wikidata="Q187124" start="23863" end="23868" title="Erimo, Hokkaido" label="Erimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185978" start="23870" end="23878" title="Hamanaka, Hokkaido" label="Hamanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q502205" start="23883" end="23889" title="Nemuro, Hokkaido" label="Nemuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="24038" end="24054" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="24128" end="24137" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="24142" end="24157" title="Sakhalin Island" label="Sakhalin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q41602" start="24202" end="24216" title="Sea of Okhotsk" label="Sea of Okhotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="24293" end="24306" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q208268" start="24341" end="24358" title="Commander Islands" label="Commander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q866283" start="24785" end="24802" title="carrying capacity" label="carrying capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452777" start="25098" end="25105" title="Kyuquot, British Columbia" label="Kyuquot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034490" start="25381" end="25391" title="Cape Scott Provincial Park" label="Cape Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q611007" start="25437" end="25458" title="Broughton Archipelago" label="Broughton Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099243" start="25472" end="25487" title="Clayoquot Sound" label="Clayoquot Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q462564" start="25492" end="25498" title="Tofino" label="Tofino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333928" start="25870" end="25888" title="Aristazabal Island" label="Aristazabal Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850825" start="25894" end="25908" title="Milbanke Sound" label="Milbanke Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624056" start="25918" end="25932" title="Calvert Island (British Columbia)" label="Calvert Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="26060" end="26066" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="26338" end="26354" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="26437" end="26441" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q631282" start="26494" end="26514" title="Prince William Sound" label="Prince William Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196587" start="26540" end="26574" title="Exxon Valdez oil spill" label="&amp;quot;Exxon Valdez&amp;quot; oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q460282" start="26699" end="26714" title="Amchitka Island" label="Amchitka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="26718" end="26728" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q554902" start="26748" end="26755" title="La Push" label="La Push"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208033" start="26760" end="26775" title="Point Grenville" label="Point Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034424" start="27050" end="27063" title="Cape Flattery" label="Cape Flattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q867627" start="27112" end="27134" title="Strait of Juan de Fuca" label="Strait of Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196315" start="27323" end="27339" title="San Juan Islands" label="San Juan Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="27344" end="27355" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="27385" end="27411" title="North American river otter" label="North American river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q460282" start="27720" end="27735" title="Amchitka Island" label="Amchitka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q924884" start="28121" end="28130" title="Depoe Bay" label="Depoe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797345" start="28139" end="28151" title="Oregon Coast" label="Oregon Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919293" start="28530" end="28548" title="Bixby Creek Bridge" label="Bixby Creek Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193314" start="28626" end="28638" title="Pigeon Point Lighthouse" label="Pigeon Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q108101" start="28642" end="28658" title="San Mateo County" label="San Mateo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108106" start="28662" end="28682" title="Santa Barbara County" label="Santa Barbara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="28718" end="28735" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q753193" start="28769" end="28793" title="Russian-American Company" label="Russian-American Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="28800" end="28806" title="Aleut people" label="Aleuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="28938" end="28946" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q169943" start="28948" end="28957" title="San Mateo, California" label="San Mateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q667738" start="28959" end="28968" title="San Bruno, California" label="San Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q531734" start="28980" end="28992" title="Angel Island (California)" label="Angel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278115" start="29009" end="29018" title="Fort Ross" label="Fort Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477175" start="29020" end="29031" title="Ivan Kuskov" label="Ivan Kuskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542906" start="29463" end="29477" title="George Nidever" label="George Nidever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537602" start="29482" end="29494" title="George Calvert Yount" label="George Yount"/>
<link wikidata="Q751347" start="29572" end="29589" title="San Joaquin River" label="San Joaquin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291183" start="29734" end="29757" title="Rancho Punta de Quentin" label="Rancho Punta de Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220090" start="29781" end="29798" title="John B. R. Cooper" label="John B. R. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187571" start="29847" end="29869" title="Juan Bautista Alvarado" label="Juan Bautista Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173218" start="29953" end="29971" title="Corte Madera Creek (Marin County, California)" label="Corte Madera Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q128362" start="30046" end="30064" title="San Nicolas Island" label="San Nicolas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348353" start="30324" end="30341" title="San Miguel Island" label="San Miguel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307973" start="31265" end="31281" title="Point Conception" label="Point Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096135" start="32369" end="32382" title="white abalone" label="white abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q859413" start="32704" end="32711" title="Big Sur" label="Big Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853220" start="32906" end="32919" title="Tunitas Creek" label="Tunitas Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193314" start="32944" end="32956" title="Pigeon Point Lighthouse" label="Pigeon Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856587" start="33004" end="33017" title="Gaviota Coast" label="Gaviota Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137761" start="33037" end="33051" title="Coal Oil Point" label="Coal Oil Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528327" start="33055" end="33073" title="Gaviota State Park" label="Gaviota State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q424720" start="33090" end="33101" title="microcystin" label="microcystin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="33125" end="33138" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q309928" start="33146" end="33157" title="Microcystis" label="Microcystis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129026" start="33615" end="33632" title="Great white shark" label="Great white shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="33883" end="33913" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193314" start="34237" end="34249" title="Pigeon Point Lighthouse" label="Pigeon Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="34526" end="34557" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="34696" end="34718" title="Endangered Species Act" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q921424" start="34867" end="34895" title="Marine Mammal Protection Act" label="Marine Mammal Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="35347" end="35372" title="Baja California Peninsula" label="Baja California Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q15269273" start="35486" end="35499" title="Punta Eugenia" label="Punta Eugenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q443000" start="35547" end="35569" title="Sebastián Vizcaíno Bay" label="Sebastián Vizcaíno Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142925" start="35639" end="35656" title="San Benito Island" label="San Benito Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q527959" start="35658" end="35671" title="Cedros Island" label="Cedros Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143651" start="35677" end="35691" title="Isla Natividad" label="Isla Natividad"/>
<link wikidata="Q128362" start="36140" end="36158" title="San Nicolas Island" label="San Nicolas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="36558" end="36568" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916569" start="36655" end="36663" title="foraging" label="foraging"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="36942" end="36956" title="apex predators" label="apex predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q182238" start="37079" end="37086" title="Benthos" label="benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="37112" end="37122" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912671" start="37139" end="37170" title="Strongylocentrotus franciscanus" label="Strongylocentrotus franciscanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936405" start="37187" end="37200" title="Strongylocentrotus purpuratus" label="S. purpuratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127470" start="37209" end="37221" title="sea cucumber" label="sea cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242916" start="37224" end="37243" title="Urechis caupo" label="fat innkeeper worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="37245" end="37255" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="37271" end="37278" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188906" start="37288" end="37294" title="chiton" label="chiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073419" start="37311" end="37329" title="Katharina tunicata" label="Katharina tunicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="37338" end="37343" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857439" start="37353" end="37360" title="abalone" label="abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076044" start="37366" end="37372" title="limpet" label="limpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3168571" start="37389" end="37403" title="Diodora aspera" label="Diodora aspera"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="37416" end="37423" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192868" start="37433" end="37437" title="clam" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="37440" end="37446" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27855" start="37463" end="37477" title="Mytilus edulis" label="Mytilus edulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953521" start="37514" end="37533" title="Crassadoma gigantea" label="Crassadoma gigantea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076044" start="37576" end="37582" title="limpet" label="limpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="37588" end="37592" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002060" start="37597" end="37610" title="giant octopus" label="giant octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013275" start="37818" end="37828" title="Pismo clam" label="Pismo clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q460282" start="37922" end="37937" title="Amchitka Island" label="Amchitka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q866283" start="37990" end="38007" title="carrying capacity" label="carrying capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753243" start="38152" end="38179" title="Hemilepidotus hemilepidotus" label="Hemilepidotus hemilepidotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="38197" end="38211" title="Tetraodontidae" label="Tetraodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349" start="38397" end="38405" title="starfish" label="starfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="38415" end="38419" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q679154" start="38607" end="38620" title="western grebe" label="western grebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="38632" end="38641" title="cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="38644" end="38648" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q190342" start="38651" end="38662" title="common loon" label="common loon"/>
<link wikidata="Q742468" start="38669" end="38680" title="surf scoter" label="surf scoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q518808" start="39575" end="39591" title="keystone species" label="keystone species"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="39725" end="39732" title="benthic" label="benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="39770" end="39780" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q575913" start="39925" end="39936" title="kelp forest" label="kelp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048184" start="39956" end="39971" title="Cascade effect (ecology)" label="cascade effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900300" start="40061" end="40074" title="urchin barren" label="urchin barren"/>
<link wikidata="Q859413" start="40599" end="40606" title="Big Sur" label="Big Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="40654" end="40663" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="40930" end="40939" title="estuaries" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="40999" end="41005" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="41190" end="41194" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q379732" start="41196" end="41204" title="California sea lion" label="Sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="41210" end="41220" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="41297" end="41303" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="41477" end="41497" title="Katmai National Park" label="Katmai National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="41499" end="41510" title="wolf" label="grey wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="41560" end="41572" title="Urban runoff" label="Urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q131003" start="41624" end="41641" title="Toxoplasma gondii" label="Toxoplasma gondii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075151" start="41652" end="41669" title="obligate parasite" label="obligate parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632594" start="41740" end="41759" title="Sarcocystis neurona" label="Sarcocystis neurona"/>
<link wikidata="Q161393" start="41923" end="41937" title="H1N1 flu virus" label="H1N1 flu virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="42227" end="42245" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q323002" start="42320" end="42338" title="Maritime Fur Trade" label="Maritime Fur Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q156337" start="42715" end="42722" title="Kyakhta" label="Kyakhta"/>
<link wikidata="Q127641" start="42798" end="42810" title="Vitus Bering" label="Vitus Bering"/>
<link wikidata="Q193962" start="42954" end="42967" title="Bering Island" label="Bering Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q208268" start="42975" end="42992" title="Commander Islands" label="Commander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q57222" start="43084" end="43097" title="Georg Steller" label="Georg Steller"/>
<link wikidata="Q26423" start="43510" end="43515" title="sable" label="sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="43899" end="43915" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="43956" end="43962" title="Aleut people" label="Aleuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="44363" end="44369" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="44380" end="44391" title="Tsar Paul I" label="Tsar Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q753193" start="44446" end="44470" title="Russian-American Company" label="Russian-American Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="44588" end="44600" title="Aleksander I" label="Aleksander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="44979" end="44989" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="45037" end="45053" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="45103" end="45121" title="Captain James Cook" label="Captain James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="45130" end="45146" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="45429" end="45446" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278115" start="45990" end="45999" title="Fort Ross, California" label="Fort Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="46337" end="46348" title="Alaska purchase" label="sold Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="46474" end="46484" title="Local extinction" label="extirpated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056258" start="46752" end="46807" title="North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911" label="Treaty for the Preservation and Protection of Fur Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="46975" end="46982" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="47207" end="47211" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="47244" end="47262" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="47319" end="47332" title="oil pollution" label="oil pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="47347" end="47351" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="47354" end="47362" title="poaching" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="47522" end="47540" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409928" start="47640" end="47668" title="History of the Soviet Union (1985–1991)" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="47826" end="47835" title="oil spill" label="oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="48032" end="48043" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="48049" end="48054" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="48056" end="48062" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="48069" end="48073" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196587" start="48163" end="48197" title="Exxon Valdez oil spill" label="&amp;quot;Exxon Valdez&amp;quot; oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q631282" start="48249" end="48269" title="Prince William Sound" label="Prince William Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q815715" start="49361" end="49384" title="Population bottleneck" label="evolutionary bottleneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656896" start="49587" end="49605" title="Missense mutation" label="missense mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754233" start="50111" end="50132" title="Monterey Bay Aquarium" label="Monterey Bay Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521787" start="50137" end="50161" title="The Marine Mammal Center" label="The Marine Mammal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q43981" start="50666" end="50675" title="Ketchikan, Alaska" label="Ketchikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="50692" end="50696" title="Attu Island" label="Attu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="50853" end="50868" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="50872" end="50887" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q921424" start="51111" end="51139" title="Marine Mammal Protection Act" label="Marine Mammal Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="52153" end="52163" title="Necropsies" label="Necropsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131003" start="52221" end="52238" title="Toxoplasma gondii" label="Toxoplasma gondii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178235" start="52249" end="52263" title="acanthocephala" label="acanthocephala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="52812" end="52827" title="Marine protected area" label="protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65148973" start="52835" end="52848" title="Protected areas of the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959314" start="52850" end="52856" title="Protected areas in Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828312" start="52861" end="52867" title="Protected areas of Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767000" start="53031" end="53069" title="Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary" label="Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q936014" start="53105" end="53144" title="Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary" label="Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857439" start="53237" end="53244" title="abalone" label="abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192868" start="53246" end="53250" title="clam" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="53257" end="53261" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="53333" end="53342" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="53655" end="53666" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="53692" end="53699" title="seismic" label="seismic"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="53992" end="54003" title="Local extinction" label="extirpation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="54485" end="54489" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912671" start="54681" end="54695" title="red sea urchin" label="red sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q721171" start="54901" end="54914" title="red king crab" label="red king crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="55031" end="55045" title="invasive species" label="invasive range"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="55051" end="55062" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="55087" end="55098" title="Lutra lutra" label="Lutra lutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="55404" end="55422" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="55626" end="55630" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu"/>
<link wikidata="Q281117" start="55657" end="55664" title="Koryaks" label="Koryaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147405" start="55669" end="55676" title="Itelmen" label="Itelmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="55695" end="55700" title="Aleut people" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q210332" start="55730" end="55735" title="Haida people" label="Haida"/>
<link wikidata="Q210907" start="55739" end="55750" title="Haida Gwaii" label="Haida Gwaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q210561" start="55765" end="55809" title="Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast" label="tribes on the Pacific coast of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="55944" end="55951" title="animist" label="animist"/>
<link wikidata="Q537784" start="56121" end="56135" title="Nuu-chah-nulth people" label="Nuu-chah-nulth"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="56154" end="56167" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q756880" start="56285" end="56293" title="potlatch" label="potlatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q835986" start="56451" end="56458" title="baculum" label="baculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="56490" end="56494" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193421" start="56654" end="56658" title="Yukar" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050522" start="56670" end="56683" title="Kutune Shirka" label="Kutune Shirka"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="57055" end="57071" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920296" start="57764" end="57773" title="Captivity (animal)" label="captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281788" start="57803" end="57818" title="public aquarium" label="public aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43501" start="57824" end="57827" title="zoo" label="zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849544" start="57834" end="57850" title="Seattle Aquarium" label="Seattle Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="58022" end="58029" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q185228" start="58174" end="58192" title="Vancouver Aquarium" label="Vancouver Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196587" start="58364" end="58398" title="Exxon Valdez oil spill" label="&amp;quot;Exxon Valdez&amp;quot; oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="58581" end="58603" title="2020 COVID-19 pandemic" label="2020 COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113275467" start="59074" end="59082" title="DougDoug" label="DougDoug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754233" start="59117" end="59138" title="Monterey Bay Aquarium" label="Monterey Bay Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q111913984" start="59168" end="59172" title="Rosa (sea otter)" label="Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020499" start="60412" end="60431" title="California Fur Rush" label="California Fur Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q82575" start="60582" end="60621" title="Integrated Taxonomic Information System" label="Integrated Taxonomic Information System"/>
<link wikidata="Q604063" start="60675" end="60707" title="World Register of Marine Species" label="World Register of Marine Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="60776" end="60779" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q57222" start="60852" end="60873" title="Georg Wilhelm Steller" label="Georg Wilhelm Steller"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="60923" end="60934" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="61005" end="61036" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567472" wikidata="Q906347" url="?curid=567472" title="Cloud condensation nuclei">
<text>Cloud condensation nuclei (CCNs), also known as cloud seeds, are small particles typically 0.2 μm, or one hundredth the size of a cloud droplet. CCNs are a unique subset of aerosols in the atmosphere on which water vapour condenses. This can affect the radiative properties of clouds and the overall atmosphere. Water vapour requires a non-gaseous surface to make the transition to a liquid; this process is called condensation.

In the atmosphere of Earth, this surface presents itself as tiny solid or liquid particles called CCNs. When no CCNs are present, water vapour can be supercooled at about for 5–6 hours before droplets spontaneously form. This is the basis of the cloud chamber for detecting subatomic particles.

The concept of CCN is used in cloud seeding, which tries to encourage rainfall by seeding the air with condensation nuclei. It has further been suggested that creating such nuclei could be used for marine cloud brightening, a climate engineering technique. Some natural environmental phenomena, such as the one proposed in the CLAW hypothesis also arise from the interaction between naturally produced CCNs and cloud formation.

==Properties==

=== Size ===
A typical raindrop is about 2 mm in diameter, a typical cloud droplet is on the order of 0.02 mm, and a typical cloud condensation nucleus (aerosol) is on the order of 0.0001 mm or 0.1 μm or greater in diameter. The number of cloud condensation nuclei in the air can be measured at ranges between around 100 to 1000 per cm3. The total mass of CCNs injected into the atmosphere has been estimated at over a year&#x27;s time.

=== Composition ===
There are many different types of atmospheric particulates that can act as CCN. The particles may be composed of dust or clay, soot or black carbon from grassland or forest fires, sea salt from ocean wave spray, soot from factory smokestacks or internal combustion engines, sulfate from volcanic activity, phytoplankton or the oxidation of sulfur dioxide and secondary organic matter formed by the oxidation of volatile organic compounds. The ability of these different types of particles to form cloud droplets varies according to their size and also their exact composition, as the hygroscopic properties of these different constituents are very different. Sulfate and sea salt, for instance, readily absorb water whereas soot, organic carbon, and mineral particles do not. This is made even more complicated by the fact that many of the chemical species may be mixed within the particles (in particular the sulfate and organic carbon). Additionally, while some particles (such as soot and minerals) do not make very good CCN, they do act as ice nuclei in colder parts of the atmosphere.

=== Abundance ===
The number and type of CCNs can affect the precipitation amount, lifetimes, and radiative properties of clouds and their lifetimes. Ultimately, this has an influence on climate change. Modeling research led by Marcia Baker revealed that sources and sinks are balanced by coagulation and coalescence which leads to stable levels of CCNs in the atmosphere. There is also speculation that solar variation may affect cloud properties via CCNs, and hence affect climate.

=== Airborne Measurements ===
The airborne measurements of these individual mixed aerosols that can form CCN at SGP site were performed using a research aircraft. CCN study by Kulkarni et al 2023 describes the complexity in modeling CCN concentrations.

== Applications ==

=== Cloud seeding ===
Cloud seeding is a process by which small particulates are added to the atmosphere to induce cloud formation and precipitation. This has been done by dispersing salts using aerial or ground-based methods. Other methods have been researched, like using laser pulses to excite molecules in the atmosphere, and more recently, in 2021, electric charge emission using drones. The effectiveness of these methods is not consistent. Many studies did not notice a statistically significant difference in precipitation while others have. Cloud seeding may also occur from natural processes such as forest fires, which release small particles into the atmosphere that can act as nuclei.

=== Marine cloud brightening ===
Marine cloud brightening is a climate engineering technique which involves the injection of small particles into clouds to enhance their reflectivity, or albedo. The motive behind this technique is to control the amount of sunlight allowed to reach ocean surfaces in hopes of lowering surface temperatures through radiative forcing. Many methods involve the creation of small droplets of seawater to deliver sea salt particles into overlying clouds.

Complications may arise when reactive chlorine and bromine from sea salt react with existing molecules in the atmosphere. They have been shown to reduce ozone in the atmosphere; the same effect reduces hydroxide which correlates to the increased longevity of methane, a greenhouse gas.

==Relation with phytoplankton and climate==
A 1987 article in &quot;Nature&quot; found that global climate may occur in a feedback loop due to the relationship between CCNs, the temperature regulating behaviors of clouds, and oceanic phytoplankton. This phenomenon has since been referred to as the CLAW hypothesis, after the authors of the original study. A common CCN over oceans is sulphate aerosols. These aerosols are formed from the dimethyl sulfide (DMS) produced by algae found in seawater. Large algal blooms, observed to have increased in areas such as the South China Sea, can contribute a substantial amount of DMS into their surrounding atmospheres, leading to increased cloud formation. As the activity of phytoplankton is temperature reliant, this negative-feedback loop can act as a form of climate regulation.

&quot;The Revenge of Gaia&quot;, written by James Lovelock, an author of the 1987 study, proposes an alternative relationship between ocean temperatures and phytoplankton population size. This has been named the anti-CLAW hypothesis In this scenario, the stratification of oceans causes nutrient-rich cold water to become trapped under warmer water, where sunlight for photosynthesis is most abundant. This inhibits the growth of phytoplankton, resulting in the decrease in their population, and the sulfate CCNs they produce, with increasing temperature. This interaction thus lowers cloud albedo through decreasing CCN-induced cloud formations and increases the solar radiation allowed to reach ocean surfaces, resulting in a positive-feedback loop. 

== From volcanoes ==
Volcanoes emit a significant amount of microscopic gas and ash particles into the atmosphere when they erupt, which become atmospheric aerosols. By increasing the number of aerosol particles through gas-to-particle conversion processes, the contents of these eruptions can then affect the concentrations of potential cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) and ice nucleating particles (INP), which in turn affects cloud properties and leads to changes in local or regional climate.

Of these gases, sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide, and water vapour are most commonly found in volcanic eruptions. While water vapour and carbon dioxide CCNs are naturally abundant in the atmosphere, the increase of sulfur dioxide CCNs can impact the climate by causing global cooling. Almost 9.2 Tg of sulfur dioxide () is emitted from volcanoes annually. This sulphur dioxide undergoes a transformation into sulfuric acid, which quickly condenses in the stratosphere to produce fine sulphate aerosols. The Earth&#x27;s lower atmosphere, or troposphere, cools as a result of the aerosols&#x27; increased capability to reflect solar radiation back into space.

==Effect on air pollution==
==See also==
* Bergeron process
* Contrail
* Evapotranspiration
* Global dimming
* Nucleation
* Seed crystal
* Water cycle

==References==
==Further reading==
* Fletcher, Neville H. (2011). The physics of rainclouds (Paperback ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-15479-6. OCLC 85709529
==External links==
* www.grida.no
* An easy experiment to do at home (in French)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q906347" start="0" end="25" title="Cloud condensation nuclei" label="Cloud condensation nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q906347" start="27" end="31" title="Cloud condensation nuclei" label="CCNs"/>
<link wikidata="Q906347" start="48" end="59" title="Cloud condensation nuclei" label="cloud seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621273" start="71" end="79" title="particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="95" end="97" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="130" end="135" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="209" end="221" title="Water vapor" label="water vapour"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="312" end="317" title="Water" label="Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="318" end="324" title="vapor" label="vapour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="340" end="343" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="384" end="390" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q166583" start="415" end="427" title="condensation" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="437" end="456" title="atmosphere of Earth" label="atmosphere of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="495" end="500" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q213659" start="580" end="591" title="supercooling" label="supercooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q214634" start="676" end="689" title="cloud chamber" label="cloud chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q217418" start="756" end="769" title="cloud seeding" label="cloud seeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135716" start="924" end="948" title="marine cloud brightening" label="marine cloud brightening"/>
<link wikidata="Q921851" start="952" end="971" title="climate engineering" label="climate engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023830" start="1053" end="1068" title="CLAW hypothesis" label="CLAW hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="1324" end="1331" title="Particulate" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="1675" end="1687" title="Atmospheric particulate matter" label="particulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="1750" end="1754" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="1756" end="1760" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233590" start="1764" end="1776" title="black carbon" label="black carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="1903" end="1910" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="1916" end="1924" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="1935" end="1948" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="1969" end="1983" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="2040" end="2066" title="volatile organic compounds" label="volatile organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="2213" end="2224" title="hygroscopic" label="hygroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136993" start="2673" end="2683" title="ice nuclei" label="ice nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="2842" end="2847" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2907" end="2921" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q108191323" start="2948" end="2960" title="Marcia Baker" label="Marcia Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784790" start="3009" end="3020" title="Coagulation (water treatment)" label="coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141256" start="3025" end="3036" title="Coalescence (chemistry)" label="coalescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49385" start="3124" end="3139" title="solar variation" label="solar variation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3188" end="3202" title="Cosmic rays#Postulated role in climate change" label="affect climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="4365" end="4371" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463606" start="4525" end="4542" title="radiative forcing" label="radiative forcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q423133" start="5388" end="5404" title="dimethyl sulfide" label="dimethyl sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="5454" end="5466" title="Algal bloom" label="algal blooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760508" start="5783" end="5802" title="The Revenge of Gaia" label="The Revenge of Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="6368" end="6374" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152079" start="6611" end="6614" title="ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136993" start="6905" end="6935" title="Ice nucleus" label="ice nucleating particles (INP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322176" start="7295" end="7309" title="global cooling" label="global cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="7435" end="7448" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q285332" start="7729" end="7745" title="Bergeron process" label="Bergeron process"/>
<link wikidata="Q207546" start="7748" end="7756" title="Contrail" label="Contrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q828158" start="7759" end="7777" title="Evapotranspiration" label="Evapotranspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q211627" start="7780" end="7794" title="Global dimming" label="Global dimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q909022" start="7797" end="7807" title="Nucleation" label="Nucleation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899429" start="7810" end="7822" title="Seed crystal" label="Seed crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81041" start="7825" end="7836" title="Water cycle" label="Water cycle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567475" wikidata="Q76748" url="?curid=567475" title="Rudolf Otto">
<text>Rudolf Otto (25 September 1869 – 7 March 1937) was a German Lutheran theologian, philosopher, and comparative religionist. He is regarded as one of the most influential scholars of religion in the early twentieth century and is best known for his concept of the &quot;numinous&quot;, a profound emotional experience he argued was at the heart of the world&#x27;s religions. While his work started in the domain of liberal Christian theology, its main thrust was always apologetical, seeking to defend religion against naturalist critiques. Otto eventually came to conceive of his work as part of a science of religion, which was divided into the philosophy of religion, the history of religion, and the psychology of religion.

==Life==
Born in Peine near Hanover, Otto was raised in a pious Christian family. He attended the Gymnasium Andreanum in Hildesheim and studied at the universities of Erlangen and Göttingen, where he wrote his dissertation on Martin Luther&#x27;s understanding of the Holy Spirit (&quot;Die Anschauung von heiligen Geiste bei Luther: Eine historisch-dogmatische Untersuchung&quot;), and his habilitation on Kant (&quot;Naturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht&quot;). By 1906, he held a position as extraordinary professor, and in 1910 he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Giessen.

Otto&#x27;s fascination with non-Christian religions was awakened during an extended trip from 1911 to 1912 through North Africa, Palestine, British India, China, Japan, and the United States. He cited a 1911 visit to a Moroccan synagogue as a key inspiration for the theme of the Holy he would later develop. Otto became a member of the Prussian parliament in 1913 and retained this position through the First World War. In 1917, he spearheaded an effort to simplify the system of weighting votes in Prussian elections. He then served in the post-war constituent assembly in 1918, and remained involved in the politics of the Weimar Republic.

Meanwhile, in 1915, he became ordinary professor at the University of Breslau, and in 1917, at the University of Marburg&#x27;s Divinity School, then one of the most famous Protestant seminaries in the world. Although he received several other calls, he remained in Marburg for the rest of his life. He retired in 1929 but continued writing afterward. On 6 March 1937, he died of pneumonia, after suffering serious injuries falling about twenty meters from a tower in October 1936. There were lasting rumors that the fall was a suicide attempt but this has never been confirmed. He is buried in the Marburg cemetery.

==Thought==
===Influences===
In his early years Otto was most influenced by the German idealist theologian and philosopher Friedrich Schleiermacher and his conceptualization of the category of the religious as a type of emotion or consciousness irreducible to ethical or rational epistemologies. In this, Otto saw Schleiermacher as having recaptured a sense of holiness lost in the Age of Enlightenment. Schleiermacher described this religious feeling as one of absolute dependence; Otto eventually rejected this characterization as too closely analogous to earthly dependence and emphasized the complete otherness of the religious feeling from the mundane world (see below). In 1904, while a student at the University of Göttingen, Otto became a proponent of the philosophy of Jakob Fries along with two fellow students.

===Early works===
Otto&#x27;s first book, &quot;Naturalism and Religion&quot; (1904) divides the world ontologically into the mental and the physical, a position reflecting Cartesian dualism. Otto argues consciousness cannot be explained in terms of physical or neural processes, and also accords it epistemological primacy by arguing all knowledge of the physical world is mediated by personal experience. On the other hand, he disagrees with Descartes&#x27; characterization of the mental as a rational realm, positing instead that rationality is built upon a nonrational intuitive realm.

In 1909, he published his next book, &quot;The Philosophy of Religion Based on Kant and Fries&quot;, in which he examines the thought of Kant and Fries and from there attempts to build a philosophical framework within which religious experience can take place. While Kant&#x27;s philosophy said thought occurred in a rational domain, Fries diverged and said it also occurred in practical and aesthetic domains; Otto pursued Fries&#x27; line of thinking further and suggested another nonrational domain of the thought, the religious. He felt intuition was valuable in rational domains like mathematics, but subject to the corrective of reason, whereas religious intuitions might not be subject to that corrective.

These two early works were influenced by the rationalist approaches of Immanuel Kant and Jakob Fries. Otto stated that they focused on the rational aspects of the divine (the &quot;Ratio aeterna&quot;) whereas his next (and most influential) book focused on the nonrational aspects of the divine.

===&quot;The Idea of the Holy&quot;===

Otto&#x27;s most famous work, &quot;The Idea of the Holy&quot; was one of the most successful German theological books of the 20th century, has never gone out of print, and is available in about 20 languages. The central argument of the book concerns the term &quot;numinous&quot;, which Otto coined. He explains the numinous as a &quot;non-rational, non-sensory experience or feeling whose primary and immediate object is outside the self&quot;. This mental state &quot;presents itself as &quot;ganz Andere&quot;, wholly other, a condition absolutely &quot;sui generis&quot; and incomparable whereby the human being finds himself utterly abashed.&quot; According to Mark Wynn in the &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;, &quot;The Idea of the Holy&quot; falls within a paradigm in the philosophy of emotion in which emotions are seen as including an element of perception with intrinsic epistemic value that is neither mediated by thoughts nor simply a response to physiological factors. Otto therefore understands religious experience as having mind-independent phenomenological content rather than being an internal response to belief in a divine reality. Otto applied this model specifically to religious experiences, which he felt were qualitatively different from other emotions. Otto felt people should first do serious rational study of God, before turning to the non-rational element of God as he did in this book.

===Later works===
In &quot;Mysticism East and West&quot;, published in German in 1926 and English in 1932, Otto compares and contrasts the views of the medieval German Christian mystic Meister Eckhart with those of the influential Hindu philosopher Adi Shankara, the key figure of the Advaita Vedanta school.

==Influence==
Otto left a broad influence on theology, religious studies, and philosophy of religion, which continues into the 21st century.

===Christian theology===
Karl Barth, an influential Protestant theologian contemporary to Otto, acknowledged Otto&#x27;s influence and approved a similar conception of God as &quot;ganz Andere&quot; or &quot;totaliter aliter&quot;, thus falling within the tradition of apophatic theology. Otto was also one of the very few modern theologians to whom C. S. Lewis indicates a debt, particularly to the idea of the &quot;numinous&quot; in &quot;The Problem of Pain&quot;. In that book Lewis offers his own description of the numinous:

German-American theologian Paul Tillich acknowledged Otto&#x27;s influence on him, as did Otto&#x27;s most famous German pupil, Gustav Mensching (1901–1978) from Bonn University. Otto&#x27;s views can be seen in the noted Catholic theologian Karl Rahner&#x27;s presentation of man as a being of transcendence. More recently, Otto has also influenced the American Franciscan friar and inspirational speaker Richard Rohr.

===Non-Christian theology and spirituality===
Otto&#x27;s ideas have also exerted an influence on non-Christian theology and spirituality. They have been discussed by Orthodox Jewish theologians including Joseph Soloveitchik and Eliezer Berkovits. The Iranian-American Sufi religious studies scholar and public intellectual Reza Aslan understands religion as &quot;an institutionalized system of symbols and metaphors [...] with which a community of faith can share with each other their numinous encounter with the Divine Presence.&quot; Further afield, Otto&#x27;s work received words of appreciation from Indian independence leader Mohandas Gandhi. Aldous Huxley, a major proponent of perennialism, was influenced by Otto; in &quot;The Doors of Perception&quot; he writes:

===Religious studies===
In &quot;The Idea of the Holy&quot; and other works, Otto set out a paradigm for the study of religion that focused on the need to realize the religious as a non-reducible, original category in its own right. The eminent Romanian-American historian of religion and philosopher Mircea Eliade used the concepts from &quot;The Idea of the Holy&quot; as the starting point for his own 1954 book, &quot;The Sacred and the Profane&quot;. The paradigm represented by Otto and Eliade was then heavily criticized for viewing religion as a &quot;sui generis&quot; category, until around 1990, when it began to see a resurgence as a result of its phenomenological aspects becoming more apparent. Ninian Smart, who was a formative influence on religious studies as a secular discipline, was influenced by Otto in his understanding of religious experience and his approach to understanding religion cross-culturally.

===Psychology===
Carl Gustav Jung, the founder of analytic psychology, applied the concept of the &quot;numinous&quot; to psychology and psychotherapy, arguing it was therapeutic and brought greater self-understanding, and stating that to him religion was about a &quot;careful and scrupulous observation… of the &quot;numinosum&quot;&quot;. The American Episcopal priest John A. Sanford applied the ideas of both Otto and Jung in his writings on religious psychotherapy.

===Philosophy===
The philosopher and sociologist Max Horkheimer, a member of the Frankfurt School, has taken the concept of &quot;wholly other&quot; in his 1970 book &quot;Die Sehnsucht nach dem ganz Anderen&quot; (&quot;longing for the entirely Other&quot;). Walter Terence Stace wrote in his book &quot;Time and Eternity&quot; that &quot;After Kant, I owe more to Rudolph Otto&#x27;s &quot;The Idea of the Holy&quot; than to any other book.&quot; Other philosophers influenced by Otto included Martin Heidegger, Leo Strauss, Hans-Georg Gadamer (who was critical when younger but respectful in his old age), Max Scheler, Edmund Husserl, Joachim Wach, and Hans Jonas.

===Other===
The war veteran and writer Ernst Jünger and the historian and scientist Joseph Needham also cited Otto&#x27;s influence.

==Ecumenical activities==
Otto was heavily involved in ecumenical activities between Christian denominations and between Christianity and other religions. He experimented with adding a time similar to a Quaker moment of silence to the Lutheran liturgy as an opportunity for worshipers to experience the numinous.

==Works==
A full bibliography of Otto&#x27;s works is given in Robert F. Davidson, &quot;Rudolf Otto&#x27;s Interpretation of Religion&quot; (Princeton, 1947), pp. 207–9

===In German===
* &quot;Naturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht&quot; (1904)
* &quot;Die Kant-Friesische Religions-Philosophie&quot; (1909)
* &quot;Das Heilige – Über das Irrationale in der Idee des Göttlichen und sein Verhältnis zum Rationalen&quot; (Breslau, 1917)
* &quot;West-östliche Mystik&quot; (1926)
* &quot;Die Gnadenreligion Indiens und das Christentum&quot; (1930)
* &quot;Reich Gottes und Menschensohn&quot; (1934)

===English translations===
*&quot;Naturalism and Religion&quot;, trans J. Arthur Thomson &amp; Margaret Thomson (London: Williams and Norgate, 1907) [originally published 1904] 
*&quot;The Life and Ministry of Jesus, According to the Critical Method&quot; (Chicago: Open Court, 1908), .
*&quot;The Idea of the Holy,&quot; trans JW Harvey (New York: OUP, 1923; 2nd edn, 1950; reprint, New York, 1970), [originally published 1917]
*&quot;Christianity and the Indian Religion of Grace&quot; (Madras, 1928)
*&quot;India&#x27;s Religion of Grace and Christianity Compared and Contrasted&quot;, trans FH Foster (New York; London, 1930)
*&#x27;The Sensus Numinis as the Historical Basis of Religion&#x27;, &quot;Hibbert Journal&quot; 29, (1930), 1–8
*&quot;The Philosophy of Religion Based on Kant and Fries&quot;, trans EB Dicker (London, 1931) [originally published 1909]
*&quot;Religious essays: A supplement to &#x27;The Idea of the Holy&quot;&#x27;, trans B Lunn, (London, 1931)
*&quot;Mysticism East and West: A Comparative Analysis of the Nature of Mysticism&quot;, trans BL Bracey and RC Payne (New York, 1932) [originally published 1926]
*&#x27;In the sphere of the holy&#x27;, &quot;Hibbert Journal&quot; 31 (1932–3), 413–6
*&quot;The original Gita: The song of the Supreme Exalted One&quot; (London, 1939)
*&quot;The Kingdom of God and the Son of Man: A Study in the History of Religion&quot;, trans FV Filson and BL Wolff (Boston, 1943)
*&quot;Autobiographical and Social Essays&quot; (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1996), 

==See also==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Almond, Philip C., 1984, &#x27;Rudolf Otto: An Introduction to his Philosophical Theology&#x27;, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
* Davidson, Robert F, 1947, &quot;Rudolf Otto&#x27;s Interpretation of Religion&quot;, Princeton
* Gooch, Todd A, 2000, &quot;The Numinous and Modernity: An Interpretation of Rudolf Otto&#x27;s Philosophy of Religion&quot;. Preface by Otto Kaiser and Wolfgang Drechsler, Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter. .
* Ludwig, Theodore M (1987), &#x27;Otto, Rudolf&#x27; in &quot;Encyclopedia of Religion&quot;, vol 11, pp. 139–41
* Raphael, Melissa, 1997, &quot;Rudolf Otto and the concept of holiness&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press
* Mok, Daniël (2012). &quot;Rudolf Otto: Een kleine biografie&quot;. Preface by Gerardus van der Leeuw. Amsterdam: Uitgeverij Abraxas. .
*Mok, Daniël &quot;et al&quot;. (2002). &quot;Een wijze uit het westen: Beschouwingen over Rudolf Otto&quot;. Preface by Rudolph Boeke. Amsterdam: De Appelbloesem Pers (i.e. Uitgeverij Abraxas). (print), 978-90-79133-00-0 (ebook).
* Moore, John Morrison, 1938, &quot;Theories of Religious Experience, with special reference to James, Otto and Bergson&quot;, New York

==External links==

*Otto and the Numinous
*Numinous – references from several thinkers at Earthpages.ca
*International Congress: Rudolf Otto – University of Marburg, 2012
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76748" start="0" end="11" title="Rudolf Otto" label="Rudolf Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="60" end="68" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075827" start="98" end="118" title="comparative religion" label="comparative religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="169" end="189" title="Religious studies" label="scholars of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219103" start="268" end="276" title="numinous" label="numinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="414" end="440" title="Liberal Christianity" label="liberal Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="469" end="481" title="apologetics" label="apologetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000" start="518" end="528" title="Naturalism (philosophy)" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q209295" start="646" end="668" title="philosophy of religion" label="philosophy of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q846742" start="674" end="693" title="history of religion" label="history of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q368498" start="703" end="725" title="psychology of religion" label="psychology of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850" start="745" end="750" title="Peine" label="Peine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="756" end="763" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185" start="849" end="859" title="Hildesheim" label="Hildesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q40025" start="895" end="903" title="University of Erlangen" label="Erlangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="908" end="917" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="938" end="950" title="dissertation" label="dissertation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="954" end="967" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="996" end="1007" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="1119" end="1131" title="habilitation" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="1135" end="1139" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="1228" end="1251" title="professor" label="extraordinary professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q317053" start="1308" end="1329" title="University of Giessen" label="University of Giessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="1462" end="1471" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="1473" end="1486" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1552" end="1560" title="Morocco" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316276" start="1670" end="1689" title="Prussian House of Representatives" label="Prussian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1737" end="1752" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1833" end="1840" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="1959" end="1974" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q315658" start="2033" end="2054" title="University of Breslau" label="University of Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="2076" end="2097" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2150" end="2160" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="2161" end="2171" title="seminary" label="seminaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869" start="2243" end="2250" title="Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="2357" end="2366" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518184" start="2505" end="2520" title="suicide attempt" label="suicide attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="2675" end="2690" title="German idealist" label="German idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q76576" start="2718" end="2742" title="Friedrich Schleiermacher" label="Friedrich Schleiermacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="2875" end="2889" title="epistemology" label="epistemologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2977" end="2997" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="3303" end="3326" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q77436" start="3373" end="3384" title="Jakob Fries" label="Jakob Fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="3521" end="3534" title="ontology" label="ontologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="3591" end="3608" title="Cartesian dualism" label="Cartesian dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="3622" end="3635" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="3862" end="3871" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="4147" end="4151" title="Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q143210" start="4234" end="4254" title="religious experience" label="religious experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="4769" end="4780" title="rationalism" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="4795" end="4808" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12046515" start="5098" end="5118" title="The Idea of the Holy" label="The Idea of the Holy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219103" start="5328" end="5336" title="numinous" label="numinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q311290" start="5620" end="5631" title="sui generis" label="sui generis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107976390" start="5729" end="5738" title="Mark Wynn" label="Mark Wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="5752" end="5787" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="5935" end="5945" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="6039" end="6052" title="physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="6137" end="6153" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenological"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="6666" end="6682" title="Christian mysticism" label="Christian mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76548" start="6683" end="6698" title="Meister Eckhart" label="Meister Eckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="6729" end="6746" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q180967" start="6747" end="6759" title="Adi Shankara" label="Adi Shankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348383" start="6783" end="6798" title="Advaita Vedanta" label="Advaita Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="6863" end="6880" title="religious studies" label="religious studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q209295" start="6886" end="6908" title="philosophy of religion" label="philosophy of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473" start="6975" end="6985" title="Karl Barth" label="Karl Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q938946" start="7219" end="7237" title="apophatic theology" label="apophatic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="7300" end="7311" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179147" start="7392" end="7411" title="The Problem of Pain" label="The Problem of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q60104" start="7510" end="7522" title="Paul Tillich" label="Paul Tillich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396173" start="7611" end="7627" title="Gustav Mensching" label="Gustav Mensching"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="7645" end="7660" title="Bonn University" label="Bonn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7705" end="7713" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q57317" start="7725" end="7736" title="Karl Rahner" label="Karl Rahner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275703" start="7744" end="7763" title="Christian anthropology" label="presentation of man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493282" start="7778" end="7791" title="Transcendence (religion)" label="transcendence"/>
<link wikidata="Q913972" start="7846" end="7856" title="Order of Friars Minor" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="7857" end="7862" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q320767" start="7889" end="7901" title="Richard Rohr" label="Richard Rohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="8071" end="8086" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q374965" start="8109" end="8128" title="Joseph Soloveitchik" label="Joseph Soloveitchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q656901" start="8133" end="8150" title="Eliezer Berkovits" label="Eliezer Berkovits"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="8173" end="8177" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298313" start="8228" end="8238" title="Reza Aslan" label="Reza Aslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="8539" end="8554" title="Mohandas Gandhi" label="Mohandas Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="8556" end="8569" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q657488" start="8592" end="8604" title="Perennial philosophy" label="perennialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215450" start="8639" end="8662" title="The Doors of Perception" label="The Doors of Perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="8790" end="8807" title="Religious studies" label="study of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q846742" start="8944" end="8965" title="History of religions" label="historian of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41590" start="8982" end="8995" title="Mircea Eliade" label="Mircea Eliade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359123" start="9390" end="9402" title="Ninian Smart" label="Ninian Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="9627" end="9643" title="Carl Gustav Jung" label="Carl Gustav Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="9660" end="9679" title="analytic psychology" label="analytic psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="9732" end="9742" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="9747" end="9760" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="9965" end="9974" title="Episcopalianism" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217938" start="9982" end="9997" title="John A. Sanford" label="John A. Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q76826" start="10132" end="10146" title="Max Horkheimer" label="Max Horkheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="10164" end="10180" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q433728" start="10343" end="10363" title="Walter Terence Stace" label="Walter Terence Stace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394432" start="10388" end="10405" title="Time and Eternity (philosophy book)" label="Time and Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="10579" end="10595" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q77144" start="10597" end="10608" title="Leo Strauss" label="Leo Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q76356" start="10610" end="10628" title="Hans-Georg Gadamer" label="Hans-Georg Gadamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76521" start="10692" end="10703" title="Max Scheler" label="Max Scheler"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="10705" end="10719" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q90861" start="10721" end="10733" title="Joachim Wach" label="Joachim Wach"/>
<link wikidata="Q57255" start="10739" end="10749" title="Hans Jonas" label="Hans Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q76727" start="10791" end="10803" title="Ernst Jünger" label="Ernst Jünger"/>
<link wikidata="Q318054" start="10836" end="10850" title="Joseph Needham" label="Joseph Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="10941" end="10951" title="ecumenical" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="10971" end="10994" title="Christian denominations" label="Christian denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="11089" end="11095" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068056" start="11096" end="11113" title="moment of silence" label="moment of silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="11130" end="11137" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741203" start="11873" end="11890" title="Arthur Thomson (naturalist)" label="J. Arthur Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12096" end="12116" title=":File:Rudolf_Otto_(translated_by_Harvey)_-_The_Idea_of_the_Holy_-_An_Inquiry_into_the_Non-Rational_Factor_in_the_Idea_of_the_Divine_and_Its_Relation_to_the_Rational.pdf" label="The Idea of the Holy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739528" start="12507" end="12522" title="Hibbert Journal" label="Hibbert Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q96362" start="13760" end="13771" title="Otto Kaiser (scholar)" label="Otto Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q96359" start="13776" end="13794" title="Wolfgang Drechsler" label="Wolfgang Drechsler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381628" start="14135" end="14157" title="Gerardus van der Leeuw" label="Gerardus van der Leeuw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14313" end="14326" title="Rudolph Boeke" label="Rudolph Boeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="14704" end="14725" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567478" wikidata="Q224151" url="?curid=567478" title="Humboldt penguin">
<text>The Humboldt penguin (Spheniscus humboldti) is a medium-sized penguin. It resides in South America, along the Pacific coast of Peru and Chile. Its nearest relatives are the African penguin, the Magellanic penguin and the Galápagos penguin. The Humboldt penguin and the cold water current it swims in both are named after the explorer Alexander von Humboldt. The species is listed as vulnerable by the IUCN with no population recovery plan in place. The current wild population is composed of roughly 23,800 mature individuals and is declining. It is a migrant species.

Humboldt penguins nest on islands and rocky coasts, burrowing holes in guano and sometimes using scrapes or caves. In South America the Humboldt penguin is found only along the Pacific coast, and the range of the Humboldt penguin overlaps that of the Magellanic penguin on the central Chilean coast. It is vagrant in Ecuador and Colombia. The Humboldt penguin has been known to live in mixed species colonies with the Magellanic penguin in at least two different locations at the south of Chile.

The Humboldt penguin has become a focus of ecotourism over the last decades.

== Description ==
Humboldt penguins are medium-sized penguins, growing to long and a weight of . The sex of the Humboldt penguin cannot be recognised via differences in plumage, as they are monomorphic. The male is heavier and larger than the females. Their sex can be determined via head width and bill length; the male has a longer bill than the female. While all the &quot;Spheniscus&quot; penguins are close to each other in size, the Humboldt penguin is the heaviest species in the genus, with 123 females weighing on average and 165 males averaging . Humboldt penguins have a black head with a white border that runs from behind the eye, around the black ear-coverts and chin, and joins at the throat. They have blackish-grey upperparts and whitish underparts, with a black breast-band that extends down the flanks to the thigh. They have a fleshy-pink base to the bill. Juveniles have dark heads and no breast-band. They have spines on their tongue which they use to hold their prey.

=== Vocalisation ===
The Humboldt penguin has different calls that it uses to communicate in different ways. The function of its calls are consistent among &quot;Spheniscus&quot; species. If an individual comes too close to an adult Humboldt penguin, the Yell is a warning call which is followed by pecking or chasing if ignored. A higher density of penguins leads to more territorial and aggressive behaviours, which leads to more Yells. The Throb is a soft call between pairs at the nest, used by incubating birds when their mates return to the nest. The Haw is a short call given by juveniles alone in the water and by paired birds when one is on the water and the other is on land. It has significant individual variation in duration and frequency. The Bray is a long call used to attract a mate and advertise a territory during the pre-laying and pre-hatching periods. It is an individually distinct call in all variables: syllables per call, duration, inter-syllable intervals, duration of syllables and frequency. When calling, the bird points its head upwards and flaps its flippers slowly. The Courtship Bray is similar to the Bray, however a different posture is assumed and is given synchronously by pairs during the pre-laying period: the birds stand together pointing their necks and head up, with flippers out to the side. The Peep is given by chicks begging for food.

=== Moulting ===
Most penguins moult between mid-January and mid-February, however the initiation varies with latitude and favourable conditions such as food abundance. Humboldt penguins are confined to land until they finish moulting. They become hyperphagic during the pre-moulting period. The feathers are lost and replaced within 2 weeks.

== Etymology ==
Both the Humboldt penguin and the Humboldt current were named after Alexander von Humboldt. It is known in Peru as the , which translates to &quot;baby-bird&quot;, due to their waddling gait and flightless wings held out suggesting the image of an infant toddling on the beach.

== Distribution and habitat ==
The Humboldt penguin is a top predator endemic to the west coast of South America.

The Humboldt penguin&#x27;s breeding distribution ranges from southern Chile along the dry and arid coastal regions of the Atacama Desert to subtropical Isla Foca in north Peru. Its range is restricted to the coast and offshore islands affected by the Humboldt current, which provides a continuous supply of nutrients and food, thus supporting huge populations of seabird. In Chile, the most important breeding colony is at Isla Chañaral.

In July 2002, a Humboldt penguin was caught in a fishing net off the coast of Prince of Wales Island in Alaska. The penguin was released from the net, and eventually sent back to the water by one of the fishermen. This is the first and only record of a penguin in the wild in North America. It is unknown whether the penguin was a wild penguin or an escaped pet or zoo animal. 

== Ecology ==
=== Diet ===
The Humboldt penguin feeds predominantly on pelagic schooling fish. The consumption of cephalopods and crustaceans vary between populations. Northern colonies consume primarily Atlantic saury and garfish, whilst southern populations primarily consume anchovy, Araucanian herring, silver-side, pilchard and squid. There are seasonal differences in the Humboldt penguin&#x27;s diet that reflect the changes in availability of fish species across seasons.

=== Foraging behaviour ===
The Humboldt penguin is a visual hunter. Humboldt penguins leave their islands for foraging after sunrise and different populations have different preferred foraging distances from the colony. Their foraging rhythm depends on the light intensity. They spend more time foraging during overnight trips. Fish are mostly seized from below through short, shallow dives.

The foraging range of Humboldt penguins is between from Pan de Azúcar, with 90% of the foraging being from a range of around the island and 50% from a range of . The maximum depth reached is .

Failed breeders take longer foraging trips with longer and deeper dives. They also dive less often than breeding penguins.

=== Courtship ===
During courtship, the Humboldt penguins bow their heads to each other and exchange mutual glances with each eye, alternatively. In the ecstatic display to attract a partner, the bird extends its head vertically, collapses its chest, flaps its wings and emits a loud call resembling the braying of a donkey. The mutual displaying consist of the pair standing side by side and repeating the actions of the ecstatic display.

=== Reproduction ===
The Humboldt penguin nests in loose colonies, with most pairs laying two eggs of the same size 4 days apart that require 41 days of incubation. Their breeding schedule is adjusted depending on the abundance of food. They breed immediately after moulting, when food is abundant and solar radiation is reduced.

The Humboldt penguin lay eggs from March to December, but also with peaks in April and August–September, due to individuals having a second clutch. Half of the females successfully have two clutches per year and most were double broods. If pairs lose their eggs during the first breeding season, they lay a new clutch within 1–4 months. The incubation shifts last, on average, 2.5 days, before one parent takes over and allows the other to forage. There are no differences in the contribution to provisioning from the male and female parents.

Chicks hatch generally 2 days apart. Chicks are semi-altricial and nidicolous and guarded by one parent while the other forages. Chicks are fed only once every day. Chicks are left unattended at the nest site after a certain age and both parents forage simultaneously.

=== Breeding sites ===
The historical breeding sites of this species are burrows on guano layers. Nests of the Humboldt penguin can also be found at caverns, hollows, cliff tops, beaches and scrapes covered by vegetation. They also nest at few Peruvian islands where true soil can be found for digging. The majority of penguins breed on cliff tops.

=== Migration ===
Humboldt penguins are sedentary during the breeding season, staying in proximity to their nests and show fidelity to breeding site. They can cover large distances, particularly in response to food shortages or changes in environmental conditions. They are a true migrant between Peru and Chile.

== Threats ==

=== El Niño-La Niña dynamics ===
The ecosystem of the Humboldt current is affected by the El Niño phenomenon. During the El Niño, upwelling of nutrient-rich bottom water in the south-eastern Pacific Ocean is depressed, as well as sea surface temperature anomaly (SSTA) value increases. Massive mortality, especially of juveniles, nest desertion and lack of reproduction occurs. Humboldt penguins migrate south as marine productivity decreases, following the anchovy stocks. Humboldt penguins expend more time and energy foraging as SSTA increases.

=== Fisheries ===
The estimated energetic demands of the total Humboldt penguin population during breeding season sums up to 1,400 tons of fish. The Humboldt penguin depends on commercially exploited, schooling prey species including anchovies. This makes them susceptible to changes in prey availability due to overfishing. They are also susceptible to entanglement in fishing nets.

=== Human presence ===
Humboldt penguins are extremely sensitive to human presence, with little habituation potential. Passing at a distance from an incubating Humboldt penguin provokes a response, which is the greatest response distance reported for penguins to date, making it the most timid penguin species so far studied. Humboldt penguins need up to half an hour to recover to normal heart rates after human approach, however, this time decreases with repeated visitation. Cumulative stress by frequent visits and delayed return of foraging partners leads to nest desertion, consequently causing decreased breeding success at frequently visited sites.

=== Habitat disturbance and feral species ===
The introduction of feral goats on the Puñihuil islands had a detrimental impact on the Humboldt penguin population. The feral goats browse the vegetation the penguins use to build their nests and they can lead to collapse to dirt burrows. The connection of the island to the mainland also led to the movements of mammals onto the island.

In central Chile, European rabbits and Norway rats graze on the vegetation. Norway rats and black rats also predate on eggs. Feral cats and dogs consume chicks, fledgelings and adult Humboldt penguins.

=== Industrial development ===
Some Humboldt penguin colonies face emerging pressures from industrial development; the construction of coal-fired power plants and mining proposals in Chile. Peru&#x27;s largest colony faces the prospect of a major new industrial port in close proximity to the country&#x27;s largest colony, at Punta San Juan. Oil spills have previously impacted some colonies. The colony of 800 birds at Cachagua was exposed to two oil spill events in 2015–16. Oil spills related to port and shipping activities have impacted many species of penguins across the southern hemisphere.

In 2017, Andes Iron proposed to construct a mineral export port near the Humboldt Penguin National Reserve in Chile&#x27;s Coquimbo region. The proposal was rejected on the grounds that the environmental impact would be unacceptable. The decision was welcomed by tour operators and environmentalists. Oceana was one of the non-governmental organisations lobbying for the rejection of the port proposal. Andes Iron challenged the decision, and environmental approval for the Dominga mine and Cruz Grande port project was eventually granted. Oceana has since challenged the proponents compliance at the work site and as of 2020 continues to lobby for the abandonment of the project and protection of region&#x27;s rich marine biodiversity. If constructed, the Dominga complex will include an open pit copper mine, processing facility, desalination plant and port.

== History of Population Decline ==

=== Over-exploitation of guano ===
The historical breeding grounds for the Humboldt penguin were guano layers which covered islands of the Peruvian and northerly Chilean coasts in which the birds could burrow. The guano, a rich fertiliser and source of income for the Peruvian Government, and eggs of the Humboldt penguin were regularly sought after. The birds were also frequently killed by fishermen and guano workers for their oil and skin. The decline of the Humboldt penguin population is attributed to the harvest of guano in the 1800s, which led to the destruction of breeding grounds and to human disturbance.

=== 1982–83 El Niño phenomenon ===
Before the 1982–83 El Niño event, the total number of individuals of Humboldt penguin individuals was estimated to be 20,000. The 1982–83 El Niño phenomenon led to a major decline in the Humboldt penguin population. The combination of an environment changed by human developments as well as the long duration and strong intensity of the event that year led to major effects on the fecundity and survival of the Humboldt penguins. The consequences were a 65% decline in the Humboldt penguin population, migration towards the south and the failure of the 1982 class of hatchlings. The surviving population in 1984 was estimated to be between 2,100 and 3,000 penguins and all were adults.

==Conservation==
Humboldt penguins were given legal protection in 1977 by the Peruvian Government and listed in Appendix I of the Convention of International Trade of Endangered Species (CITES). Both Peru and Chile have implemented the CITES under national law. It is categorised as vulnerable due to extreme population size fluctuations, clustered distribution and the major threats to the species not being ameliorated over time. In August 2010 the Humboldt penguin of Chile and Peru, was granted protection under the U.S. Endangered Species Act. Most penguins breed within protected areas.

Peruvian legislation categorises the species as endangered and prohibits the hunting, possession, capture, transportation and export of the bird for commercial purposes. Chile implemented a 30-year hunting ban in 1995 forbidding hunting, transport, possession and commercialisation of penguins.

In 2017 a large mining project proposed by the company Andes Iron in Chile was vetoed due to the possible environmental impact on the penguins, though that decision was subsequently overturned.

As of August 2020, the species is listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List, with a declining population of roughly 23,800 mature adults. Climate change, commercial overfishing of main prey species (sardines and anchovy) and bycatch in commercial and artisanal fisheries are all contributing factors in the species&#x27; decline. Rats, feral cats and dog attacks threaten some colonies. Historically, the Humboldt penguin population was impacted by the extraction of guano from their breeding colonies, which reduced the available habitat for burrowing and nesting.

==In captivity==
In addition to their home waters near South America, Humboldt penguins can be found in zoos all around the world, including Spain, Germany, India, South Korea, Ireland, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States and other locations.

=== Mr. Sea ===
The oldest penguin at Woodland Park Zoo and one of the oldest penguins in North America, Mr. Sea was euthanized after a decline in activity and appetite. He was 2 months short of his 32nd birthday. The average age for a Humbolt penguin that survives its first year is 17.6 years. He has 12 viable grandchicks, great-grandchicks, and great-great grandchicks.

===Escape from Tokyo Zoo===
One of the 135 Humboldt penguins from Tokyo Sea Life Park (Kasai Rinkai Suizokuen) thrived in Tokyo Bay for 82 days after apparently scaling the 4-metre-high wall and managing to get through a barbed-wire fence into the bay. The penguin, known only by its number (337), was recaptured by the zoo keepers in late May 2012.

=== US discovery ===
In 1953, a Humboldt penguin was found in The Bronx, New York, US. It is not known whether the animal had escaped from a private collection or whether it was a vagrant but the local zoo&#x27;s population was fully accounted for.

=== Same-sex raising of young ===
In 2009 at the Bremerhaven Zoo in Germany, two adult male Humboldt penguins adopted an egg that had been abandoned by its biological parents. After the egg hatched, the two penguins raised, protected, cared for, and fed the chick in the same manner that heterosexual penguin couples raise their own offspring. A further example of this kind of behavior came in 2014, when Jumbs and Kermit, two Humboldt Penguins at Wingham Wildlife Park, became the center of international media attention as two males who had pair bonded a number of years earlier and then successfully hatched and reared an egg given to them as surrogate parents after the mother abandoned it halfway through incubation.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* Humboldt penguin on PenguinWorld
* BirdLife species factsheet
* Humboldt penguins at Marwell</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224151" start="4" end="20" title="Humboldt penguin" label="Humboldt penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="62" end="69" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="110" end="117" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="127" end="131" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="136" end="141" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q244813" start="173" end="188" title="African penguin" label="African penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207246" start="194" end="212" title="Magellanic penguin" label="Magellanic penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206668" start="221" end="238" title="Galápagos penguin" label="Galápagos penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q143888" start="269" end="287" title="Humboldt Current" label="cold water current"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="334" end="356" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800545" start="552" end="559" title="Migration (ecology)" label="migrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="641" end="646" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="667" end="674" title="Bird nest#Scrape" label="scrapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="887" end="894" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="899" end="907" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="1110" end="1120" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q902912" start="1521" end="1531" title="Spheniscus" label="Spheniscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q653267" start="3769" end="3780" title="hyperphagic" label="hyperphagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q143888" start="3915" end="3931" title="Humboldt Current" label="Humboldt current"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="3949" end="3971" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="4230" end="4237" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47141" start="4398" end="4412" title="Atacama Desert" label="Atacama Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q601637" start="4793" end="4815" title="Prince of Wales Island (Alaska)" label="Prince of Wales Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="4819" end="4825" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="4991" end="5004" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809317" start="5165" end="5187" title="Pelagic fish" label="pelagic schooling fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="5208" end="5218" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="5224" end="5234" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886478" start="5298" end="5312" title="Atlantic saury" label="Atlantic saury"/>
<link wikidata="Q643373" start="5317" end="5324" title="garfish" label="garfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q192662" start="5372" end="5379" title="anchovy" label="anchovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559503" start="5381" end="5399" title="Araucanian herring" label="Araucanian herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222469" start="5401" end="5412" title="Silver-sided weedfish" label="silver-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="5414" end="5422" title="pilchard" label="pilchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="5427" end="5432" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916569" start="5685" end="5693" title="foraging" label="foraging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236744" start="6024" end="6037" title="Pan de Azúcar National Park" label="Pan de Azúcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="6880" end="6890" title="Egg incubation" label="incubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201371" start="7287" end="7293" title="Broodiness" label="broods"/>
<link wikidata="Q110576835" start="7650" end="7664" title="Altriciality" label="semi-altricial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341246" start="7669" end="7679" title="nidicolous" label="nidicolous"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="8588" end="8597" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="8681" end="8690" title="upwelling" label="upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="8742" end="8755" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507383" start="8781" end="8804" title="sea surface temperature" label="sea surface temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132245" start="9301" end="9310" title="Schooling (fish)" label="schooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="9311" end="9315" title="Predation" label="prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="9412" end="9423" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136816" start="9581" end="9592" title="habituation" label="habituation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="9874" end="9884" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443748" start="10209" end="10219" title="feral goat" label="feral goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="10547" end="10562" title="European rabbit" label="European rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q184224" start="10568" end="10579" title="Brown rat" label="Norway rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="10621" end="10630" title="black rat" label="black rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404562" start="10654" end="10663" title="Feral cat" label="Feral cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124833" start="10669" end="10673" title="Free-ranging dog" label="dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558431" start="10867" end="10890" title="Coal-fired power station" label="coal-fired power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="10895" end="10901" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849285" start="11266" end="11299" title="List of oil spills impacting penguins" label="impacted many species of penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q97163412" start="11342" end="11352" title="Andes Iron" label="Andes Iron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11406" end="11439" title="Humboldt Penguin National Reserve" label="Humboldt Penguin National Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3871" start="11456" end="11464" title="Coquimbo" label="Coquimbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076166" start="11634" end="11640" title="Oceana (non-profit group)" label="Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="12283" end="12299" title="Habitat" label="breeding grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="12330" end="12335" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410542" start="12435" end="12441" title="burrow" label="burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22294905" start="13454" end="13463" title="hatchling" label="hatchling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153692" start="13652" end="13671" title="Politics of Peru" label="Peruvian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="13704" end="13759" title="CITES" label="Convention of International Trade of Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="13857" end="13867" title="Vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="14099" end="14121" title="Endangered Species Act" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="14216" end="14226" title="Endangered species" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="14721" end="14734" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="15374" end="15381" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="15383" end="15388" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="15390" end="15401" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="15403" end="15410" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="15412" end="15417" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="15423" end="15437" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="15443" end="15456" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032871" start="15517" end="15534" title="Woodland Park Zoo" label="Woodland Park Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="15569" end="15582" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925165" start="15920" end="15939" title="Tokyo Sea Life Park" label="Tokyo Sea Life Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="15976" end="15985" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q220116" start="16504" end="16519" title="Bremerhaven Zoo" label="Bremerhaven Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="16523" end="16530" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025221" start="16904" end="16925" title="Wingham Wildlife Park" label="Wingham Wildlife Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15249491" start="17312" end="17319" title="Marwell Wildlife" label="Marwell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567481" wikidata="Q3684212" url="?curid=567481" title="Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron">
<text>Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron is a graphic novel by American cartoonist Daniel Clowes. The book follows a fantastic and paranoid plot, differing in tone from the stark realism of Clowes&#x27; later more widely known &quot;Ghost World&quot;. It contains nightmarish imagery, including dismemberment, deformed people and animals, and sexual fetishism.

Clowes has talked about how the story was inspired by his dreams, as well as a recurring dream of his ex-wife&#x27;s: 
The book&#x27;s title is a quote from the Russ Meyer film &quot;Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!&quot; (The full line, as delivered by Lori Williams, is &quot;You&#x27;re cute, like a velvet glove cast in iron. And like a gas chamber, Varla, a real fun gal.&quot;)

== Publication history ==
Like many of Clowes&#x27; extended works, &quot;Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron&quot; originally appeared in serial form in his comic book &quot;Eightball&quot; (issues #1–#10, 1989–1993) but has been reprinted as a trade paperback. The opening panels of later chapters of the story were presented in color when originally published in &quot;Eightball&quot;. When collected in trade paperback form, the chapters of the story were given names, and a table of contents was added to reflect this.

&quot;Velvet Glove&quot; has since been reprinted many times, and is currently in its sixth edition. The book has also been translated into Italian, Japanese, French, Spanish, and Greek. The French edition was nominated for the 2000 Angoulême International Comics Festival Prize for Best Album.

==Plot==
&quot;Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron&quot; is about a man named Clay Loudermilk and his attempts to locate his estranged wife. (The song &quot;the Ballad of Barbara Allen&quot; forms a commentary on the story with its elements of unrequited love, loss, and death.) For reasons unknown, Clay is in the audience at a porno theatre when he sees a bizarre BDSM feature (also titled &quot;Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron&quot;), the star of which is revealed to be his wife, who appears in the credits as &quot;Madame Van Damme&quot;. Clay sets out to locate her and becomes embroiled in a series of misadventures involving an incredibly weird cast of supporting characters. Clay is victimized by two crazed policemen, meets a religious cult led by a mass-murderer who intend to overthrow the American government, conspiracy theorists who believe that the reins of the world&#x27;s political power somehow revolve around a series of dime store novelty figures, a malformed, half-fish young woman and her nymphomaniacal mother, and various other freaks and weirdos. During one dream sequence, the infamous Foot Foot, from the song by The Shaggs, gnaws on Clay&#x27;s leg.

The happy-face icon of &quot;Mr. Jones&quot; also appears in various places through the story (reminiscent of Alfred E. Neuman, the mascot of &quot;Mad&quot; magazine, whose image dates at least back into the 1800s). Images of Mr. Jones are tattooed into people, carved on to Clay&#x27;s foot, as a ghost-like character, in Hitler&#x27;s birthmark, and on the sign for Value Ape shops. It signifies the way in which logos pervade our societies, and links to the conspiracy elements of the story. The true nature of the fish-woman&#x27;s father is never learned by Mr. Loudermilk, but readers familiar with the stories of H.P. Lovecraft will note connections to Lovecraft&#x27;s novella &quot;The Shadow over Innsmouth&quot;, which involves the monstrous interbreeding of humans and unspeakable denizens of the deep. The phrase &quot;Kenneth, what is the frequency?&quot;, referencing the bizarre Dan Rather incident (some years before the R.E.M. song did the same thing), is used as part of the &quot;Mr. Jones&quot; conspiracy sub-plot. There are, in addition, references to child pornography and snuff films.

== In other media ==
&quot;Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron&quot; is one of very few graphic novels to have inspired an official soundtrack album. The 10-track CD by Victor Banana (a.k.a. cartoonist Tim Hensley) was released in 1993 on the Jenkins-Peabody label.

In issue #11 of &quot;Eightball&quot;, published after the conclusion of the &quot;Velvet Glove&quot; storyline, Clowes did a story about a hypothetical movie based on his book. As presented by Clowes, the film is a highly commercialized, poorly made flop, with little in common with Clowes&#x27; original story beyond the title and a few superficial elements.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Burr, Ty. &quot;Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron,&quot; &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; (May 21, 1993).
* Valenti, Kristy. &quot;Where Were You When... :On Daniel Clowes &quot;Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron,&quot;&quot; Comixology (October 6, 2008).
* Valenti, Kristy. &quot;Keepsakes to Commandeer: Tim Hensley and the &quot;Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron&quot; Soundtrack,&quot; Comixology (October 14, 2008).
* Valenti, Kristy. &quot;What&#x27;s the Frequency, Kenneth?: The &quot;LAVGCII&quot; Soundtrack + Graphic Novel,&quot; Comixology (October 21, 2008).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="38" end="51" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="55" end="63" title="United States citizen" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q712675" start="75" end="88" title="Daniel Clowes" label="Daniel Clowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116213606" start="109" end="118" title="Fantastique" label="fantastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="123" end="131" title="Paranoia" label="paranoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104961" start="225" end="236" title="Ghost World (comics)" label="Ghost World"/>
<link wikidata="Q315325" start="515" end="525" title="Russ Meyer" label="Russ Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215958" start="537" end="566" title="Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!" label="Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215958" start="605" end="618" title="Lori Williams" label="Lori Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349042" start="908" end="917" title="Eightball (comics)" label="Eightball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="979" end="994" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004825" start="1491" end="1551" title="Angoulême International Comics Festival Prize for Best Album" label="Angoulême International Comics Festival Prize for Best Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634587" start="1712" end="1735" title="Barbara Allen (song)" label="Ballad of Barbara Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="1880" end="1885" title="pornographic film" label="porno"/>
<link wikidata="Q190845" start="1917" end="1921" title="BDSM" label="BDSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q267907" start="2565" end="2579" title="Hypersexuality" label="nymphomaniacal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234059" start="2666" end="2675" title="My Pal Foot Foot" label="Foot Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q655768" start="2694" end="2704" title="The Shaggs" label="The Shaggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q552164" start="2843" end="2859" title="Alfred E. Neuman" label="Alfred E. Neuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3057" end="3063" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="3354" end="3368" title="H.P. Lovecraft" label="H.P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068054" start="3425" end="3450" title="The Shadow over Innsmouth" label="The Shadow over Innsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3566" end="3597" title="Dan Rather#&amp;quot;Kenneth, what is the frequency?" label="Kenneth, what is the frequency?"/>
<link wikidata="Q733027" start="3629" end="3639" title="Dan Rather" label="Dan Rather"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="3672" end="3678" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q2726124" start="3679" end="3683" title="What&amp;#x27;s the Frequency, Kenneth?" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="3809" end="3826" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q644437" start="3831" end="3841" title="snuff film" label="snuff film"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="3930" end="3944" title="graphic novels" label="graphic novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="3974" end="3984" title="soundtrack" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q25706607" start="4044" end="4055" title="Tim Hensley" label="Tim Hensley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349042" start="4131" end="4140" title="Eightball (comics)" label="Eightball"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567484" wikidata="Q3505451" url="?curid=567484" title="Hormogonium">
<text>Hormogonia are motile filaments of cells formed by some cyanobacteria in the order Nostocales and Stigonematales. They are formed during vegetative reproduction in unicellular, filamentous cyanobacteria, and some may contain heterocysts and akinetes.

Cyanobacteria differentiate into hormogonia when exposed to an environmental stress or when placed in new media.

Hormogonium differentiation is crucial for the development of nitrogen-fixing plant cyanobacteria symbioses, in particular that between cyanobacteria of the genus &quot;Nostoc&quot; and their hosts. In response to a hormogonium-inducing factor (HIF) secreted by plant hosts, cyanobacterial symbionts differentiate into hormogonia and then dedifferentiate back into vegetative cells after about 96 hours. Hopefully, they have managed to reach the plant host by this time. The bacteria then differentiate specialized nitrogen-fixing cells called heterocysts and enter into a working symbiosis with the plant.

Depending on species, Hormogonia can be many hundreds of micrometers in length and can travel as fast as 11 μm/s. They move via gliding motility, requiring a wettable surface or a viscous substrate, such as agar for motion.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3505451" start="0" end="10" title="Hormogonium" label="Hormogonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="56" end="69" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q959143" start="83" end="93" title="Nostocales" label="Nostocales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338992" start="98" end="112" title="Stigonematales" label="Stigonematales"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="189" end="202" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q899004" start="225" end="235" title="heterocyst" label="heterocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619679" start="241" end="248" title="akinete" label="akinete"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="315" end="335" title="Stress (biology)" label="environmental stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="428" end="443" title="Nitrogen fixation" label="nitrogen-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q311257" start="535" end="541" title="Nostoc" label="Nostoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="558" end="562" title="host (biology)" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="582" end="609" title="hormogonium-inducing factor" label="hormogonium-inducing factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q618561" start="1102" end="1118" title="bacterial gliding" label="gliding motility"/>
<link wikidata="Q177998" start="1181" end="1185" title="agar" label="agar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567489" wikidata="Q13049940" url="?curid=567489" title="Pliers">
<text>Pliers are a hand tool used to hold objects firmly, possibly developed from tongs used to handle hot metal in Bronze Age Europe. They are also useful for bending and physically compressing a wide range of materials. Generally, pliers consist of a pair of metal first-class levers joined at a fulcrum positioned closer to one end of the levers, creating short &quot;jaws&quot; on one side of the fulcrum, and longer handles on the other side. This arrangement creates a mechanical advantage, allowing the force of the grip strength to be amplified and focused on an object with precision. The jaws can also be used to manipulate objects too small or unwieldy to be manipulated with the fingers.

Diagonal pliers, also called side cutters, are a similarly shaped tool used for cutting rather than holding, having a pair of stout blades, similar to scissors except that the cutting surfaces meet parallel to each other rather than overlapping. Ordinary (holding/squeezing) pliers may incorporate a small pair of such cutting blades. Pincers are a similar tool with a different type of head used for cutting and pulling, rather than squeezing. Tools designed for safely handling hot objects are usually called tongs. Special tools for making crimp connections in electrical and electronic applications are often called crimping pliers or crimpers; each type of connection uses its own dedicated tool.

Parallel pliers have jaws that close in parallel to each other, as opposed to the scissor-type action of traditional pliers. They use a box joint system to do this, and it allows them to generate more grip from friction on square and hexagonal fastenings.

There are many kinds of pliers made for various general and specific purposes.

==History==

As pliers in the general sense are an ancient and simple invention, no single inventor can be credited. Early metal working processes from several millennia BCE would have required plier-like devices to handle hot materials in the process of smithing or casting. Development from wooden to bronze pliers would have probably happened sometime prior to 3000 BCE. Among the oldest illustrations of pliers are those showing the Greek god Hephaestus in his forge. The number of different designs of pliers grew with the invention of the different objects which they were used to handle: horseshoes, fasteners, wire, pipes, electrical, and electronic components.

==Design==
The basic design of pliers has changed little since their origins, with the pair of &quot;handles&quot;, the &quot;pivot&quot; (often formed by a rivet), and the &quot;head&quot; section with the gripping jaws or cutting edges forming the three elements.

The materials used to make pliers consist mainly of steel alloys with additives such as vanadium or chromium, to improve strength and prevent corrosion. The metal handles of pliers are often fitted with grips of other materials to ensure better handling; grips are usually insulated and additionally protect against electric shock. The jaws vary widely in size, from delicate needle-nose pliers to heavy jaws capable of exerting much pressure, and shape, from basic flat jaws to various specialized and often asymmetrical jaw configurations for specific manipulations. The surfaces are typically textured rather than smooth, to minimize slipping.

A plier-like tool designed for cutting wires is often called diagonal pliers. Some pliers for electrical work are fitted with wire-cutter blades either built into the jaws or on the handles just below the pivot.

Where it is necessary to avoid scratching or damaging the workpiece, as for example in jewellery and musical instrument repair, pliers with a layer of softer material such as aluminium, brass, or plastic over the jaws are used.

==Ergonomics==
Much research has been undertaken to improve the design of pliers, to make them easier to use in often difficult circumstances (such as restricted spaces). The handles can be bent, for example, so that the load applied by the hand is aligned with the arm, rather than at an angle, thus reducing muscle fatigue. It is especially important for factory workers who use pliers continuously and helps prevent carpal tunnel syndrome.

==Types==
==See also==
* Nipper

==References==
==External links==
* How pliers are made (video)
*Types of Pliers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13049940" start="0" end="6" title="Pliers" label="Pliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578402" start="13" end="22" title="hand tool" label="hand tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276479" start="76" end="81" title="tongs" label="tongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="110" end="120" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072476" start="154" end="161" title="bending" label="bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="166" end="188" title="Compression (physical)" label="physically compressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="255" end="260" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="261" end="279" title="Lever#Classes of levers" label="first-class levers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40164" start="292" end="299" title="lever" label="fulcrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200266" start="415" end="422" title="handles" label="handles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378501" start="469" end="489" title="mechanical advantage" label="mechanical advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="504" end="509" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609571" start="517" end="530" title="grip strength" label="grip strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q620207" start="685" end="691" title="finger" label="finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13049940" start="695" end="710" title="Pliers" label="Diagonal pliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13049940" start="724" end="736" title="Pliers" label="side cutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q40847" start="846" end="854" title="scissors" label="scissors"/>
<link wikidata="Q840979" start="1030" end="1037" title="Pincers (tool)" label="Pincers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140059" start="1238" end="1254" title="crimp connection" label="crimp connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q13049940" start="1315" end="1330" title="Pliers" label="crimping pliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13049940" start="1334" end="1342" title="Pliers" label="crimpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13049940" start="1398" end="1413" title="Pliers" label="Parallel pliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="1805" end="1814" title="invention" label="invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="1905" end="1908" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q838566" start="1990" end="1998" title="smithing" label="smithing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268371" start="2002" end="2009" title="Casting (metalworking)" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="2028" end="2034" title="wooden" label="wooden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="2038" end="2044" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q211523" start="2099" end="2107" title="3000 BCE" label="3000 BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q516588" start="2172" end="2181" title="Greek god" label="Greek god"/>
<link wikidata="Q44384" start="2182" end="2192" title="Hephaestus" label="Hephaestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40558" start="2200" end="2205" title="forge" label="forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q192130" start="2330" end="2339" title="horseshoe" label="horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002016" start="2342" end="2351" title="fasteners" label="fasteners"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="2353" end="2357" title="wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41551" start="2359" end="2363" title="Pipe (material)" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="2366" end="2376" title="electrical" label="electrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="2382" end="2402" title="electronic component" label="electronic component"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="2563" end="2568" title="rivet" label="rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="2725" end="2730" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="2731" end="2736" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="2761" end="2769" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="2773" end="2781" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="2815" end="2824" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="2946" end="2955" title="Insulator (electrical)" label="insulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q244404" start="2989" end="3003" title="electric shock" label="electric shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585781" start="3049" end="3067" title="needle-nose pliers" label="needle-nose pliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="3360" end="3364" title="wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q245934" start="3382" end="3397" title="diagonal pliers" label="diagonal pliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q269359" start="3404" end="3430" title="Lineman&amp;#x27;s pliers" label="pliers for electrical work"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="3621" end="3630" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="3635" end="3653" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043452" start="3654" end="3660" title="repair" label="repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="3709" end="3718" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="3720" end="3725" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="3730" end="3737" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940317" start="4073" end="4087" title="muscle fatigue" label="muscle fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="4182" end="4204" title="carpal tunnel syndrome" label="carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833060" start="4232" end="4238" title="Nipper (tool)" label="Nipper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567491" wikidata="Q77734" url="?curid=567491" title="Doris Dörrie">
<text>Doris Dörrie (; born 26 May 1955) is a German film director, producer and author.

==Early life and education==
Born in Hanover, Dörrie completed her secondary education there in 1973. The same year, she began a two-year attendance in film studies in the drama department of the University of the Pacific in Stockton, California. She then studied at the New School of Social Research in New York. She worked odd jobs in cafés and as a film presenter in New York&#x27;s Goethe-Institut.

In 1975, back in Germany, Dörrie began to study at the University of Television and Film Munich. 

==Career==
Dörrie wrote film reviews for the &quot;Süddeutsche Zeitung&quot;, where she was also assistant editor. Subsequently, Dörrie worked as a volunteer for various television stations, and filmed short documentaries. She has published several novels, short story collections and children&#x27;s books, and also staged and directed a number of operas. 

==Awards==
*1999 Bavarian Film Awards, Best Screenplay
*1999 German Film Award in Gold for &quot;Am I Beautiful?&quot;
*2012 Bavarian Film Award, Best Director
*2022 Brothers Grimm Poetics Professorship

==Filmography==
*1983: &quot;Straight Through the Heart&quot; (&quot;Mitten ins Herz&quot;)
*1985: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Im Innern des Wals&quot;)
*1985: &quot;Men...&quot; (&quot;Männer...&quot;)
*1986: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Paradies&quot;)
*1988: &quot;Me and Him&quot; (&quot;Ich und Er&quot;), starring Griffin Dunne, Ellen Greene, Kelly Bishop, Carey Lowell
*1989: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Geld&quot;)
*1992: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Happy Birthday, Türke!&quot;), starring 
*1994: &quot;Nobody Loves Me&quot; (&quot;Keiner liebt mich&quot;)
*1998: &quot; – Augenblick&quot; (TV documentary series episode)
*1998: &quot;Am I Beautiful?&quot; (&quot;Bin ich schön?&quot;), starring Franka Potente, Senta Berger, Heike Makatsch, Iris Berben
*2000: &quot;Enlightenment Guaranteed&quot; (&quot;Erleuchtung garantiert&quot;)
*2002: &quot;Naked&quot; (&quot;Nackt&quot;)
*2005: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Der Fischer und seine Frau&quot;)
*2007: &quot;&quot;, a documentary about Zen chef Edward Espe Brown
*2008: &quot;Cherry Blossoms&quot; (&quot;Kirschblüten – Hanami&quot;)
*2010: &quot;The Hairdresser&quot; (&quot;Die Friseuse&quot;)
*2012: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Glück&quot;)
*2014: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Alles inklusive&quot;)
*2016: &quot;Greetings from Fukushima&quot;
*2019: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Kirschblüten &amp; Dämonen&quot;)

==Fiction==
*&quot;Liebe Schmerz und das ganze verdammte Zeug: Vier Geschichten&quot; (1987); Eng. tr. &quot;Love, Pain and the Whole Damn Thing: Four Stories&quot; (1989)
*&quot;&quot;Was wollen Sie von Mir?&quot; und 15 andere Geschichten&quot; (1989); Eng. tr. &quot;What Do You Want From Me?&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Der Mann meiner Träume&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Für immer und ewig: eine Art Reigen&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Bin ich schön? Erzählungen&quot; (1994)

==Personal life==
Dörrie is a member of the PEN Centre Germany and the German Film Academy. She was a member of the jury for the 2019 Prize of the National Gallery. Since 2019, she has been a member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

In 2019, Dörrie served on the jury that chose Pauline Curnier Jardin as winner of the Preis der Nationalgalerie.

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
*Breitenstein, Andreas. &quot;Alptraum vom Traummann: Doris Dörries Erzählung &quot;Der Mann meiner Träume&quot;.&quot; &quot;Neue Zürcher Zeitung&quot; (22 July 1991).
*Elss, Karin. &quot;Doris Dörrie als Erzählerin.&quot; &quot;Saarbrücker Zeitung&quot; (24 August 1989).
*Görtz, Franz Josef. &quot;Beiläufige Tragödien: Geschichten von der Filmemacherin Doris Dörrie.&quot; &quot;Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung&quot; (14 March 1989).
*Joglekar, Yogini. &quot;Ethnic Noir in Post-Wall Germany: &quot;Happy Birthday, Türke!&quot; (Dörrie 1991).&quot; &quot;Clues: A Journal of Detection&quot; 24.2 (Winter 2006): 17–29.
*Jurczyk, Günther. &quot;Brav Geschmollt: Doris Dörrie erzählt.&quot; &quot;Stuttgarter Zeitung&quot; (11 October 1989).
*Phillips, Klaus. &quot;A Conversation with Doris Dörrie.&quot; In: &quot;Straight Through the Heart: Doris Dörrie, German Filmmaker and Author&quot;, ed. Franz Birgel, Klaus Phillips and Christian-Albrecht Gollub. Lanham: Scarecrow Press, 2004. pp. 1–16.
*Steuhl, Wolfgang. &quot;Antonia und der Dreckspatz: Wenn ein Mannequin den Mann ihrer Träume findet.&quot; &quot;Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung&quot; (13 April 1991).
*Utz, Richard. &quot;Reflecting Love at Quite Its Natural Size: Doris Dörrie as a Writer.&quot; In: &quot;Straight Through the Heart: Doris Dörrie, German Filmmaker and Author&quot;, ed. Franz Birgel, Klaus Phillips and Christian-Albrecht Gollub. Lanham: Scarecrow Press, 2004. pp. 177–87.

==External links==
* Literature on Doris Dörrie</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77734" start="0" end="12" title="Doris Dörrie" label="Doris Dörrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="120" end="127" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q630226" start="279" end="304" title="University of the Pacific (United States)" label="University of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="308" end="328" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q599316" start="354" end="383" title="New School of Social Research" label="New School of Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q157033" start="469" end="484" title="Goethe-Institut" label="Goethe-Institut"/>
<link wikidata="Q569350" start="542" end="582" title="University of Television and Film Munich" label="University of Television and Film Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q158870" start="637" end="656" title="Süddeutsche Zeitung" label="Süddeutsche Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q448468" start="962" end="982" title="Bavarian Film Awards" label="Bavarian Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q708731" start="1006" end="1023" title="Deutscher Filmpreis" label="German Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q863484" start="1042" end="1057" title="Am I Beautiful?" label="Am I Beautiful?"/>
<link wikidata="Q448468" start="1070" end="1089" title="Bavarian Film Award" label="Bavarian Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q996648" start="1111" end="1147" title="Brothers Grimm Poetics Professorship" label="Brothers Grimm Poetics Professorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q874078" start="1307" end="1313" title="Men..." label="Men..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1625361" start="1400" end="1410" title="Me and Him" label="Me and Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q470260" start="1452" end="1465" title="Griffin Dunne" label="Griffin Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q513009" start="1467" end="1479" title="Ellen Greene" label="Ellen Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q237247" start="1481" end="1493" title="Kelly Bishop" label="Kelly Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q236151" start="1495" end="1507" title="Carey Lowell" label="Carey Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738011" start="1628" end="1643" title="Nobody Loves Me (film)" label="Nobody Loves Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q863484" start="1760" end="1775" title="Am I Beautiful?" label="Am I Beautiful?"/>
<link wikidata="Q65105" start="1821" end="1835" title="Franka Potente" label="Franka Potente"/>
<link wikidata="Q62310" start="1837" end="1849" title="Senta Berger" label="Senta Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q62510" start="1851" end="1865" title="Heike Makatsch" label="Heike Makatsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q71662" start="1867" end="1878" title="Iris Berben" label="Iris Berben"/>
<link wikidata="Q322612" start="1892" end="1916" title="Enlightenment Guaranteed" label="Enlightenment Guaranteed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339351" start="1973" end="1978" title="Naked (2002 film)" label="Naked"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="2107" end="2110" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292137" start="2116" end="2133" title="Edward Espe Brown" label="Edward Espe Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q663960" start="2147" end="2162" title="Cherry Blossoms (film)" label="Cherry Blossoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212777" start="2218" end="2233" title="The Hairdresser" label="The Hairdresser"/>
<link wikidata="Q21646655" start="2370" end="2394" title="Greetings from Fukushima" label="Greetings from Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043519" start="2963" end="2981" title="PEN Centre Germany" label="PEN Centre Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q879171" start="2990" end="3009" title="Deutsche Filmakademie" label="German Film Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162610" start="3048" end="3082" title="National Gallery (Berlin)" label="2019 Prize of the National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="3125" end="3168" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q52484325" start="3217" end="3239" title="Pauline Curnier Jardin" label="Pauline Curnier Jardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q658945" start="3461" end="3481" title="Neue Zürcher Zeitung" label="Neue Zürcher Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261982" start="3565" end="3584" title="Saarbrücker Zeitung" label="Saarbrücker Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q10184" start="3718" end="3748" title="Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung" label="Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q319663" start="4032" end="4051" title="Stuttgarter Zeitung" label="Stuttgarter Zeitung"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567493" wikidata="Q637463" url="?curid=567493" title="Frozen custard">
<text>Frozen custard is a frozen dessert that is a type of ice cream that is made with egg yolks in addition to cream and sweetener, either sugar or an alternative, and an additional flavoring such as cocoa, vanilla, or fruit such as strawberries or peaches. It is usually kept at a warmer temperature compared to ice cream, and typically has a denser and thicker consistency.

==History==
Egg yolks have been integrated into ice creams since at least the 1690s, though there are several notable invention stories that are associated with modern commercializations of this practice.

One early commercialization of frozen custard was in Coney Island, New York, in 1919, when ice cream vendors Archie and Elton Kohr found that adding egg yolks to ice cream created a smoother texture and helped the ice cream stay cold longer. In their first weekend on the boardwalk, they sold 18,460 cones.

Throughout the 1920s, the popularity of frozen custard spread from Coney Island to traveling carnivals. That is where tennis player Theodore R. Drewes Sr. was introduced to the treat when he began selling it in Florida to earn extra money during the winter off-season, first with the traveling carnival in the 1920s and then at his own custard stand in 1929. He brought the business back to his hometown of St. Louis, Missouri, where he opened Ted Drewes in 1930 and expanded to a second location in 1931 and three stores in that city by 1941. Ted Drewes is often credited as the birthplace of the concrete, which is a thick custard churned with mix-ins. Ted Drewes custard shop in the Dutchtown neighborhood is the oldest frozen custard stand in the world that is still in operation.

A frozen custard stand at the 1933 World&#x27;s Fair in Chicago introduced the dessert to a wider audience. Following the fair, the dessert&#x27;s popularity spread throughout the Midwest; Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in particular, became known as the &quot;unofficial frozen custard capital of the world&quot;.

Per capita, Milwaukee has the highest concentration of frozen custard shops in the world and the city supports a long-standing three-way competition between Kopp&#x27;s Frozen Custard, Gilles Frozen Custard and Leon&#x27;s Frozen Custard.

Major frozen custard chains in the United States include Culver&#x27;s, headquartered in Prairie du Sac, Wisconsin, with outlets in 26 states; Freddy&#x27;s Frozen Custard &amp; Steakburgers, based in Wichita, Kansas, with more than 300 locations nationwide; and Andy&#x27;s Frozen Custard, based in Springfield, Missouri, with over 140 locations in 15 states. Other chains serving frozen custard include Ted Drewes (based in Saint Louis, Missouri), Rita&#x27;s Italian Ice (a suburb of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania), The Meadows, and Abbott&#x27;s (Rochester, New York).

==Characteristics==
In the U.S., the Food and Drug Administration requires any product marketed as frozen custard to contain at least 10 percent milkfat and 1.4 percent egg yolk solids. The FDA also allows the names “french ice cream” or “french custard ice cream” to be used. If it has a smaller percentage of egg yolk solids, it is considered ice cream and legally classified as such by the FDA.

Actual frozen custard is a very dense dessert. Soft serve ice creams may have an overrun as large as 100%, meaning half of the final product is composed of air. Frozen custard, when made in a continuous freezer, will have an overrun of 15–30% depending on the machine manufacturer (an overrun percentage similar to gelato). Air is not pumped into the mix, nor is it added as an &quot;ingredient&quot; but gets into the frozen state by the agitation of liquid similar to whisking a meringue. The high percentage of butterfat and egg yolk gives the frozen custard a thick, creamy texture and a smoother consistency than ice cream. Frozen custard can be served at −8 °C (18 °F), warmer than the −12 °C (10 °F) at which ice cream is served, to make a soft serve product.

Another difference between commercially produced frozen custard and commercial ice cream is the way the custard is frozen. The mix enters a refrigerated tube and, as it freezes, blades scrape the product cream off the barrel walls. The now frozen custard is discharged directly into containers from which it can be served. The speed with which the product leaves the barrel minimizes the amount of air in the product but, more importantly, ensures that the ice crystals formed are very small.

==See also==
* Custard, the basic egg and dairy preparations
* Frozen yogurt, the cultured and frozen milk product
* Gelato, the Italian style of ice cream
* Ice cream
* List of custard desserts
* List of frozen custard companies
* Semifreddo, the partially frozen type of dessert, sometimes a custard mixed with whipped cream
* Soft serve, a soft form of ice cream

==References==
==External links==
* FDA Standards for Frozen Desserts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q637463" start="0" end="14" title="Frozen custard" label="Frozen custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q866153" start="20" end="34" title="frozen dessert" label="frozen dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="53" end="62" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q181409" start="81" end="90" title="Yolk" label="egg yolks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13228" start="106" end="111" title="cream" label="cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400794" start="116" end="125" title="sweetener" label="sweetener"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="134" end="139" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173974" start="177" end="186" title="flavoring" label="flavoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="195" end="200" title="Chocolate" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="202" end="209" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="228" end="240" title="Strawberry" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="244" end="249" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="631" end="653" title="Coney Island, New York" label="Coney Island, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q181409" start="727" end="736" title="Yolk" label="egg yolks"/>
<link wikidata="Q93338609" start="850" end="859" title="boardwalk (entertainment district)" label="boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1293" end="1312" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693148" start="1330" end="1340" title="Ted Drewes" label="Ted Drewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317504" start="1572" end="1581" title="Dutchtown, St. Louis" label="Dutchtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q300347" start="1702" end="1724" title="1933 World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1933 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1728" end="1735" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1861" end="1881" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431150" start="2136" end="2162" title="Kopp&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard" label="Kopp&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562051" start="2164" end="2185" title="Gilles Frozen Custard" label="Gilles Frozen Custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524458" start="2190" end="2216" title="Leon&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard" label="Leon&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143589" start="2276" end="2289" title="Culver&amp;#x27;s" label="Culver&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415586" start="2308" end="2333" title="Prairie du Sac, Wisconsin" label="Prairie du Sac, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496837" start="2362" end="2409" title="Freddy&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard &amp;amp; Steakburgers" label="Freddy&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard &amp;amp; Steakburgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="2420" end="2435" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760327" start="2482" end="2508" title="Andy&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard" label="Andy&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="2519" end="2540" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693148" start="2624" end="2634" title="Ted Drewes" label="Ted Drewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="2645" end="2666" title="Saint Louis, Missouri" label="Saint Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336456" start="2669" end="2692" title="Rita&amp;#x27;s Italian Ice" label="Rita&amp;#x27;s Italian Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2706" end="2732" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803428" start="2735" end="2746" title="Meadows Frozen Custard" label="The Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664334" start="2752" end="2765" title="Abbott&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard" label="Abbott&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="2767" end="2786" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="2827" end="2855" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q909729" start="2935" end="2942" title="milkfat" label="milkfat"/>
<link wikidata="Q181409" start="2959" end="2967" title="egg yolk" label="egg yolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362405" start="3504" end="3510" title="gelato" label="gelato"/>
<link wikidata="Q276276" start="3670" end="3678" title="meringue" label="meringue"/>
<link wikidata="Q625825" start="4466" end="4473" title="Custard" label="Custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13319" start="4514" end="4527" title="Frozen yogurt" label="Frozen yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362405" start="4568" end="4574" title="Gelato" label="Gelato"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="4609" end="4618" title="Ice cream" label="Ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716807" start="4621" end="4645" title="List of custard desserts" label="List of custard desserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q48998740" start="4648" end="4680" title="List of frozen custard companies" label="List of frozen custard companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570370" start="4683" end="4693" title="Semifreddo" label="Semifreddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397211" start="4780" end="4790" title="Soft serve" label="Soft serve"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567494" wikidata="Q3009781" url="?curid=567494" title="Quercus fusiformis">
<text>Quercus fusiformis (also often referred to as &quot;Q. virginiana&quot; var. &quot;fusiformis&quot;), commonly known as escarpment live oak, plateau live oak, plateau oak, or Texas live oak, is an evergreen or nearly evergreen tree. Its native range includes the Quartz Mountains and Wichita Mountains in southwestern Oklahoma, through Texas, to the Mexican states of Coahuila, Tamaulipas, and Nuevo León.

&quot;Quercus fusiformis&quot; is an evergreen tree in the southern live oaks section of the genus &quot;Quercus&quot; (section &quot;Virentes&quot;). It is distinguished from &quot;Quercus virginiana&quot; (southern live oak) most easily by the acorns, which are slightly larger and with a more pointed apex. It is also a smaller tree, not exceeding in trunk diametercompared to 2.5 m (75 in) in diameter in southern live oakwith more erect branching and a less wide crown. Like &quot;Q. virginiana&quot;, its magnificent, stately form and unparalleled longevity has endeared it to generations of residents throughout its native range. Its low hanging branches are a favorite for local children to climb and play in.

Escarpment live oak is typically found on dry sites, unlike southern live oak, which prefers moister conditions. The tree, especially the Quartz Mountains variety, is generally accepted to be the hardiest evergreen oak, able to withstand very cold winters with minimal leaf burn in areas as cold as USDA zone 6a. For this reason the tree has become popular within the landscape industry for its beauty, ability to endure urban conditions, and general hardiness. It is prevalently used for these purposes in Texas and southern Oklahoma but use is becoming more widespread in the Western&quot; &quot;US.

The largest recorded individual tree of &quot;Q. fusiformis&quot; in the state of Texas is found in Bosque County (not to be confused with the &quot;Election Oak&quot; or Bosque County Oak). It has a circumference of , which is actually larger than the largest recorded &quot;Q. virginiana&quot; in the state, listed at .

==References==
==External links==
*Texas Native Plants Database, Texas A&amp;M University: &quot;Quercus fusiformis&quot; — &quot;horticultural/ornamental tree description&quot;.
*photo of herbarium specimen collected in Nuevo León in 2003</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3009781" start="120" end="139" title="Quercus fusiformis" label="escarpment live oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009781" start="141" end="157" title="Quercus fusiformis" label="plateau live oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009781" start="159" end="170" title="Quercus fusiformis" label="plateau oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009781" start="175" end="190" title="Quercus fusiformis" label="Texas live oak,"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="227" end="231" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269394" start="263" end="279" title="Quartz Mountains" label="Quartz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305333" start="284" end="301" title="Wichita Mountains" label="Wichita Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571438" start="305" end="326" title="southwestern Oklahoma" label="southwestern Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="368" end="376" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="378" end="388" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="394" end="404" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="512" end="519" title="Oak" label="Quercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163388" start="527" end="555" title="Quercus sect. Virentes" label="section &amp;quot;Virentes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758722" start="589" end="607" title="Quercus virginiana" label="Quercus virginiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914781" start="653" end="658" title="acorn" label="acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269394" start="1264" end="1280" title="Quartz Mountains" label="Quartz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="1425" end="1437" title="Hardiness zone" label="USDA zone 6a"/>
<link wikidata="Q108424" start="1829" end="1842" title="Bosque County" label="Bosque County"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567501" wikidata="Q5231555" url="?curid=567501" title="David Boring">
<text>David Boring is a graphic novel by American cartoonist Daniel Clowes. It was serialized in issues #19–21 of Clowes&#x27;s comic book &quot;Eightball&quot; and appeared in collected form from Pantheon Books in 2000.

The book depicts the misadventures of its eponymous character, whose main interests are finding the &quot;perfect woman&quot; and learning more about his father, an obscure comic artist whom he has never met. All this occurs in a nameless American city, against the background of a looming conflict involving germ warfare. Trying to imagine what a one-sentence sales pitch for &quot;David Boring&quot; would sound like, Clowes told an interviewer &quot;It&#x27;s like Fassbinder meets half-baked Nabokov on &quot;Gilligan&#x27;s Island&quot;.&quot;

==Publication==
&quot;David Boring&quot;&#x27;s three chapters (which Clowes called &quot;acts&quot;) first appeared from May 1998 to February 2000 in issues of Clowes&#x27;s comic book &quot;Eightball&quot;, published by Fantagraphics Books. Pantheon Books published a hardcover collected version later in 2000 and followed with a softcover version in 2002. The pages were printed in a relatively large format.

==Plot==
&quot;David Boring&quot; is a story told in the first person by its eponymous protagonist, concerning his sometimes fantastic and sometimes mundane exploits and misadventures in and out of big city life.

Much of the plot of the book concerns David&#x27;s attempt to obtain a woman whom he considers his feminine ideal, based largely on the characteristics of his first cousin, Pamela, with whom he shared some innocent adolescent kisses at a family summer retreat. Soon after attending the funeral of a friend, David meets, dates, and is abandoned by Wanda, a woman whom he considers the perfect fulfillment of this ideal. After sinking into an all-consuming depression for weeks, David is shot in the head by an unknown attacker in front of his own home, but survives with only a small dent in his forehead.

David, his mother, their extended family, and David&#x27;s roommate and friend Dot all end up stranded on a small island, Hulligan&#x27;s Wharf, which the family owns and uses for vacations. David&#x27;s great-uncle August shows up, proclaims that terrorist gas attacks have contaminated the mainland, and later dies. While on the island, David has a sexual tryst with his mother&#x27;s cousin, Mrs. Capon, who later disappears that very night. At the same time, Dot has begun a relationship with Iris, Mrs. Capon&#x27;s daughter, who is married to Manfred. Manfred tries to kill Dot by drugging her and throwing her into the water while she sleeps, but she wakes up in time to grab Iris, beat up Manfred, and escape by boat.

When word gets around that David suspects Manfred of killing Mrs. Capon as well, Manfred tries to pummel him, but is stopped by Mr. Hulligan, the island&#x27;s caretaker. When the food runs out, David and Mr. Hulligan are abandoned by Manfred and David&#x27;s mother, and barely make it ashore on a makeshift raft. They discover (as Mr. Hulligan believed all along) that the terrorist attack was not the world-ending catastrophe August had believed.

David returns home and begins a relationship with a woman named Naomi. He soon discovers that the man who shot him was a professor named Karkes, who was similarly abandoned by Wanda, and assumed that she had left him for David. He and Karkes enter into a strange friendship, discussing their mutual obsession with Wanda and attempting to track her down. In his search, David meets Judy, Wanda&#x27;s sister, who resembles her strongly. David decides that, contrary to his earlier belief that Wanda was the fulfillment of his ideal, Wanda was in fact merely a flawed version of Judy. His relationship with Naomi falls apart, and she flees to Norway, fearing further terrorist attacks on America.

Judy is attracted to David, but is worried about her husband. After they meet and kiss, her husband shows up at David&#x27;s apartment and knocks him unconscious with a baseball bat. Meanwhile, Dot&#x27;s relationship with Iris has failed, and Iris leaves her for Agent Roy Smith, who is investigating the murders of Mrs. Capon and Whitey. Smith resolves to frame David and Dot for Whitey&#x27;s murder, in order to eliminate any competition for Iris, whom he marries.

David and Karkes track Wanda down to a weird cult commune, finding that Wanda is the only one there, the others having &quot;gone on.&quot; Neither David nor Karkes asks what that means. Although David and Karkes agree to &quot;let the best man win,&quot; David intends to deceive and defeat Karkes by letting him have Wanda, whom he considers a lesser version of Judy. David loudly and publicly declares his love for Judy, but this only earns him another beating at the hands of her husband.

David aimlessly wanders his way around the docks, where he is tracked down by Smith and his superior, Lieutenant Anemone. Smith tries to shoot David, but only grazes his head before Smith and Anemone are both shot by Dot. The two escape to Hulligan&#x27;s Wharf, where David finds his long-lost cousin Pamela and her baby. She fled to the island for her child&#x27;s safety, and has several months of food supply, planning to start a vegetable garden so that they can survive indefinitely. David and Pamela begin an adult relationship.

The group spends more than four months on the island with no sign of the police or poison gas. The occurrence of further terrorist attacks is suggested, but not directly stated. At the book&#x27;s end, David expresses the conviction that he is happy and thankful, and does not care how long he has to live. The question of whether the pair have days, weeks, months, or years of bliss is never answered.

==Characters==
*David Boring: David, who gives his birthdate as May 6, 1978, is both the novel&#x27;s protagonist and narrator. He is very quiet, thoughtful, passive, and is noticeably skinny. At the beginning of the novel he works as a security guard, although he has virtually no capacity for violence. David is an expert pick-up artist, but derives little satisfaction from his conquests and does not boast of them. He is in search of a woman who meets his exacting ideal of female physical beauty. He also aspires to be a moviemaker, although at the book&#x27;s end he seems to have given up this goal. His only other motivation, it seems, is to learn more about his absent, deceased father, whom he never knew and of whom his mother refuses to talk at length. David tries to learn as much as he can from fragmented pages of a superhero comic his father made, called &quot;The Yellow Streak&quot;.
*Dot: Dot is David&#x27;s best friend. She has known him since high school, when they did short movie projects together. Dot is a lesbian, and enjoys the fact that she can peacefully coexist and cohabit with David without any sexual tension. Unfortunately, Dot has a tendency to get involved with women who do not self-identify as lesbian and who are already involved with a man. It also hints at Dot being in love with David, though it is never shown outright. She tries to become close to him and get him to forget Wanda in bed but he gets a migraine interrupting the moment, later she mentions &quot;the complex mechanics of our relationship&quot; indicating there is more than has been shown to the reader, along with the words &quot;when you find a good man you have to do whatever you can to protect him&quot; referring again to her protection of David as more than just a friend.
*Wanda Kraml: A woman with whom David falls in love. Although she appears modest, conservative, and old-fashioned, David later discovers that she has a habit of getting involved with men who become obsessed with her, usually under an assumed personality (her older sister Judy called her a talented actress), later abandoning them. She seems to have patterned the false personality she used in her relationship with David after Judy. This revelation leads David to lose interest in Wanda and fall in love with Judy herself. She later joins a bizarre cult, and at the novel&#x27;s end, appears to have become involved with Karkes again.
*Ferdinand B. Karkes: A college professor who shares David&#x27;s obsessive streak, and is similarly obsessed with Wanda. Unlike David, Karkes never gets over his fixation on Wanda, and his obsession has cost him his marriage, his finances, and the respect of his colleagues.
*Whitey Whitman: David&#x27;s old school friend, whom David describes as &quot;a cynical hayseed with pretensions of urbanity.&quot; Whitey gives David a lucky penny, and is subsequently murdered in the street after leaving a woman&#x27;s apartment.
*Mrs. Boring: David&#x27;s mother, whom he dislikes. David describes her as &quot;horrible&quot; and she appears to have no interest in relationships with other people. She is angry that David wants to know more about his father, whom she absolutely despises.
*Iris: Manfred&#x27;s wife and Mrs. Capon&#x27;s daughter. She gets involved with Dot, but is disgusted with her own homosexual behavior. She later leaves Dot for Agent Roy Smith.
*Manfred Roland, Jr.: Iris&#x27; abusive husband. He does not get along with her or her family, and later tries to kill Dot. It is strongly hinted that he killed Mrs. Capon.
*Agent Roy Smith: An unscrupulous government agent who falls for Iris, and tries to frame David and Dot for Whitey&#x27;s murder in order to have her for himself. It is implied that he also has Manfred arrested for the murder of Mrs. Capon after Dot and Iris identify him as her killer.

==Reception and legacy==
In 2005, &quot;Time&quot; chose it as one of the 10 Best graphic novels ever written.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="18" end="31" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q712675" start="55" end="68" title="Daniel Clowes" label="Daniel Clowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="77" end="83" title="Serial (literature)" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349042" start="139" end="148" title="Eightball (comics)" label="Eightball"/>
<link wikidata="Q520387" start="191" end="205" title="Pantheon Books" label="Pantheon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242560" start="525" end="537" title="germ warfare" label="germ warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q44426" start="684" end="694" title="Rainer Werner Fassbinder" label="Fassbinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="712" end="719" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141741" start="729" end="751" title="Gilligan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Gilligan&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349042" start="958" end="967" title="Eightball (comics)" label="Eightball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395850" start="988" end="1007" title="Fantagraphics Books" label="Fantagraphics Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q520387" start="1009" end="1023" title="Pantheon Books" label="Pantheon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1848" end="1858" title="clinical depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="2247" end="2256" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q637304" start="6102" end="6116" title="pick-up artist" label="pick-up artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="6609" end="6618" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="6810" end="6817" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="6994" end="7007" title="Identity (social science)" label="self-identify"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="7649" end="7661" title="conservative" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="8117" end="8121" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="9106" end="9116" title="homosexual" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="9202" end="9209" title="domestic violence" label="abusive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567502" wikidata="Q983661" url="?curid=567502" title="Demetrios Chalkokondyles">
<text>Demetrios Chalkokondyles ( ), Latinized as Demetrius Chalcocondyles and found variously as Demetricocondyles, Chalcocondylas or Chalcondyles (14239 January 1511), was one of the most eminent Greek scholars in the West. He taught in Italy for over forty years; his colleagues included Marsilio Ficino, Poliziano, and Theodorus Gaza in the revival of letters in the Western world, and Chalkokondyles was the last of the Greek humanists who taught Greek literature at the great universities of the Italian Renaissance (Padua, Florence, Milan). One of his pupils at Florence was the famous Johann Reuchlin. Chalkokondyles published the first printed publications of Homer (in 1488), of Isocrates (in 1493), and of the Suda lexicon (in 1499).

==Life==

Demetrios Chalkokondyles was born in Athens in 1423 to one of the noblest Athenian families; he was the cousin of Laonicus Chalcocondyles, the chronicler of the fall of Constantinople. He soon moved to the Peloponnese, with his Athenian family who had migrated after its persecution by the Florentine dukes. He migrated to Italy in 1447 and arrived at Rome in 1449 where Cardinal Bessarion became his patron. He became the student of Theodorus Gaza and later gained the patronage of Lorenzo de Medici, serving as a tutor to his sons. Afterwards Chalkokondyles lived the rest of his life in Italy, as a teacher of Greek and philosophy. One of Chalkokondyles&#x27; Italian pupils described his lectures at Perugia, where he taught in 1450:
Among his pupils were Janus Lascaris, Poliziano, Leo X, Castiglione, Giglio Gregorio Giraldi, Stefano Negri, and Giovanni Maria Cattaneo.

In 1463 Chalkokondyles was made professor at Padua, and later, at Francesco Philelpho&#x27;s suggestion, in 1479 he took over the place of Ioannis Argyropoulos, as the head of the Greek Literature department and was summoned by Lorenzo de Medici to Florence. Chalkokondyles composed several orations and treatises calling for the liberation of his homeland Greece from what he called “the abominable, monstrous, and impious barbarian Turks.” In 1463 Chalkokondyles called on Venice and &quot;all of the Latins&quot; to aid the Greeks against the Ottomans, he identified this as an overdue debt and reminded the Latins how the Byzantine Greeks once came to Italy&#x27;s aid against the Goths in the Gothic Wars (535–554 AD)

It was during his tenure at the Studium in Florence that Chalkokondyles edited Homer for publication, which, dedicated to Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici, is his major accomplishment. He assisted Marsilio Ficino with his Latin translation of Plato. During his tenure at Florence, the German classical scholar Johannes Reuchlin was one of his pupils. He also taught Alessandra Scala, the Florentine Greek and Latin poet.

Chalkokondyles married in 1484 at the age of sixty-one and fathered ten children. Finally, invited by Ludovico Sforza, he moved to Milan (1491/1492), where he taught until he died.

==Work==

He wrote in Ancient Greek the grammar handbook &quot;Summarized Questions on the Eight Parts of Speech With Some Rules&quot; (). He translated Galen&#x27;s &quot;Anatomy&quot; into Latin.

As a scholar, Chalkokondyles published the &quot;editio princeps&quot; of Homer (Florence 1488), Isocrates (Milan 1493) and the Byzantine &quot;Suda&quot; lexicon (1499).
*Greek Grammar, edited 1546 by Melchior Volmar in Basel
*Latin translation of the &quot;Anatomical Procedures&quot; of Galen, edited and published in 1529 by Jacopo Berengario da Carpi
*Ἡ τοῦ Ὁμήρου ποίησις ἅπασα, 1488, &quot;editio princeps&quot; of Homer&#x27;s Iliad and Odyssey, edited by Bernardus Nerlius and Chalkokondyles, appeared in Florence, not before 13 January 1489, in two folio volumes. It was the first Greek book to be printed in Florence. The Greek type used to print the 1488–1489 Homer is believed to have been cast by the Cretan Demetrius Damilas from the type that he had used to print Constantine Lascaris’ &quot;Erotemata&quot; (Milan 1476), the first book to be printed entirely in Greek, based upon the hand of Damilas’s fellow scribe Michael Apostolis.

==See also==
*Chalkokondyles family
*Greek scholars in the Renaissance

==Notes==
==References==
* Nancy Bisaha, &quot;Creating East and West: Renaissance humanists and the Ottoman Turks&quot;, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2006, pp. 113–15. 
* Deno J. Geanakoplos, &quot;The discourse of Demetrius Chalcocondyles on the inauguration of Greek studies at the University of Padua&quot;, &quot;Studies in the Renaissance&quot;, 21 (1974), 118–44 and in Deno J. Geanakoplos, &quot;Interaction of the ‘Sibling’ Byzantine and Western Cultures in the Middle Ages and Italian Renaissance (330–1600)&quot;, New Haven and London, 1976, pp. 296–304
* Jonathan Harris, &quot;Greek Émigrés in the West, 1400–1520&quot;, Camberley: Porphyrogenitus, 1995. 
* Robert Proctor, &quot;The Printing of Greek in the Fifteenth-Century&quot;, London, 1930, pp. 66–9.
* Fotis Vassileiou &amp; Barbara Saribalidou, &quot;Short Biographical Lexicon of Byzantine Academics Immigrants to Western Europe&quot;, 2007.
* N.G. Wilson, &quot;From Byzantium to Italy. Greek Studies in the Italian Renaissance&quot;, London, 1992. 

== External links ==
* The &quot;First Edition&quot; of the &quot;Iliad&quot;, article about the textual history the &quot;Iliad&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="0" end="24" title="Demetrios Chalkokondyles" label="Demetrios Chalkokondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="30" end="39" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="43" end="67" title="Demetrios Chalkokondyles" label="Demetrius Chalcocondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="91" end="108" title="Demetrios Chalkokondyles" label="Demetricocondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="110" end="124" title="Demetrios Chalkokondyles" label="Chalcocondylas"/>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="128" end="140" title="Demetrios Chalkokondyles" label="Chalcondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="191" end="196" title="Greek people" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q192374" start="284" end="299" title="Marsilio Ficino" label="Marsilio Ficino"/>
<link wikidata="Q250414" start="301" end="310" title="Poliziano" label="Poliziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q287485" start="316" end="330" title="Theodorus Gaza" label="Theodorus Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="424" end="433" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="516" end="521" title="University of Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q820887" start="523" end="531" title="University of Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q46210" start="533" end="538" title="University of Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61067" start="586" end="601" title="Johann Reuchlin" label="Johann Reuchlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="662" end="667" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221182" start="682" end="691" title="Isocrates" label="Isocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="714" end="718" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="786" end="792" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q324534" start="863" end="886" title="Laonicus Chalcocondyles" label="Laonicus Chalcocondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="910" end="932" title="fall of Constantinople" label="fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="955" end="966" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1039" end="1049" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1101" end="1105" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q299446" start="1120" end="1138" title="Cardinal Bessarion" label="Cardinal Bessarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q287485" start="1183" end="1197" title="Theodorus Gaza" label="Theodorus Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="1232" end="1249" title="Lorenzo de Medici" label="Lorenzo de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q498547" start="1509" end="1523" title="Janus Lascaris" label="Janus Lascaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q250414" start="1525" end="1534" title="Poliziano" label="Poliziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="1536" end="1541" title="Leo X" label="Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q211133" start="1543" end="1554" title="Baldassare Castiglione" label="Castiglione"/>
<link wikidata="Q448191" start="1556" end="1579" title="Giglio Gregorio Giraldi" label="Giglio Gregorio Giraldi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1581" end="1594" title="Stefano Negri" label="Stefano Negri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1600" end="1623" title="Giovanni Maria Cattaneo" label="Giovanni Maria Cattaneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="1671" end="1676" title="University of Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622" start="1692" end="1711" title="Francesco Philelpho" label="Francesco Philelpho"/>
<link wikidata="Q26648" start="1765" end="1785" title="Ioannis Argyropoulos" label="Ioannis Argyropoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="1854" end="1871" title="Lorenzo de Medici" label="Lorenzo de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1875" end="1883" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1983" end="1989" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="2101" end="2107" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2129" end="2135" title="Catholic Church" label="Latins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2172" end="2180" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="2252" end="2268" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="2311" end="2316" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q477973" start="2324" end="2335" title="Gothic War (535–554)" label="Gothic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2429" end="2434" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="2472" end="2495" title="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2584" end="2589" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q61067" start="2651" end="2668" title="Johannes Reuchlin" label="Johannes Reuchlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215784" start="2707" end="2723" title="Alessandra Scala" label="Alessandra Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q236853" start="2865" end="2880" title="Ludovico Sforza" label="Ludovico Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2967" end="2980" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="3098" end="3103" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108907595" start="3193" end="3208" title="List of editiones principes in Greek" label="editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q221182" start="3241" end="3250" title="Isocrates" label="Isocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3272" end="3281" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="3288" end="3292" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3346" end="3361" title="Melchior Volmar" label="Melchior Volmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="3365" end="3370" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="3434" end="3439" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q670782" start="3473" end="3499" title="Jacopo Berengario da Carpi" label="Jacopo Berengario da Carpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="3541" end="3556" title="editio princeps" label="editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3608" end="3625" title="Bernardus Nerlius" label="Bernardus Nerlius"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="3859" end="3865" title="Crete" label="Cretan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3866" end="3883" title="Demetrius Damilas" label="Demetrius Damilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358738" start="3924" end="3944" title="Constantine Lascaris" label="Constantine Lascaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395405" start="3952" end="3961" title="Erotemata" label="Erotemata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4077" end="4094" title="Michael Apostolis" label="Michael Apostolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068845" start="4111" end="4132" title="Chalkokondyles" label="Chalkokondyles family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="4134" end="4167" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="Greek scholars in the Renaissance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567506" wikidata="Q3521777" url="?curid=567506" title="K. Karunakaran">
<text>Kannoth Karunakaran (5 July 191823 December 2010) was an Indian politician who served as the chief minister of Kerala in 1977, from 1981 to March 1982, from May 1982 to 1987 and from 1991 to 1995. He is the founder of the Indian National Congress (INC)-led United Democratic Front (UDF) coalition, which governed the state in the periods of 1982-87, 1991-96, 2001-06 and 2011-16; and currently is the main opposition in Kerala . He has also served as the Union Minister of Industry from 1995 to 1996 and served as the Leader of the Opposition in the Kerala Legislative Assembly for four terms- 1967 to 1969, 1978 to 1979, 1980 to 1981 and 1987 to 1991. He also has the distinction of being one of the longest serving Congress Legislature Party (CLP) Leaders in the country, holding that post from 1967 to 1995.

Karunakaran was close to former Prime Ministers Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi. At the peak of his career in the 1980s and 1990s, he enjoyed considerable access, confidence and control at the All India Congress Committee (AICC), such that he had an important role in helping P. V. Narasimha Rao become Prime Minister of India. He played a crucial role in nurturing and strengthening the INC into a strong political party in Kerala and enjoyed mass support of not just party workers but the entire anti-communist bloc that was active in Kerala. He is also credited with bringing development to multiple sectors in Kerala by spearheading key projects, including Kochi Airport, the country’s first public-private international airport, the Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, and Kochi&#x27;s Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium.

==Personal life==
Karunakaran was born on 5 July 1918 in Chirakkal near Kannur in an Ambalavasi Marar family to Thekkedathu Ravunni Marar and Kannoth Kalyani Amma. He had two elder brothers, Kannoth Kunjirama Marar and Kannoth Balakrishna Marar; a younger brother, Kannoth Damodara &quot;Appunni&quot; Marar; and a sister, Devaki, who died when Karunakaran was five years old. His father was a record keeper in the erstwhile Malabar District.

During his childhood, Karunakaran was an expert in swimming, painting, football and volleyball. Though he was named Karunakara Marar, he later dropped his caste title, and came to be known just by his given name.

Karunakaran began his education at Vadakara Government Lower Primary School in 1923. Later, he studied in Andallur Government School and Raja&#x27;s High School near his home in Chirakkal. After graduating high school, he went to Thrissur and enrolled at the fine arts college, where he obtained degrees in painting and mathematics. For treating an eye disorder, he went to his maternal uncle&#x27;s home in Vellanikkara near Thrissur, along with his eldest brother Kunjirama Marar. Later, he married his uncle&#x27;s daughter Kalyanikkutty Amma in 1954 at Guruvayoor Temple, when he was 36 and she was 30. Their children are Congress politician K. Muraleedharan and BJP politician Padmaja Venugopal.

On 3 June 1992, during his last term as Chief Minister, he had a near fatal car accident on his way to Thiruvananthapuram. He recovered after prolonged treatment in both India and the US. In the next year, his wife died following a heart ailment.

==Political career==

In 1937, Karunakaran joined the flood relief camps that were conducted by V. R. Krishnan Ezhuthachan, C. Achutha Menon, R.M.Manakkalath and other leaders of Prajamandalam, an early freedom movement in Kochi. He became a member of the INC and began to wear khadi. He also participated intensively in trade union activities in the vast Thattil rubber estates where his uncle Raghavan Nair was a writer. During this time he used his artistic skills and labour to help the workers&#x27; union, which would become the Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC), with their posters and campaigns. Gradually, he was picked up by Panampilly Govinda Menon as his favourite follower. Eventually, Karunakaran rose to the level of senior leader of the INTUC, which became one of the largest trade unions in India with over 33 million members. He went on to become INC&#x27;s Thrissur District Committee President, after which he was elected to the Cochin Legislative Assembly twice before the formation of Kerala State. He contested the 1957 Kerala Legislative Assembly elections against trade unionist and ex-INC member Dr. A. R. Menon, going onto to lose by around two thousand votes.
The VIP pavilion in Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium in Kaloor, Kochi is named in his honour.

In 1967, when Karunakaran was elected to the State Legislature for the first time, the Congress was at its lowest ebb in the state having been routed in the election with just 9 legislators on its side (less than the 10 percent strength which is now mandatory to be recognized as the official opposition party). The defeat of many veteran leaders paved the way for Karunakaran to take up the mantle of the Leader of the Opposition. Karunakaran quickly adapted to the role with his dexterous and Machiavellian capabilities putting the EMS Namboodiripad ministry on its toes despite the massive majority it enjoyed in the assembly.

In 1969, Karunakaran faced a severe setback when the Congress legislature party vertically split, leaving Karunakaran with the support of just 5 MLAs. However, Karunakaran, always a master strategist bided his time and played a crucial role in the overthrow of the Namboodiripad ministry and the subsequent formation of a coalition with the new Chief Minister, C. Achutha Menon. By the mid-term elections, the Congress had recovered significantly under Karunakaran and emerged as the largest party post the elections. Although Karunakaran could have technically staked a claim for Chief Ministership in 1970, he chose not to do so, being aware of Achutha Menon&#x27;s administrative capabilities and visionary ideas for the state. Instead, he went to become the Home Minister in the cabinet, by virtue of which he was the de-facto deputy in the cabinet.

In 1977, following the National Emergency, when the Congress was swept out of power across the nation, Karunakaran led the Congress-coalition government to a landslide victory securing 111 seats in the 1977 Kerala Legislative Assembly elections. However, he had to resign after one month following the controversies that emerged about the Rajan case paving the way for his rival AK Antony to become Chief Minister. Regardless, he emerged as a strong supporter of Indira Gandhi after the emergency.

Political instability continued with Antony, P.K. Vasudevan Nair and C.H. Mohammad Koya all serving as Chief Ministers in the 5th legislative assembly from 1977 to 1979, eventually calling for the need for a fresh mandate from the public. With the CPI, RSP, the Antony-faction and K.M. Mani joining hands with the CPI(M) to form the Left Democratic Front in 1979-80, the residual Congress under Karunakaran was doomed. The newly formed United Democratic Front consisting of the Congress, Muslim League and the Kerala Congress faction led by P.J. Joseph suffered a crushing defeat in the 1980 assembly elections winning a mere 46 seats. Nevertheless, Karunakaran went on to become the Leader of the Opposition.

As in 1969, Karunakaran deftly took advantage of the discord prevailing between the CPI(M) and the Antony-faction, eventually leading to the collapse of the E.K. Nayanar government in October 1981. Subsequently, Karunakaran went onto form his second administration in December 1981, after a brief spell of President&#x27;s rule. However, he faced a dilemma as both the treasury and opposition benches were tied, thus requiring the Speaker, A.C. Jose to cast his vote to save the government. This went to become a farcical experiment with the speaker casting his vote on occasion eight times to save the government. Eventually, in March 1982, a legislator defected from the treasury benches and the government lost the no-confidence motion.

In the early elections held in May 1982, the UDF under Karunakaran won a narrow but decisive victory securing 77 seats to the LDF&#x27;s 63. Karunakaran himself contested from two seats, winning from both- his traditional Mala seat as well as Nemom. Karunakaran was sworn in as Chief Minister for the third time and went on to become just the second Chief Minister to serve a full 5-year term in office. Karunakaran was also successful in ensuring the return of &#x27;rebel&#x27; leaders such as A. K. Antony, Oommen Chandy and Vayalar Ravi to the Congress.

In March 1987, the Karunakaran administration which had been tainted due to corruption charges, rising communalization and infighting, was brought down from power, with the LDF winning 78 seats, leaving just 61 seats for the UDF. The next four years in opposition saw a virtual tug of war between Karunakaran and Antony serving as the new Leader of the Opposition and State Congress President respectively. The Congress and the UDF were in virtual disarray, ceding wide political ground to the Marxists under Chief Minister Nayanar. Following the rout suffered by the UDF in the panchayat elections in 1990-91, Nayanar took the gamble of holding an early assembly election in May 1991 along with the already scheduled parliamentary election. The tragic assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, two days before polling was scheduled to take place completely changed the tide in Kerala. The UDF on the back of a sympathy-wave rode to power, sweeping 90 seats. The Congress itself won 57 seats, its highest tally since 1960. Karunakaran was propelled back to the post of Chief Minister for the fourth and what would be the final time.

His downfall in state politics began with a car accident that happened to him in June 1992. He was returning from Aluva after attending multiple meetings in Njarakkal Legislative Constituency, where there were by-elections, and his car collided with a tree at Pallippuram near Thiruvananthapuram, causing him serious fractures in head, limbs and the sixth vertebrae of his spine. After the accident, he was hospitalized in Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum and was unable to manage the finances and administration of the state government. This became a political crisis when the state government was managed by a kitchen cabinet of Karunakaran&#x27;s son K. Muraleedharan and his trusted aide and Chief Secretary of the Indian Administrative Service, K. Padmakumar. This was an issue within the state INC as then-Finance Minister and second in command of the ruling coalition Oommen Chandy, belonging to the party&#x27;s pro-Antony faction, was not given command. By 1993, Karunakaran had recovered and became active in government affairs. During this period, discontent was further aggravated by bringing K. M. Mani into the foray when a split occurred between Kerala Congress and Kerala Congress (Jacob). Meanwhile a revisionist () group emerged within Karunakaran&#x27;s INC faction led by G. Karthikeyan, Ramesh Chennithala and M. I. Shanavas against his authoritarian tendencies and proxy rule by his son. The situation intensified into an intra-party revolt when M. A. Kuttappan, nominated by the state INC as a Rajya Sabha nominee, was denied candidacy by party leadership, which Karunakaran had considerable influence over. The difference of opinion that emerged between Chandy and Karunakaran became public and vociferous with Chandy threatening to resign and giving speeches against Karunakaran. By the end of 1994, the ISRO espionage case emerged and the case led to political tensions when the Kerala High Court made remarks against then-Inspector General of the Kerala Police and Karunakaran ally Raman Srivastava. Thereafter the dissidence in the party grew into a full-scale crisis, with the Antony faction threatening to withdraw their support from the government, and G. K. Moopanar arriving on behalf of P. V. Narasimha Rao to insist that Karunakaran resign. Eventually, Karunakaran was forced to step down from the post of Chief Minister on 16th March 1995 in favour of his bête-noire, A.K. Antony. He was also compelled to relinquish the post of the Leader of the Congress Legislature Party (CLP) which he had been holding since 1967- the longest tenure of any Congress leader in that post in any state in the country. It was tragic for Karunakaran that the ISRO case later emerged as a conspiracy case which was manipulated by his rivals to oust him. 

Subsequently, he was elected to the Rajya Sabha and served as the Union Minister for Industries under Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao from June 1995 to May 1996. His foray into national politics was much less successful with Karunakaran suffering a shock defeat in his maiden parliamentary outing from his stronghold of Thrissur by a wafer-thin margin of 1,480 votes. He might have well become the next Congress Parliamentary Party Leader had he been elected to the Lok Sabha in 1996. He squarely went to blame Antony and his supporters for engineering his defeat and causing his downfall. 

Although Karunakaran went to get elected to the Lok Sabha in 1998 and 1999 from Trivandrum and Mukundapuram respectively, he failed to rise to the top echelons of the party. Confined to state politics, he emerged as a thorn for Antony and resisted Antony&#x27;s elevation to Chief Ministership following the landslide victory of the UDF in 2001. He subsequently raised the banner of revolt on multiple occasions and tried to topple Antony, despite his son K. Muraleedharan becoming the new State Congress President, Eventually, Antony was compelled to appoint Muraleedharan as a Minister and Padmaja Venugopal, Karunakaran&#x27;s daughter as the Congress candidate from Karunakaran&#x27;s constituency. Both Muraleedharan and Padmaja were defeated in Congress bastions by landslide margins, along with the other UDF candidates, tarnishing both Antony and Karunakaran in the process. The subsequent resignation of Antony and the installation of Oommen Chandy as Chief Minister only increased tensions, leading to Karunakaran walking out of the Congress in 2005.

The Democratic Indira Congress (Karunakaran) (DIC(K)) party was founded at a meeting of Karunakuran&#x27;s INC faction in Thrissur on 1 May 2005. Initially it was called National Congress (Indira), but the name was changed to DIC(K) for registration purposes in August 2005. Karunakaran rejoined the INC on 11 December 2007.

==Death==
Karunakaran died at 5:30 PM on 23 December 2010, aged 92, at Ananthapuri Hospital in Thiruvananthapuram. He had had respiratory problems, a fever and other age related diseases and had been hospitalized since 10 December 2010. His condition worsened following a stroke on 22 December and he died following cardiac arrest, as declared by doctors. It was coincidental that his and P. V. Narasimha Rao&#x27;s deaths were on same date, Rao having died six years earlier. Karunakaran had played a key role in backing the Rao government and later Rao had dismissed him from the chair of Chief Minister of Kerala. His funeral was attended by the then Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and the AICC chief Sonia Gandhi. He was cremated with full state honors at his residence in Punkunnam, Thrissur.

==Electoral history==
==Controversies==

K. Karunakaran was the home minister of Kerala during the Emergency period and decimated the Naxalite–Maoist insurgency in Kerala. After the Emergency, the Rajan case rocked Kerala politics and Karunakaran was forced to step down as the case attracted national attention. A habeas corpus petition was filed by T. V. Eachara Warrier asking the state government to produce his son Rajan (a student of the Regional Engineering College, Calicut who had actively participated in protests against the Emergency) in court. Rajan was allegedly killed by the police at the Kakkayam police torture camp and his body disposed of. The legal battle led by his father became one of the most remembered human rights fights in the state and diminished Karunakaran&#x27;s popularity.

Karunakaran was accused of involvement in the Palmolein Oil Import Scam, about which a case was pending before the Supreme Court at the time of his death. The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) who finally investigated the case mentioned in 2013 that no case can be made against the officials and that there was no loss to the state government, and the case was withdrawn. 

He was forced to resign due to allegations that his subordinate, senior Indian Police Service officer Raman Srivastava, was involved in the ISRO espionage scandal.

==See also==
* Chief Ministers of Kerala
* Kerala Ministers
* Democratic Indira Congress (Karunakaran)
* Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;K.&quot;&quot;Karunakaran&quot;, a biography by Vrindavanam Venugopalan, published by Islamiya Books in Aluva in 1992.

== External links ==
* The Hindu on Karunakaran
* News of Death of Karunakaran</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3521777" start="0" end="19" title="K. Karunakaran" label="Kannoth Karunakaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837949" start="93" end="117" title="List of chief ministers of Kerala" label="chief minister of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="222" end="246" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887689" start="257" end="280" title="United Democratic Front (Kerala)" label="United Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="420" end="426" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462542" start="550" end="577" title="Kerala Legislative Assembly" label="Kerala Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="860" end="873" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="878" end="890" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728931" start="1004" end="1032" title="All India Congress Committee" label="All India Congress Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q275146" start="1087" end="1106" title="P. V. Narasimha Rao" label="P. V. Narasimha Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="1114" end="1137" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q592172" start="1472" end="1485" title="Cochin airport" label="Kochi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="1507" end="1521" title="public-private" label="public-private"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286188" start="1549" end="1586" title="Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology" label="Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="1592" end="1597" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684271" start="1605" end="1643" title="Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium" label="Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939535" start="1703" end="1712" title="Chirakkal, Kannur" label="Chirakkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="1718" end="1724" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721143" start="1731" end="1747" title="Marar (caste)" label="Ambalavasi Marar"/>
<link wikidata="Q239462" start="2071" end="2087" title="Malabar District" label="Malabar District"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="2141" end="2149" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="2151" end="2159" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2161" end="2169" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="2174" end="2184" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283340" start="2339" end="2347" title="Vadakara" label="Vadakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q163798" start="2534" end="2542" title="Thrissur" label="Thrissur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919136" start="2712" end="2724" title="Vellanikkara" label="Vellanikkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666459" start="2861" end="2878" title="Guruvayoor Temple" label="Guruvayoor Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564486" start="2950" end="2966" title="K. Muraleedharan" label="K. Muraleedharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="2971" end="2974" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="BJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="3109" end="3127" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906186" start="3350" end="3376" title="V. R. Krishnan Ezhuthachan" label="V. R. Krishnan Ezhuthachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530024" start="3378" end="3394" title="C. Achutha Menon" label="C. Achutha Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51433119" start="3433" end="3446" title="Kochi Rajya Prajamandalam" label="Prajamandalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364455" start="3532" end="3537" title="khadi" label="khadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021077" start="3789" end="3825" title="Indian National Trade Union Congress" label="Indian National Trade Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130023" start="3900" end="3924" title="Panampilly Govinda Menon" label="Panampilly Govinda Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064574" start="4303" end="4344" title="1957 Kerala Legislative Assembly election" label="1957 Kerala Legislative Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4391" end="4402" title="A. R. Menon" label="A. R. Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684271" start="4473" end="4497" title="Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium (Kochi)" label="Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060941" start="4501" end="4507" title="Kaloor" label="Kaloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726232" start="6045" end="6067" title="The Emergency (India)" label="the National Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071642" start="6228" end="6269" title="1977 Kerala Legislative Assembly election" label="1977 Kerala Legislative Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285722" start="6365" end="6375" title="Rajan case" label="Rajan case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="6489" end="6502" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q278849" start="8473" end="8485" title="A. K. Antony" label="A. K. Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775400" start="8487" end="8500" title="Oommen Chandy" label="Oommen Chandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755828" start="8505" end="8517" title="Vayalar Ravi" label="Vayalar Ravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q588793" start="9795" end="9800" title="Aluva" label="Aluva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9838" end="9872" title="Njarakkal Legislative Constituency" label="Njarakkal Legislative Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127906" start="9941" end="9952" title="Pallippuram, Thiruvananthapuram" label="Pallippuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585631" start="10104" end="10181" title="Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum" label="Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581374" start="10338" end="10353" title="Kitchen Cabinet" label="kitchen cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520703" start="10445" end="10474" title="Indian Administrative Service" label="Indian Administrative Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775400" start="10601" end="10614" title="Oommen Chandy" label="Oommen Chandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q278849" start="10650" end="10656" title="A. K. Antony" label="Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323584" start="10831" end="10841" title="K. M. Mani" label="K. M. Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595134" start="10887" end="10902" title="Kerala Congress" label="Kerala Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393317" start="10907" end="10930" title="Kerala Congress (Jacob)" label="Kerala Congress (Jacob)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512311" start="11018" end="11032" title="G. Karthikeyan" label="G. Karthikeyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289391" start="11034" end="11052" title="Ramesh Chennithala" label="Ramesh Chennithala"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110635" start="11057" end="11071" title="M. I. Shanavas" label="M. I. Shanavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20559915" start="11194" end="11209" title="M. A. Kuttappan" label="M. A. Kuttappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="11243" end="11254" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q113115030" start="11555" end="11574" title="ISRO espionage case" label="ISRO espionage case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522623" start="11631" end="11648" title="Kerala High Court" label="Kerala High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305417" start="11675" end="11692" title="Inspector general" label="Inspector General"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064579" start="11700" end="11713" title="Kerala Police" label="Kerala Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288886" start="11735" end="11751" title="Raman Srivastava" label="Raman Srivastava"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512301" start="11910" end="11924" title="G. K. Moopanar" label="G. K. Moopanar"/>
<link wikidata="Q275146" start="11947" end="11966" title="P. V. Narasimha Rao" label="P. V. Narasimha Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248152" start="14159" end="14199" title="Democratic Indira Congress (Karunakaran)" label="Democratic Indira Congress (Karunakaran)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="14753" end="14759" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="14797" end="14811" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="15150" end="15164" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q163225" start="15184" end="15196" title="Sonia Gandhi" label="Sonia Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660396" start="15257" end="15266" title="Punkunnam" label="Punkunnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q979845" start="15413" end="15439" title="Naxalite–Maoist insurgency" label="Naxalite–Maoist insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="15594" end="15607" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668772" start="15630" end="15651" title="T. V. Eachara Warrier" label="T. V. Eachara Warrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973731" start="15723" end="15760" title="National Institute of Technology Calicut" label="Regional Engineering College, Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128415" start="16134" end="16159" title="Palmolein Oil Import Scam" label="Palmolein Oil Import Scam"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="16203" end="16216" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517917" start="16535" end="16556" title="Indian Police Service" label="Indian Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837949" start="16643" end="16668" title="List of chief ministers of Kerala" label="Chief Ministers of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q13111578" start="16671" end="16687" title="Kerala Council of Ministers" label="Kerala Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248152" start="16690" end="16730" title="Democratic Indira Congress (Karunakaran)" label="Democratic Indira Congress (Karunakaran)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393391" start="16733" end="16766" title="Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee" label="Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943130" start="16859" end="16882" title="Vrindavanam Venugopalan" label="Vrindavanam Venugopalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q588793" start="16915" end="16920" title="Aluva" label="Aluva"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567507" wikidata="Q8027330" url="?curid=567507" title="Wisconsin State University Conference">
<text>The Wisconsin State University Conference (WSUC) was an American intercollegiate college athletic conference that was formed in July 1913 as the Wisconsin State Normal Conference. All member institutions were located in the State of Wisconsin. The WSUC sponsored competitions and championships in basketball, football, and other sports.

Charter members included La Crosse, Wisconsin State College of Milwaukee (1913-1956), Oshkosh, Platteville, River Falls, Stevens Point, Superior, and Whitewater.

Other members included Eau Claire (joined 1917) and Stout (1914).

All of these schools were (and remain) State institutions, most of them had been founded as normal schools in the late 19th century. They were renamed as state teachers colleges, state colleges, and state universities before becoming campuses of the University of Wisconsin System when the latter merged with the Wisconsin State Universities in 1971.

Wisconsin State College–Milwaukee became University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee in 1956, and left the conference.

In July 1997, the nine members of the WSUC merged with the Wisconsin Women’s Intercollegiate Athletic Conference to form the Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference.

==References==
==External links==
* Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8027330" start="4" end="41" title="Wisconsin State University Conference" label="Wisconsin State University Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027330" start="43" end="47" title="Wisconsin State University Conference" label="WSUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027330" start="145" end="178" title="Wisconsin State University Conference" label="Wisconsin State Normal Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="233" end="242" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="297" end="307" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="309" end="317" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688358" start="363" end="372" title="University of Wisconsin–La Crosse" label="La Crosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027320" start="374" end="410" title="Wisconsin State College of Milwaukee" label="Wisconsin State College of Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503441" start="424" end="431" title="University of Wisconsin–Oshkosh" label="Oshkosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590962" start="433" end="444" title="University of Wisconsin–Platteville" label="Platteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687532" start="446" end="457" title="University of Wisconsin–River Falls" label="River Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687782" start="459" end="472" title="University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point" label="Stevens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943718" start="474" end="482" title="University of Wisconsin–Superior" label="Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551772" start="488" end="498" title="University of Wisconsin–Whitewater" label="Whitewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551771" start="524" end="534" title="University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire" label="Eau Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590529" start="553" end="558" title="University of Wisconsin–Stout" label="Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q10814056" start="881" end="909" title="Wisconsin State Colleges" label="Wisconsin State Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755318" start="961" end="994" title="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee" label="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1089" end="1142" title="Wisconsin Women’s Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Wisconsin Women’s Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027211" start="1155" end="1200" title="Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567508" wikidata="Q1215745" url="?curid=567508" title="Journey to the Center of the Earth (1959 film)">
<text>Journey to the Center of the Earth (also called Jules Verne&#x27;s Journey to the Center of the Earth) is a 1959 American science fiction adventure film directed by Henry Levin and starring James Mason, Pat Boone, Arlene Dahl and Diane Baker. Based on the 1864 novel of the same name by Jules Verne, it was written for the screen by Charles Brackett (who also produced) and Walter Reisch. Bernard Herrmann wrote the film score.

The film was released by 20th Century Fox on December 16, 1959. It was a commercial success and well-received by critics, earning three Academy Award nominations.

==Plot==
In 1880 Edinburgh, Professor Sir Oliver Lindenbrook, a geologist at the University of Edinburgh, is given a piece of volcanic rock by his admiring student, Alec McEwan, who is in love with Lindenbrook&#x27;s niece Jenny. Finding the rock unusually heavy, Lindenbrook discovers a plumb bob inside bearing a cryptic inscription. Lindenbrook and Alec discover that it was left by a scientist named Arne Saknussemm, who, almost 100 years earlier, had found a passage to the center of the Earth by descending into the volcano Snæfellsjökull, in western Iceland. After translating the message, Lindenbrook immediately sets off with Alec to follow in the Icelandic pioneer&#x27;s footsteps.

Professor Göteborg, upon receiving correspondence from Lindenbrook regarding the message, attempts to reach the Earth&#x27;s center first. Lindenbrook and McEwan chase him to Iceland. There, Göteborg and his assistant kidnap and imprison them in a cellar. They are freed by local Hans Bjelke and his pet duck Gertrud. They later find Göteborg dead in his hotel room. Lindenbrook finds potassium cyanide crystals in Göteborg&#x27;s goatee and concludes that he was murdered.

Göteborg&#x27;s widow, Carla, who initially believed Lindenbrook was trying to capitalize on her deceased husband&#x27;s work, learns the truth. She provides the equipment and supplies that her husband had accumulated, including much sought after Ruhmkorff lamps, but only on the condition that she accompanies them to protect her husband&#x27;s reputation. Lindenbrook grudgingly agrees. Hans and Gertrud also join the new expedition.

On a specific date, they mark the sunrise&#x27;s exact location on Snæfellsjökull and descend into the Earth from there, following markings left by Saknussemm. However, they are not alone. Göteborg&#x27;s murderer, Count Saknussemm, believes that, as Saknussemm&#x27;s descendant, only he has the right to be there. He and his manservant trail the group secretly. When Alec becomes separated from the others, he comes upon Saknussemm. When Alec refuses to take the place of Saknussemm&#x27;s servant, who has died from overexertion, Saknussemm shoots Alec in the arm. Lindenbrook locates them through the gunshot&#x27;s echoes and, after a quick trial for murder, sentences Saknussemm to death. No one is willing to execute him, however, so they reluctantly take him along.

The explorers eventually come upon a subterranean ocean. They construct a raft to cross it, but not before narrowly escaping a family of large &quot;dimetrodons&quot;. Their raft begins circling in a large mid-ocean whirlpool. The professor deduces that this must be the center of the Earth: The magnetic forces of north and south meet there and are powerful enough to snatch away even the gold in their rings and tooth fillings. Now completely exhausted, they reach the opposite shore.

While the others are asleep, a hungry Saknussemm catches and eats Gertrud. When Hans finds out, he rushes at the count. Reeling back, Saknussemm inadvertently loosens a column of large stones and is buried beneath them, killing him. Right behind the collapse, the group comes upon the ruins of the sunken city of Atlantis. They also find the skeleton of Arne Saknussemm, whose right hand points toward a volcanic chimney. While a strong updraft suggests it leads directly to the surface, a huge rock partially blocks the way. Lindenbrook decides to blow up the obstruction with gunpowder left by Saknussemm, and they take shelter in a large sacrificial altar bowl. A giant lizard attacks, but is buried under molten lava released by the explosion. The bowl floats toward the passage and is finally driven upward at great speed by a lava plume. It finally reaches the surface, where the explorers are ejected, coming down away from the lava eruption.

When they return to Edinburgh, they are hailed as heroes. Lindenbrook turns down all the honors due to the loss of their documented evidence, but encourages the next generations to follow in their footsteps. Alec soon marries Jenny, and Lindenbrook and Carla kiss, a pledge of their coming wedding.

==Cast==
==Production==
The film was a co-production between 20th Century-Fox and Joseph M. Schenck, who had been instrumental in helping establish Fox in 1935. The film was produced by Charles Brackett, who said:
Our picture describes action and events, with not the slightest shadow of Freud. The serious thing about Jules Verne is that all he does is tell a story in exciting episodes, but his stories have always pushed man a little closer towards the unknown. What we&#x27;ve tried to do is retell his story in the best way of all - in the Verne vernacular.
Brackett called the original story &quot;a delightful book, written for young people. We simply couldn&#x27;t have any solemnity about it. I wanted very much to do it at this time. I&#x27;m tired of all these films based on thoughts at the back of sick minds.&quot;

The script was written by Walter Reisch who later said:
I had written a lot of science fiction for magazines, and Charles Brackett knew about that. They also knew that I had written magazine articles on Jules Verne. I had studied Jules Verne, and always wanted to write his biography, but I never got around to doing it. When they bought the Jules Verne novel from his estate and assigned me, I was delighted. The master&#x27;s work, though a beautiful basic idea, went in a thousand directions and never achieved a real constructive &quot;roundness&quot;. With the exception of the basic idea, there is very little of the novel left in the film. I invented a lot of new characters—the Pat Boone part, the part of the professor&#x27;s wife played by Arlene Dahl, the [part of the] villain—and the fact that it all played in Scotland. 
Pat Boone was the first star announced. He said he was reluctant to make the film because it was science fiction, even after Fox promised to add some songs. It was only when they offered him 15% of the profits that he agreed at the urging of his management. He said, &quot;Later on, I was very glad I did it, because it was fun to do, it had some good music and it became a very successful film&quot;.

Following up on that point, &quot;Diabolique&quot; magazine later observed:
It remains a mystery why Boone never appeared in another fantasy/sci-fi adventure in his entire career. Boone was believable in them, and he could easily sing a song over the credits if he wanted. He wouldn’t have to worry about kissing any of his co-stars or “morality” issues. And it wasn’t as though Fox weren’t making them. When he was under contract they turned out &quot;The Lost World&quot; (1960), &quot;Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea&quot; (1961) and &quot;Five Weeks in a Balloon&quot; (1962). The last two even featured pop stars Frankie Avalon and Fabian respectively, but no Boone. Was he too expensive? Did the dates not work out? Did he insist on playing the lead? Whatever the reason it was a great shame. For me, this is the biggest misstep Boone made in his film career.

The role of the professor was meant to be played by Clifton Webb. Reisch said:
That was absolutely the most beautiful idea, because Clifton Webb had a certain tongue-in-cheek style, suited to playing a professor with crazy notions, which could be paired with Pat Boone as his favorite disciple. Every week Clifton visited Brackett&#x27;s office, where we described scenes to him and he became very excited at the prospect of playing that kind of part. Maybe two or three weeks before we actually began to shoot, Clifton Webb went to the hospital for a checkup, and they never let him out. He had to undergo major surgery. Unless my memory fails me completely, it was a double hernia, and he was, as you can imagine, a very sensitive man, very touchy about sickness. He called Zanuck himself on his private line, and said he could not play the part because it was such a physical part.
Webb was replaced at the last minute by James Mason, who had previously appeared as Captain Nemo in Disney&#x27;s earlier adaptation of Jules Verne&#x27;s novel, &quot;20,000 Leagues Under the Sea&quot; (1954). Reisch:
I think it was [longtime head of Twentieth Century-Fox casting] Billy Gordon or Lew Schreiber [Twentieth Century-Fox production executive] who suggested James Mason. James Mason was, of course, British, with a beautiful voice, and he liked the idea [of the part]. He felt it was his duty as Clifton&#x27;s colleague to take over. From there on it was clear sailing, except that Pat Boone had about three or four songs, if not more, and I think all of them died in the end, with the exception of one or two. The moment that Zanuck saw [their effect on] the action, those songs just fell by the wayside.
Some of the underground sequences for &quot;Journey to the Center of the Earth&quot; were filmed at Carlsbad Caverns National Park. Other shooting locations included Amboy Crater and Sequit Point, California, as well as Edinburgh, Scotland. Principal photography took place from late June to mid-September 1959.

Originally, &quot;Life&quot; magazine editor and science writer Lincoln Barnett was to write the screenplay and later acted as one of the technical advisers on the film.

The giant &quot;Dimetrodon&quot; depicted at the center of the Earth action sequence were actually rhinoceros iguanas with a large, glued-on make-up appliance added to their back. The giant chameleon seen later in the ruins of Atlantis scene was actually a painted Tegu lizard or a monitor lizard.

Boone recalled filming the dramatic whirlpool sea scene:
 James Mason, Arlene Dahl, Peter Ronson and I were on a raft, caught in a giant whirlpool. It was a tricky thing to shoot — the raft was on a revolving platform that tilted when it went around. It had to look like we were being tossed violently. Hundreds of gallons of water were being dumped on us to simulate a stormy sea. The noise was deafening, but not enough to drown out Dahl, who started screaming as she held on for dear life. She screamed at the director, Henry Levin, &#x27;Get me off this thing. Get me down. I&#x27;m going to pass out!&#x27; She kept yelling. Mason had little patience for it. He thought Dahl had already overplayed the role of a dainty creature when we had to wear very heavy parkas, feigning winter amid very hot July weather, for another scene (Dahl complained then of heat prostration). Mason was not amused as this time he yelled back at her, &#x27;Shut up woman! We&#x27;re going to have to do this ten times if you don&#x27;t keep quiet.&#x27; We were going to have to dub dialogue anyway, and they got the shot.
Dahl became unconscious and it took 30 minutes to revive her.

==Reception==
===Box office===
At the time of release, &quot;Journey to the Center of the Earth&quot; was a financial success, grossing $10,000,000 at the box office (well over its $3.44 million budget).

===Critical response===
Film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes assigns a rating of 84% based on 31 critics, with an average rating of 6.9/10. The website&#x27;s critical consensus describes &quot;Journey to the Center of the Earth&quot; as &quot;a silly but fun movie with everything you&#x27;d want from a sci-fi blockbuster – heroic characters, menacing villains, monsters, big sets and special effects&quot;.

Upon the film&#x27;s release, &quot;New York Times&quot; film critic Bosley Crowther said &quot;Journey to the Center of the Earth&quot; is &quot;really not very striking make-believe, when all is said and done. The earth&#x27;s interior is somewhat on the order of an elaborate amusement-park tunnel of love. And the attitudes of the people, toward each other and toward another curious man who happens to be exploring down there at the same time, are conventional and just a bit dull&quot;.

Ian Nathan, writing a retrospective review for &quot;Empire&quot;, gave the film four stars, stating that &quot;it has dated a fair bit, but it&#x27;s a film that takes its far-fetchedness seriously, and delivers a thrilling adventure untrammelled by cheese, melodrama or ludicrous tribes of extras, shabbily dressed bird-beings or lizard men&quot;, ultimately concluding that the film is &quot;still captivating despite the obviously dated effects&quot;.

===Accolades===
&quot;Journey to the Center of the Earth&quot; won a second place Golden Laurel award for Top Action Drama in 1960.

The film was nominated for three Academy Awards: for Best Art Direction-Set Decoration (Lyle R. Wheeler, Franz Bachelin, Herman A. Blumenthal, Walter M. Scott, Joseph Kish), for Best Effects, Special Effects, and for Best Sound (Carlton W. Faulkner).

==Comic book adaptation==
* Dell Four Color #1060 (November 1959)

==See also==
* &quot;At the Earth&#x27;s Core&quot;
* &quot;Journey to the Center of the Earth&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Where Time Began&quot;

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* Warren, Bill. &quot;Keep Watching the Skies: American Science Fiction Films of the Fifties&quot;, 21st Century Edition. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Company, 2009, (First edition: 1982). .
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="122" end="137" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q319221" start="138" end="152" title="adventure film" label="adventure film"/>
<link wikidata="Q939550" start="165" end="176" title="Henry Levin (director)" label="Henry Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209186" start="190" end="201" title="James Mason" label="James Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q342778" start="203" end="212" title="Pat Boone" label="Pat Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q447879" start="214" end="225" title="Arlene Dahl" label="Arlene Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q266313" start="230" end="241" title="Diane Baker" label="Diane Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q219457" start="261" end="283" title="Journey to the Center of the Earth" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="287" end="298" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q385055" start="333" end="349" title="Charles Brackett" label="Charles Brackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q213811" start="374" end="387" title="Walter Reisch" label="Walter Reisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="389" end="405" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="454" end="470" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="565" end="578" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="610" end="619" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="674" end="697" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="719" end="732" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826066" start="881" end="890" title="plumb bob" label="plumb bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315012" start="1123" end="1137" title="Snæfellsjökull" label="Snæfellsjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="1150" end="1157" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192470" start="1672" end="1689" title="potassium cyanide" label="potassium cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014570" start="1718" end="1724" title="goatee" label="goatee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2009" end="2023" title="Gas-discharge lamp#The &amp;quot;Ruhmkorff&amp;quot; lamp" label="Ruhmkorff lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042490" start="2330" end="2338" title="Trail blazing" label="markings"/>
<link wikidata="Q130869" start="3117" end="3140" title="Dimetrodon" label="&amp;quot;dimetrodons&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25373" start="3775" end="3783" title="Atlantis" label="Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q733150" start="4129" end="4141" title="Megalania" label="giant lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707966" start="4795" end="4812" title="Joseph M. Schenck" label="Joseph M. Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="5001" end="5006" title="Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q213811" start="5569" end="5582" title="Walter Reisch" label="Walter Reisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q560592" start="7700" end="7712" title="Clifton Webb" label="Clifton Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q64110" start="8701" end="8729" title="20,000 Leagues Under the Sea (1954 film)" label="20,000 Leagues Under the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q273195" start="9454" end="9484" title="Carlsbad Caverns National Park" label="Carlsbad Caverns National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="9685" end="9689" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550493" start="9731" end="9746" title="Lincoln Barnett" label="Lincoln Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q130869" start="9854" end="9864" title="Dimetrodon" label="Dimetrodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q907252" start="9937" end="9954" title="Rhinoceros Iguana" label="rhinoceros iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q37686" start="10028" end="10037" title="chameleon" label="chameleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963339" start="10103" end="10107" title="Tegu" label="Tegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q81228" start="10120" end="10134" title="monitor lizard" label="monitor lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="11541" end="11558" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="11567" end="11582" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11969" end="11983" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="12002" end="12017" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="12480" end="12486" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242148" start="12966" end="12979" title="Laurel Awards" label="Golden Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="13050" end="13064" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q277751" start="13070" end="13103" title="Academy Award for Best Production Design" label="Best Art Direction-Set Decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q586320" start="13105" end="13120" title="Lyle R. Wheeler" label="Lyle R. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q118366" start="13122" end="13136" title="Franz Bachelin" label="Franz Bachelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q918591" start="13138" end="13158" title="Herman A. Blumenthal" label="Herman A. Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q506302" start="13160" end="13175" title="Walter M. Scott" label="Walter M. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707407" start="13177" end="13188" title="Joseph Kish" label="Joseph Kish"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="13195" end="13224" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Best Effects, Special Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="13234" end="13244" title="Academy Award for Best Sound" label="Best Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377585" start="13246" end="13265" title="Carlton W. Faulkner" label="Carlton W. Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289818" start="13297" end="13301" title="Dell Comics" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528585" start="13302" end="13312" title="Four Color" label="Four Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199617" start="13357" end="13381" title="At the Earth&amp;#x27;s Core (film)" label="At the Earth&amp;#x27;s Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q250770" start="13396" end="13430" title="Journey to the Center of the Earth (2008 theatrical film)" label="Journey to the Center of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221752" start="13452" end="13468" title="Where Time Began" label="Where Time Began"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911283" start="13528" end="13540" title="Bill Warren (film historian and critic)" label="Warren, Bill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567511" wikidata="Q497305" url="?curid=567511" title="Daru of Baekje">
<text>Daru (?–77, r. 28–77) was the second king of Baekje, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea.

==Background==
He was the eldest son of the founding monarch Onjo and became the heir of throne in the year 10. He became king upon Onjo&#x27;s death in 28 which was the 46th year of his reign. The &quot;Samguk sagi&quot; records that &quot;he was a generous man and had presence and esteem&quot;.

==Reign==
The &quot;Samguk sagi&quot; records many battles against the &quot;Malgal&quot; during Daru&#x27;s reign. It is unclear who this refers to, as the Mohe tribes are thought to have occupied Manchuria northwest of the northern Korean kingdom Goguryeo, far from Baekje&#x27;s capital (generally presumed to have been in the present-day Seoul region). The &quot;Malgal&quot; do not appear to refer to the Buyeo people that founded Baekje, nor to the Mahan confederacy tribes subjugated by Baekje. They appear to have remained from the earlier period, incited by Chinese commanderies to attack Baekje. The battles indicate that Baekje as a new power was still expanding its control of the central Korean Peninsula.

Samguk sagi:
* 29 AD, spring, first month. The king paid respects at the shrine of his grandfather, Jumong. Second month. The king made sacrifices to heaven at the southern altar.
* 30 AD, winter, tenth month. Heul-u(屹于) of the eastern district fought the Malgal to the west of Mt. Masu where he overcame them and awarded by the king.
* 31 AD, autumn, eighth month. Gon-u(昆優), of the fortress of Gobon fought the Malgal and defeated them beheading over 200. Ninth month. The king went hunting at the summit of Mt. Hoeng(橫) and killed two deer in succession, and the people admired and praised him.
* 33 AD, spring, first month. His son Giru is made crown prince. Second month. The king ordered that the southern counties of the country begin to cultivate grain.
* 34 AD, spring, second month. The Marshal Bulwark of the Right, Gaeru, died. He was 90 years old. Heulu from the eastern district became Marshal Bulwark of the Right. Summer, fourth month. There was a red mist in the east. Autumn, ninth month. The Malgal attacked and sacked the Masu Fortress burning down houses of the common folk. Winter, tenth month. They attacked the palisade at Mt. Byeong.
* 37 AD, winter, tenth month. The Marshal Bulwark of the Right, Heulu, became Marshal Bulwark of the Left. Jinhoe of the northern district became Marshal Bulwark of the Right. eleventh month. There was an earthquake that sounded like thunder.
* 38 AD, autumn. The grains did not mature. Private brewing of alcohol was prohibited. Winter, tenth month. The king made a tour to console the two districts of the east and west. The poor people could not support themselves, and they were provided with 200 seok of tax grain.
* 48 AD, spring, second month. A great locust tree in the palace grounds rotted on its own. Third month. The Marshal Bulwark of the Left, Heulu, died. The king wept and mourned him.
* 55 AD, spring and summer. There was a drought. The king was worried and released prisoners, even those who had committed capital offenses. Autumn, eight month. The Malgal assaulted the northern borders.
* 56 AD, spring, second month. The king ordered the people of the eastern district to build Ugok Fortress (). This was a preparation against the Malgal.
* 63 AD, winter, tenth month. The king expanded his domain to Nangjagok Fortress. Then he sent messengers rival Korean state Silla to ask to meet them, but they did not come.
* 64 AD, he dispatched soldiers to attack the Wasan Fortress () in Silla (today&#x27;s Boeun), but they could not take it. Then he moved the soldiers to attack Goeyang Fortress (today&#x27;s Okcheon or Goesan). Silla dispatched 2,000 soldiers and cavalry who fought back and repelled [the invaders].
* 66 AD, he attacked and captured Silla&#x27;s Wasan Fortress. 200 men were stationed there to defend it, but Silla won it back.
* 70 AD, soldiers were dispatched to attack Silla.
* 73 AD, summer, fifth month, last day of the month. There was a solar eclipse.
* 74 AD, autumn, eighth month. The generals were sent to invade Silla.
* 75 AD, winter, tenth month. Baekje again attacked Wasan and sacked it.
* 76 AD, autumn, ninth month. The fortress of Wasan was taken back by Silla.
* 77 AD, autumn, ninth month. The king died.

==Family==
* Father: Onjo of Baekje
* Mother: unknown
** Brother: name unknown
** Brother: Tokusa-Ō (德佐王, ?–?) - his name in Baekje would have been Buyeo Deokjwa (扶餘德佐), recorded in the Sakyō shoban (左京諸蕃) section of the Shinsen Shōjiroku as ancestor of several clans making him one of the earliest people from Baekje to settle in Japan.
** Queen(s): unknown
*** Son: 3rd King, Giru of Baekje (己婁王, ?–128) - eldest son, before he became king he was known as Buyeo Giru (扶餘己婁).

==See also==
*List of monarchs of Korea
*History of Korea

==References==
* Content in this article was copied from Samguk Sagi Scroll 23 at the Shoki Wiki, which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 (Unported) (CC-BY-SA 3.0) license.
*The Academy of Korean Studies
*Korea Britannica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q497305" start="0" end="4" title="Daru of Baekje" label="Daru"/>
<link wikidata="Q697610" start="30" end="41" title="List of monarchs of Korea" label="second king"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428" start="45" end="51" title="Baekje" label="Baekje"/>
<link wikidata="Q165292" start="64" end="87" title="Three Kingdoms of Korea" label="Three Kingdoms of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q497285" start="151" end="155" title="Onjo of Baekje" label="Onjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q485552" start="294" end="305" title="Samguk sagi" label="Samguk sagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276322" start="466" end="472" title="Malgal" label="Malgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276322" start="546" end="550" title="Mohe people" label="Mohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="587" end="596" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28370" start="638" end="646" title="Goguryeo" label="Goguryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="731" end="736" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q28511" start="799" end="804" title="Buyeo (state)" label="Buyeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q704278" start="844" end="861" title="Mahan confederacy" label="Mahan confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="1090" end="1106" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q378502" start="1209" end="1215" title="Jumong" label="Jumong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276322" start="1365" end="1371" title="Malgal" label="Malgal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3267" end="3280" title="Ugok Fortress" label="Ugok Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456" start="3453" end="3458" title="Silla" label="Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q50244" start="3590" end="3595" title="Boeun" label="Boeun"/>
<link wikidata="Q497285" start="4351" end="4365" title="Onjo of Baekje" label="Onjo of Baekje"/>
<link wikidata="Q16179582" start="4421" end="4429" title="Tokusa-Ō" label="Tokusa-Ō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045362" start="4551" end="4568" title="Shinsen Shōjiroku" label="Shinsen Shōjiroku"/>
<link wikidata="Q497336" start="4708" end="4722" title="Giru of Baekje" label="Giru of Baekje"/>
<link wikidata="Q697610" start="4822" end="4847" title="List of monarchs of Korea" label="List of monarchs of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q713414" start="4849" end="4865" title="History of Korea" label="History of Korea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567513" wikidata="Q322612" url="?curid=567513" title="Enlightenment Guaranteed">
<text>Erleuchtung garantiert (Enlightenment Guaranteed) is a 1999 German film directed by Doris Dörrie about two brothers, Uwe (Uwe Ochsenknecht) and Gustav (Gustav-Peter Wöhler), who travel to Japan in order to find themselves. The two plan to retreat for a while at the Monastery in Monzen, Ishikawa in the Noto Peninsula, well away from Tokyo. On their way there, in a rather literal Buddhist moment, the brothers lose all of their belongings. When they finally make it to the monastery, they find that even there, enlightenment can be elusive.

==Plot==
The film begins by detailing the troubled lives of the two brothers; each is experiencing a mid life crisis. With four young children, Uwe and his wife Petra find their obligations overburdening, having little compassion for the other&#x27;s problems and constantly bickering. Uwe leaves for work after a particularly stressful morning, during which he once again argues with his wife; while at work as a real estate agent, his wife packs up most of their belongings and moves out. Uwe finds a note when he comes home and is immediately distressed to tears.

Meanwhile, his brother Gustav faces his own problems; though an enthusiast for Zen Buddhism, and outwardly more composed than his brother, Gustav&#x27;s burdens are internal; he is afraid of making mistakes and also afraid of fear itself. Gustav plans a trip to a monastery in Monzen (far away from Tokyo) in order to find himself. Uwe, both greatly distressed and drunk, asks his brother to take him along. After much hesitation, Gustav agrees to buy his brother a ticket.

==Production==
&quot;Enlightment Guaranteed&quot;, though not a direct sequel to Dörrie&#x27;s previous landmark 1985 film &quot;Men...&quot;, starred both the same actors (albeit as different characters) and a similarly existential storyline, and was occasionally billed as a sequel to the film.

==Reception==
After three weeks of release in Germany, the film had grossed $827,000.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77734" start="84" end="96" title="Doris Dörrie" label="Doris Dörrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q186692" start="122" end="138" title="Uwe Ochsenknecht" label="Uwe Ochsenknecht"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="152" end="171" title="Gustav-Peter Wöhler" label="Gustav-Peter Wöhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="188" end="193" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907002" start="279" end="295" title="Monzen, Ishikawa" label="Monzen, Ishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q691151" start="303" end="317" title="Noto Peninsula" label="Noto Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="334" end="339" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="381" end="389" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="512" end="525" title="Enlightenment in Buddhism" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q874078" start="1715" end="1721" title="Men..." label="Men..."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567515" wikidata="Q324534" url="?curid=567515" title="Laonikos Chalkokondyles">
<text>Laonikos Chalkokondyles (; – ), also latinized as Laonicus Chalcocondyles, was a Byzantine Greek historian from Athens. He is known for his &quot;Demonstrations of Histories&quot; in ten books, which record the last 150 years of the Byzantine Empire.

Laonikos Chalkokondyles was born to an aristocratic family in Florentine Athens circa 1430-32. Laonikos’ birth name was Nikolaos but he adopted the classical sounding anagram Laonikos to emphasize his classical Greek learning and interests. This was an intellectual trend that Laonikos shared with other members of his intellectual circle in Byzantine Mystras, such as Georgios Gemistos Plethon and Bessarion. In the first half of the fifteenth century, Athens was under the rule of the Florentine family of the Acciajuoli to whom the Chalkokondyli were connected by marriage ties.

In his seminal work &quot;Apodeixis Historion&quot; (Display of Histories), Laonikos claims that his father George Chalkokondyles visited the Ottoman Sultan Murad II (r. 1421-1444, 1446-1451) twice on diplomatic missions. George had attempted to gain the throne in Athens along with the widow of the former Florentine Duke of Athens and had travelled to the Ottoman court for Murad II’s endorsement. The mission was unsuccessful and the Chalkokondyli family were exiled from Athens circa 1435. Laonikos Chalkokondyles and his family relocated to Byzantine Mistra. Constantine Palaiologos, Despot of the Peloponnesus at this time and future Byzantine Emperor during 1453, sent George Chalkokondyles on a second mission to Murad II which aimed to restore the Duchy of Athens to Byzantine rule. George was imprisoned by the Ottomans during this mission. The unsuccessful attempt led to the Ottoman military campaign against the Peloponnesus in 1446. It has been proposed that Laonikos’ narrative of the Ottoman invasion in 1446 is an eyewitness account.

In Mystras, Laonikos became the student of Pletho, a Platonist philosopher and Judge General of the Byzantine Empire. At the court of the Despots in Mystras, Pletho was an advisor to Byzantine rulers and taught a wide ranging group of students. Among Pletho’s students, there were Bessarion and Isidore, the two future Cardinals of the Catholic Church, Mark Eugenikos, the leader of Orthodox factions who resisted Church Union with Rome, Michael Apostolius, and the self-professed sun worshipper Demetrios Raoul Kabakes. Kabakes was instrumental in disseminating the remaining portions of Pletho’s secret tract &quot;Nomoi&quot; (Laws) in Europe. The &quot;Nomoi&quot; had been burned by the Ottoman Patriarch Gennadius Scholarius, Pletho’s Aristotelian arch-enemy and anti-Unionist theologian, following the Platonist philosopher’s death when the Patriarch was sent the tract c. 1455. In connection with the auto-da-fé, Scholarios had commented that Pletho had become a Hellene (that is a pagan) as a result of his education under a Hellenizing Jewish thinker at an unspecified barbarian city in his youth. Historians have argued that this city must have been either Ottoman Bursa or Edirne without conclusive evidence; it could have been any one of the Muslim courts in the eastern Mediterranean.

There are echoes of this religious controversy in the &quot;Apodeixis&quot;. In an intriguing and laconic passage, Laonikos defined Hellenic religion as polytheistic ritual belief in the gods Zeus, Hera, Apollo and Artemis and wrote that it was only recently that the Bohemians stopped worshiping fire and the sun while the pagan religion was still practiced in various locations in the world in the fifteenth century. Laonikos’ narrative on religious practices and beliefs, both Islam as well as Christianity, is conspicuous for its omission of metaphysics and for his definition of religion as a cultural and administrative system that regulates societies. A passage concerning Bessarion, Isidore, Mark Eugenikos, and Gennadius Scholarius details the deliberations at the Council of Florence in 1438-9. At the Council the Byzantines and the Latins aimed to mend the Schism between the Orthodox and the Catholic Churches. In these passages and elsewhere, Laonikos systematically employs the classical term &quot;threskeia&quot; (religious practice) which has connotations of ritual and cult and never uses the term &quot;pistos&quot; (faith). The latter term was more commonly used in connection with religion in Byzantium.

Laonikos’ instruction with Pletho in Mystras is revealed in a diary entry of Cyriac of Ancona from late July-early August 1447. The Italian merchant and humanist who is sometimes also referred to as the father of modern archaeology, was visiting Pletho in Mystras when he met &quot;the gifted young Athenian, Nikolaos Chalkokondyles... remarkably learned in both Latin and Greek literature.&quot; Late medieval Greece was a hybrid society where bilingualism was a common feature and contacts with the west were frequent. Laonikos’ detailed presentation of Italian city-states and western polities, intricate knowledge of current and past events in the west, admiration for the Greek Cardinals Bessarion and Isidore who had migrated to Italy, and capacity for salacious gossip from western urban centers reveal that he was a member of the Franko-Greek society of late medieval Greece. In fact, Laonikos was proud to draw the readers’ attention to this, referring to himself as &quot;Laonikos the Athenian&quot; in the opening words of the &quot;Apodeixis&quot;.

Interestingly and tellingly, Laonikos does not openly reference Pletho in the &quot;Apodeixis&quot;. However, Laonikos’ adoption of Herodotus as historiographical model, the explicit emphasis on Hellenic identity in the &quot;Apodeixis&quot;, the articulation of a long historical memory extending to mythical time, the sympathetic presentation of Islam and the prophet Mohammed, and interest in oracular knowledge are similar in tenor to Pletho’s teachings and writings.

Laonikos’ methodological contribution to Renaissance historiography was his adoption of Herodotus as model. Although Herodotus was taught in Byzantine schools as a linguistic model for Ionian Greek, he was denigrated as an unreliable historian with a penchant for the fabulous in late antiquity and the middle ages. Furthermore, the classical historian’s formulation of the tyrannical Persian empire in opposition to the free Greek city-states was not in line with Byzantine political ideology with its claim to just universal Empire. In the aftermath of 1453 and the eventual incorporation of all Byzantine territories into the centralizing Ottoman state under Mehmed II, Herodotus emerged as a useful historiographical model to describe the Ottomans. Further, Laonikos’ Herodotean model of Empire should be evaluated in tandem with Mehmed II’s imperial claims. These claims were applauded in the &quot;History&quot; of Kritoboulos, the contemporary Greek historian and bureaucrat. Kritoboulos dedicated and presented the Greek autograph manuscript of his &quot;History&quot; to the Ottoman Sultan himself, illustrating the competing claims on the Byzantine heritage in the latter part of the fifteenth century.

Laonikos must have studied the classical historian of the Persian Wars closely with Pletho in Mystras as a fourteenth-century Byzantine manuscript of Herodotus (Plut. Gr. 70.06 in the Laurentian Library in Florence) was owned by both teacher and student. Laonikos inserted an epigraph concerning the ancient historian on the last folio of this manuscript, writing that Herodotus’ History was composed with &quot;divine guidance&quot;. This particular manuscript was copied multiple times by Pletho’s disciples, among them Bessarion and Kabakes. Textual interventions - such as the insertion of alternating astronomical symbols of the sun and the moon in the margins and the marking of oracular statements in the manuscript - and the close links between Plut. Gr. 70.06 and other manuscripts associated with the Mistra intellectuals, demonstrate that Herodotus was not merely prized as a classical historian. In the epigraph, Laonikos praised Herodotus as a &quot;herald&quot; who described in detail the deeds of the Hellenes. Laonikos also wrote that he was amazed that the Hellenes &quot;displayed a virtue that was greater than human&quot;. Laonikos’ word choice &quot;xrhsamenoi&quot; (display), to refer to the Hellenes, is also used to describe oracular statements. In fact, the ancient historian Herodotus had cosmic significance for the Mystras intellectuals at a time when eschatological beliefs were widespread.

Laonikos’ adoption of Herodotus was systematic, thorough and methodical. He adopted the organizational scheme of the ancient historian as well as Herodotus’ approach to source material. Arnaldo Momigliano has distinguished a Herodotean approach from the approach advocated by Thucydides, whose strict focus was on contemporary political events. Herodotus, on the other hand, whose main narrative thread focused on the clash between the Persians and the Hellenes that occurred in an earlier generation than when the historian was composing his work, necessarily had to rely on oral reports from multiple sources. Moreover, Herodotus’ numerous excursuses into cultural geography necessitated his reliance on foreign informants. Similarly, Laonikos constructed his narrative around the wars between the Ottomans and the Byzantines and in the process relied on Ottoman Turkish informants for political events, ethnographic details, origin stories and much else. Laonikos incorporated extensive material on the kinship groups, language, religious beliefs, and customs of the Ottoman Turks in line with Herodotus. A short section on the Ottoman custom of lighting military camp fires during sieges is included in the excerpt below.

In the very long tradition of Byzantine historiography, such primary focus on the &quot;other&quot; and the &quot;barbarian&quot; was unprecedented with the exception of Kritoboulos. With a composition date after 1464, Laonikos was one of the earliest narrative sources on Ottoman history in any language and the only witness for many of the events and personalities he recorded. While Laonikos depicted Ottoman Sultan Murad II in a favorable light, his son Mehmed II the Conqueror was portrayed as an oriental tyrant par excellence, bringing to mind Herodotus’ representations of Darius and Xerxes. Laonikos relied on Ottoman informants who maintained a critical distance to the Ottoman court and the narrative contains echoes of the kind of Ottoman social criticism of Mehmed II’s reign, only included in the Ottoman historiographical tradition in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.

While the criticism of Mehmed II’s social and political policies was not put down to paper in the east during the Sultan’s reign, they circulated widely in the west thanks to the &quot;Apodeixis&quot;. There are more than 30 manuscripts of the &quot;Apodeixis&quot; from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, demonstrating its popularity. It was first printed in 1556 in Latin translation along with other tracts on the Ottomans. Catering to the European demand for information on the Ottomans, the Latin translation was reprinted numerous times. French translations and editions appeared in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, some of them with illustrations and supplementary material. The original Greek text appeared later than its Latin and French translations in a bilingual edition printed in 1615 in Geneva. Laonikos’ original vision of the Ottomans as oriental tyranny and his revival of Herodotus historiographical model would endure and mold subsequent western engagements with the east.

== Life ==
The Chalkokondyles were one of the oldest native families in Athens and had gained great prominence. At the time of Laonikos it was ruled by the Florentine Acciaioli family. His father George was a kinsman of Maria Melissene, the wife of Duke Antonio I Acciaioli. When Antonio died in 1435, Maria attempted to secure control of the Duchy of Athens and sent George on a mission to the Ottoman Sultan Murad II, asking that the government of Athens might be entrusted to herself and George Chalkokondyles. However, during his absence, the Duchess was enticed out of the Acropolis and a young scion of the Acciaiuoli family, Nerio II, was proclaimed Duke of Athens. Meanwhile, George Chalkokondyles had his proposal rejected, despite offering the Sultan 30,000 gold pieces, and was cast into prison. George Chalkokondyles managed to escape to Constantinople, according to William Miller &quot;leaving his retinue, tents and beasts of burden behind him&quot;, but after leaving Constantinople by ship, he was captured by an Athenian ship and taken back to the Sultan, who pardoned him.

George with Laonikos and the rest of the family relocated to the Peloponnese, which was under Byzantine rule as the Despotate of the Morea. In 1446 Constantine Palaiologos, then Despot of the Morea, sent George on a diplomatic mission to Murad II to obtain the independence of the Greek states south of Thermopylae; enraged at the offered terms, the Sultan put George Chalkokondyles into prison, then marched on Constantine&#x27;s forces holding the Hexamilion wall on the Isthmus of Corinth and after bombarding it for three days, destroyed the fortifications, massacred the defenders, then pillaged the countryside, ending all hopes of independence. According to Miller, Laonikos was &quot;evidently&quot; an eye-witness to this battle, although the historian Theodore Spandounes claims Laonikos was the secretary of Murad II and present at the Battle of Varna in 1444.

The one glimpse we have of Laonikos himself is in the summer of 1447, when Cyriacus of Ancona met him in the summer of 1447 at the court of Constantine Palaiologos at Mistra. Cyriacus describes him as a youth (&quot;surprisingly learned in Latin and Greek literature&quot;). It was at Mistra where Laonikos was taught by George Gemistos Plethon, and who gave Laonikos his personal copy of the &quot;Histories&quot; of Herodotus: Laur. Plut. 70.6, written in 1318, with corrections by Plethon, and later used by Bessarion in 1436 to make another copy, contains a subscription written by Laonikos.

Laonikos&#x27; movements and actions after 1447 are not known with certainty. His account of the circumcision of Sultan Mehmed II&#x27;s sons in 1457 suggest he was an eye-witness to the event, and his account of Ottoman finances indicate he interviewed the Sultan&#x27;s accountants. Internal evidence has led Byzantinist Anthony Kaldellis to put the date Laonikos stopped writing his &quot;Histories&quot; as 1464. While Laonikos Chalkokondyles greatly relied on Ottoman sources for the sections on the Ottomans, his narrative on the rule of Mehmed II is generally antagonistic. Thus, it has been argued that Laonikos Chalkokondyles was writing for the contemporary western audience in the Turcica genre rather than for the post-Byzantine intellectuals associated with the Ottoman court. Other speculations about Laonikos Chalkokondyles&#x27; life are not as widely accepted.

According to Kaldellis, Chalkokondyles was the first to use &quot;Byzantine&quot; to refer to the state as he advocated a neo-Hellenic identity of the Romans.

== Portrayals in fiction ==
In the 1954 Albanian–Soviet movie &quot;The Great Warrior Skanderbeg&quot;, Laonikos Chalkokondyles is portrayed as an official historian at the Ottoman Court with opportunistic views on politics who tries to discourage Skanderbeg from an anti-Ottoman insurrection. After Skanderbeg leaves the Ottoman army and becomes leader of Albania on his own right, Chalkokondyles is brought as a hostage to his court to witness the First Siege of Krujë.

== &quot;The Histories&quot; of Chalkokondyles ==
After the Fall of Constantinople, Chalkokondyles wrote his most important historical work, &quot;Demonstrations of Histories&quot; (Ἀποδείξεις Ἱστοριῶν). This historical work comprises one of the most important sources for the students of the final 150 years of Byzantine history, despite being defective in its chronology. It covers the period from 1298 to 1463, describing the fall of the Byzantine empire and the rise of the Ottoman Turks, which forms the centre of the narrative, down to the conquest of the Venetians and Mathias, king of Hungary, by Mehmed II. The capture of Constantinople he rightly regarded as an historical event of far-reaching importance and compared it to the fall of Troy. The work also sketches other manners and civilization of England, France and Germany, whose assistance the Greeks sought to obtain against the Turks. For his account of earlier events he was able to obtain information from his father.

His model is Thucydides (according to Bekker, Herodotus), his language is tolerably pure and correct, and his style is simple and clear. The text, however, is in a very corrupt state. The archaic language he used made his texts hard to read in many parts, while the antiquarian names, with which he named people of his time, created confusion (Γέται, Δάκες, Λίγυρες, Μυσοί, Παίονες, Ἕλληνες). The extended use of the name &quot;Hellenes&quot; (Ἕλληνες), which Laonikos used to describe the Byzantines contributed to the connection made between the ancient Greek civilization and the modern one.

Chalkokondyles&#x27; &quot;History&quot; was first published in a Latin translation by Conrad Clauser at Basel in 1556, although the translation itself bears the date of November 1544. A French translation was published by Blaise de Vigenère in 1577 with a later edition by Artus Thomas, with valuable illustrations on Turkish matters. The &quot;editio princeps&quot; of the Greek text had to wait until 1615 for J. B. Baumbach&#x27;s printing.

The older Bonn corpus edition stays close to some of the manuscript readings: &quot;Historiarum Libri Decem&quot;, ed. I. Bekker, Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae (Bonn 1843). The only critical edition of the work has been published by the Hungarian Byzantinist Eugenius Darkó: &quot;Historiae Demonstrationes&quot;, 2 vols., ed. E. Darko, (Budapest 1922–7). The text can also be found in J.-P. Migne, &quot;Patrologia Graeca&quot;, volume 159.

A complete English translation (by Anthony Kaldellis) of &quot;The Histories&quot; was published in two volumes in 2014 by Harvard University Press, as volumes 33 and 34 of The Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library. Partial translations include one of Books I-III in &quot;Laonikos Chalkokondyles. A Translation and Commentary of the Demonstrations of Histories&quot;, trans. Nikolaos Nikoloudis (Athens 1996) and another of Book VIII in J. R. Melville Jones, &quot;The Siege of Constantinople: Seven Contemporary Accounts&quot; (Amsterdam 1972), pp. 42–55.

==See also==
*Greek scholars in the Renaissance

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*

==Further reading==
*There is a biographical sketch of Laonicus and his brother, Demetrius Chalcondyles in Greek by Antonius Calosynas, a physician of Toledo, who lived in the latter part of the sixteenth century: see 
*
*, and reprinted in Vryonis, &quot;Studies on Byzantium, Seljuks and Ottomans&quot;, No. XII.
*

==External links==
*Opera Omnia by Migne Patristica Graeca with analytical indexes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324534" start="0" end="23" title="Laonikos Chalkokondyles" label="Laonikos Chalkokondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="37" end="46" title="Latinisation of names" label="latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q324534" start="50" end="73" title="Laonikos Chalkokondyles" label="Laonicus Chalcocondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="81" end="96" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="97" end="106" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="112" end="118" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="146" end="173" title="Demonstrations of Histories" label="Demonstrations of Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="233" end="249" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19053" start="604" end="611" title="Mystras" label="Mystras"/>
<link wikidata="Q220313" start="621" end="646" title="Georgios Gemistos Plethon" label="Georgios Gemistos Plethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q299446" start="651" end="660" title="Bessarion" label="Bessarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q339067" start="764" end="774" title="Acciajuoli" label="Acciajuoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="992" end="1000" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37142" start="1399" end="1422" title="Constantine Palaiologos" label="Constantine Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="1592" end="1607" title="Duchy of Athens" label="Duchy of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q220313" start="1930" end="1936" title="Gemistos Plethon" label="Pletho"/>
<link wikidata="Q299446" start="2168" end="2177" title="Bessarion" label="Bessarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066832" start="2182" end="2189" title="Isidore II of Constantinople" label="Isidore"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="2206" end="2238" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinals of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q738727" start="2240" end="2254" title="Mark Eugenikos" label="Mark Eugenikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="2270" end="2278" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362779" start="2325" end="2343" title="Michael Apostolius" label="Michael Apostolius"/>
<link wikidata="Q381211" start="2597" end="2617" title="Gennadius Scholarius" label="Gennadius Scholarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q209966" start="2796" end="2806" title="auto-da-fé" label="auto-da-fé"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="2877" end="2882" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="3063" end="3068" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="3072" end="3078" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="3379" end="3383" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="3385" end="3389" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="3391" end="3397" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="3402" end="3409" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="3455" end="3464" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemians"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3667" end="3672" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3684" end="3696" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="3733" end="3744" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="3961" end="3980" title="Council of Florence" label="Council of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="4011" end="4021" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806855" start="4030" end="4036" title="Latins (Middle Ages)" label="Latins"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="4055" end="4061" title="East–West Schism" label="Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q558074" start="4490" end="4506" title="Cyriac of Ancona" label="Cyriac of Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="5607" end="5616" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="5837" end="5853" title="prophet Mohammed" label="prophet Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="6782" end="6791" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q648868" start="6869" end="6880" title="Kritoboulos" label="Kritoboulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="7220" end="7232" title="Persian Wars" label="Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q856419" start="7346" end="7364" title="Laurentian Library" label="Laurentian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="7368" end="7376" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q644418" start="8771" end="8789" title="Arnaldo Momigliano" label="Arnaldo Momigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="8861" end="8871" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068845" start="11728" end="11742" title="Chalkokondyles family" label="Chalkokondyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="11785" end="11791" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="11869" end="11879" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q339067" start="11880" end="11896" title="Acciaioli family" label="Acciaioli family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11909" end="11915" title="George Chalkokondyles" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11933" end="11948" title="Maria Melissene" label="Maria Melissene"/>
<link wikidata="Q602484" start="11967" end="11986" title="Antonio I Acciaioli" label="Antonio I Acciaioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="12056" end="12071" title="Duchy of Athens" label="Duchy of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="12123" end="12131" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="12291" end="12300" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q608409" start="12345" end="12353" title="Nerio II Acciaioli" label="Nerio II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="12563" end="12577" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q15730496" start="12592" end="12606" title="William Miller (historian)" label="William Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="12871" end="12882" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="12900" end="12909" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q604593" start="12922" end="12944" title="Despotate of the Morea" label="Despotate of the Morea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37142" start="12954" end="12977" title="Constantine XI" label="Constantine Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q889870" start="12984" end="12990" title="Despot (court title)" label="Despot"/>
<link wikidata="Q194450" start="13109" end="13120" title="Thermopylae" label="Thermopylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q305428" start="13256" end="13271" title="Hexamilion wall" label="Hexamilion wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q215200" start="13279" end="13297" title="Isthmus of Corinth" label="Isthmus of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12877963" start="13568" end="13587" title="Theodore Spandounes" label="Theodore Spandounes"/>
<link wikidata="Q32832" start="13653" end="13668" title="Battle of Varna" label="Battle of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q558074" start="13754" end="13772" title="Ciriaco de&amp;#x27; Pizzicolli" label="Cyriacus of Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q19053" start="13846" end="13852" title="Mistra" label="Mistra"/>
<link wikidata="Q220313" start="14000" end="14023" title="George Gemistos Plethon" label="George Gemistos Plethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="14097" end="14106" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q299446" start="14190" end="14199" title="Bessarion" label="Bessarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="14396" end="14405" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q92595083" start="14599" end="14616" title="Anthony Kaldellis" label="Anthony Kaldellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707305" start="15383" end="15411" title="The Great Warrior Skanderbeg" label="The Great Warrior Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q160614" start="15563" end="15573" title="Skanderbeg" label="Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="15672" end="15679" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q73670" start="15765" end="15785" title="First Siege of Krujë" label="First Siege of Krujë"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="15848" end="15870" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="16266" end="16273" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="16350" end="16359" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="16364" end="16388" title="Mathias of Hungary" label="Mathias, king of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="16393" end="16402" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="16408" end="16415" title="fall of Constantinople" label="capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="16419" end="16433" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="16535" end="16539" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="16598" end="16605" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="16607" end="16613" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="16618" end="16625" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="16790" end="16800" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q77606" start="16815" end="16821" title="August Immanuel Bekker" label="Bekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="16823" end="16832" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19012" start="17121" end="17126" title="Getae" label="Γέται"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="17128" end="17133" title="Dacians" label="Δάκες"/>
<link wikidata="Q207023" start="17135" end="17142" title="Ligures" label="Λίγυρες"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576656" start="17144" end="17149" title="Mysians" label="Μυσοί"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567156" start="17151" end="17158" title="Paeonians" label="Παίονες"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="17160" end="17167" title="Ἕλληνες" label="Ἕλληνες"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="17205" end="17213" title="Hellenes" label="Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q262880" start="17596" end="17614" title="Blaise de Vigenère" label="Blaise de Vigenère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="17719" end="17734" title="editio princeps" label="editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q77606" start="17938" end="17947" title="I. Bekker" label="I. Bekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238783" start="18233" end="18250" title="Patrologia Graeca" label="Patrologia Graeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264942" start="18448" end="18462" title="Dumbarton Oaks" label="Dumbarton Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="18838" end="18871" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="Greek scholars in the Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q983661" start="19001" end="19023" title="Demetrius Chalcondyles" label="Demetrius Chalcondyles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19036" end="19054" title="Antonius Calosynas" label="Antonius Calosynas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567517" wikidata="Q7990465" url="?curid=567517" title="Whakapapa skifield">
<text>Whakapapa skifield is a commercial skifield on the northern side of Mount Ruapehu in Tongariro National Park, New Zealand. It is one of three skifields on the mountain, the others being Turoa, which is on Ruapehu&#x27;s south-western slopes and Tukino on the eastern slopes. The ski season is generally from late June to late October, depending on snow and weather conditions. The terrain at Whakapapa Skifield is divided up as 25% beginner, 50% intermediate and 25% advanced.

Access to the skifield is by Bruce Road, a two-lane, sealed road. Limited accommodation and refreshments are available at the entry to the skifield, and elsewhere on the mountain. Alpine huts are provided for trampers and climbers. Ruapehu&#x27;s two skifields are collectively the largest ski resort in New Zealand. Turoa has a slightly longer season, generally opening a week before Whakapapa and closing early November. Both are operated by Ruapehu Alpine Lifts. Chateau Tongariro, which has appeared on several New Zealand stamps, is a feature of Whakapapa village.

== History ==
===Interwar period===
The first people to ski the slopes of Ruapehu were Bill Mead and Bernard Drake who purchased a pair of skis from Europe in 1913 and later formed the Ruapehu Ski Club. Bill Salt, Mead, Drake and others helped to then build the first hut on the skifield in 1923, a small corrugated iron shack which still stands to this day. Skiing slowly progressed on the skifield, hindered by World War 2 with the road expanded in the 1930s to accommodate more traffic. Some small rope tows were built before the first ski lifts, the first being installed in 1938 at Scoria Flat by the Tourist Department and a further 5-6 more over the following years.

===1950s expansion===
By 1951 skiing had become quite popular and Walter Haensli was granted a license to operate a ski lift at Whakapapa. In 1953 Ruapehu Alpine Lifts was formed and the company purchase the license from Haensli, installing the first chairlift in New Zealand in 1954. This chairlift was built by GMD Müller and was a single seater Diesel-Electric driven lift capable of taking 350 people an hour up to Hut Flat. Sir Edmund Hillary officially opened the chairlift on August 1, 1954. A year later the Staircase T-Bar extended up the Staircase slopes until it was removed in the late 1990s.

Following on from the success, the No.2 Chairlift was opened in May 1956 extending from Hut Flat to the top of Knoll Ridge. This lift was destroyed by an ice storm a week later due to the extreme build-up of rime ice - common in Ruapehu&#x27;s maritime climate. Over the following years more ski companies opened up and Ski Enterprises Ltd opened a rope tow then a T-Bar on the National Downhill slopes while Happy Ski Valley Ltd commenced operations of rope tows going up Meads Wall.

===Consolidation:1970s-1980s===
During the 70s many of the rope tows were phased out for more comfortable poma lifts and eventually more chairlifts in the late 70s. The top half of the No.2 Chairlift was moved to run from the base of the Rockgarden, west to the Downhill Ski Club and a two seater chair replaced the Rockgarden single chair.

The late 70s and early 80s signalled a period of fast growth for the ski area with snow groomers purchased in 1977, A double chairlift up the staircase slopes and the first T-Bar on the upper mountain. 1981, 1982 and 1983 saw the installation of the Te Heuheu Valley T-Bar, Knoll Ridge T-Bar and the National Downhill No.2 T-Bar and Double Chairlift. In 1987 the Staircase double chair was moved down to serve the Rockgarden slopes and New Zealand&#x27;s first High Speed Detachable Quad was installed by Doppelmayr and named the Waterfall Express. The late 80s saw RAL purchase Happy Ski Valley and their license, the No.2 T-Bar moved up the mountain to become the current Far West T-Bar and the first snowmaking system installed in Happy Valley in 1990.

In 1995, skiers were evacuated from the skifield when a small volcanic eruption occurred at the crater lake, ejecting rocks, ash and steam.

===21st century===
In 2002 the snowmaking was expanded to cover the Rockgarden and in 2005 a pump station was built under the Waterfall Express lower terminal to facilitate snowmaking all the way up the staircase slopes to the base of the Waterfall T-Bar.

On 13 February 2009 arson destroyed two buildings at the skifield: the main chalet and an implement shed containing three snow groomers. The damage was estimated at $11 to 12.5 million. The main chalet, the Knoll Ridge Cafe was replaced by a new, more modern, facility slightly lower down the mountain with less visual impact than the old chalet.

In 2016 the Rangatira Express built by Leitner Poma replaced the Centennial and Rockgarden chairs and the second hand Delta Quad replaced the Waterfall T-Bar. In 2019, after a NZD $15m grant from the government Provincial Growth Fund the Sky Waka Gondola was built from the Top of the Bruce up to Knoll Ridge. In the process of doing this, the Waterfall Express which had begun to show its age was removed to make way from the new gondola, completing over 100,000 hours of run time in its 32 year lifespan.

=== Voluntary administration ===
In 2022 following a poor snow season attributed largely to climate change, Ruapehu Alpine Lifts, the parent company of both Whakapapa and Turoa skifields, entered voluntary administration in an attempt to avoid bankruptcy. The company is a not-for-profit business that was established by members of ski clubs in 1953. In August 2022, Ruapehu Alpine Lifts laid off 130 workers and its total debt climbed to over NZ$30 million. The financial situation of Ruapehu Alpine Lifts deteriorated rapidly following disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic. Efforts to secure additional funds from investors or the New Zealand government initially failed.

However, in December 2022, the government provided a $6 million loan to Ruapehu Alpine Lifts, to help ensure that both Ruapehu skifields could operate in winter 2023. This was in addition to $15 million provided in 2018 from the Provincial Growth Fund.

In mid-March 2024, the Government agreed to a final NZ$7 million bail out of Ruapehu Alpine Lifts to allow the 2024 ski season to proceed at Whakapapa. In addition, the Government agreed to provide NZ$3.05 million in equity and loan funding to enable the sale of the adjacent Tūroa skifield. Ruapehu accommodation and ski-hire business owner Sam Clarkson criticised the bailout as wasteful, stating that the company lacked people who knew how to run skifields.

==Happy Valley==

Happy Valley is a large beginner&#x27;s area at Whakapapa separated from the rest of the skifield in its own little valley and is considered one of the best in the country. The area has a cafe and ski hire facility, there is also a double chair lift, and 4 magic carpet lifts including a dedicated snow sledding area. Access to Happy Valley is by way of two glass-enclosed 26 person elevators which travel 22m down into the canyon.

==Lifts==

There is a new lift systems that has been proposed. The Knoll ridge Express will replace the Knoll Ridge T-Bar and possible the Valley T-Bar as well, starting from the top of the Rangatira Express and ending in a similar spot to where the Knoll Ridge T-Bar&#x27;s top terminal is. If the plan goes ahead it will be a six seater with a top speed of 5 meters per second and the ability to transport 3,200 people per hour. A new gondola was installed for the 2019 season, called the Sky Waka, that can transport over 3000 people an hour from the base area at an elevation of 1630m to the Knoll Ridge Cafe at 2020m to provide access to the upper mountain.
==Weather==
Weather conditions can be changeable over the day, and mountain visitors are advised to be prepared and carry basic survival equipment. Although severe weather is unusual and generally forecast, it has claimed several lives over the years, including a party of soldiers undergoing winter survival training in 1990. The same storm also trapped a Japanese tourist when the weather unexpectedly closed in on him, but he built a snow cave and sheltered in it until he was rescued days later.

On July 5, 2003, about 350 skiers and 70 skifield staff were trapped on the mountain overnight at Top o&#x27;the Bruce when a sudden snow storm blew up and within a few minutes made the access road too dangerous to descend. They spent the night in relative comfort and all descended safely the next morning. Such rapidly changing conditions are typical of the weather on New Zealand mountains.
Again on Saturday July 26, 2008, skiers and staff were trapped on the mountain overnight when a fast approaching storm caused the skifield to be closed at 10:30 am and made the road too dangerous for cars without chains or 4WD to leave the area. By 3pm there were still over 100 cars in the Whakapapa car park and those who had not been able to leave by that point were told to settle in for the night. All cars were able to leave safely the next morning.

== Ski Clubs ==
There are a total of 47 Ski Clubs located between the Top of the Bruce and Hut Flat, with the majority of them being located around the loop road. Many of these clubs have been around for over 50 years and have anywhere between 200-1000 members. The clubs often have either a custodian who is in charge of coordinating the lodge during the winter season and cooking meals, while others operate on a member system where they are in charge of cooking meals or providing personal food. Accommodation is provided in combined bunkroom style and on average 32 beds per club.

==Iwikau climate==
Being more than 400 metres higher than Whakapapa Village, Iwikau is considerably cooler year-round with an average annual temperature of 5.5 °C. Maximum temperatures vary from 16.6 °C in February to 3.6 °C in July. Minimum temperatures range from 5.2 °C in February to -3.1 °C in July. The climate is classified as Cfc, or sub-polar oceanic. The driest month is February, with 196 mm of precipitation, and the wettest month is July, with 399 mm of precipitation. Annually, 3733 mm of precipitation falls on Iwikau. 

==Other activities==

=== Sledding At Whakapapa ===
Across from Happy Valley is a tubing park called &#x27;the sliding zone&#x27;. It is a large area dedicated to tubing, and within walking distance from the base area.

=== Guided Crater Lake Walks ===
Offered in the summer months of the year, there is an option to view the volcanic crater lake at the top of the mountain. Visitors take a chairlift ride up to 2020m, from which a guide takes visitors on a 6-hour walk around the lake.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7990465" start="0" end="18" title="Whakapapa skifield" label="Whakapapa skifield"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="35" end="43" title="skifield" label="skifield"/>
<link wikidata="Q207284" start="68" end="81" title="Mount Ruapehu" label="Mount Ruapehu"/>
<link wikidata="Q202845" start="85" end="108" title="Tongariro National Park" label="Tongariro National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856127" start="186" end="191" title="Turoa" label="Turoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851844" start="245" end="251" title="Tukino" label="Tukino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087550" start="944" end="961" title="Chateau Tongariro" label="Chateau Tongariro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1029" end="1046" title="Whakapapa village" label="Whakapapa village"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513754" start="2037" end="2047" title="GMD Müller" label="GMD Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q33817" start="2157" end="2171" title="Edmund Hillary" label="Edmund Hillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131099" start="2538" end="2546" title="rime ice" label="rime ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606521" start="3630" end="3645" title="Detachable chairlift" label="Detachable Quad"/>
<link wikidata="Q665486" start="3663" end="3673" title="Doppelmayr/Garaventa Group" label="Doppelmayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520426" start="4700" end="4712" title="Leitner-Poma" label="Leitner Poma"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="5261" end="5275" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q759652" start="5365" end="5389" title="voluntary administration" label="voluntary administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="5413" end="5423" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5728" end="5745" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6376" end="6390" title="Tūroa skifield" label="Tūroa skifield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978323" start="10232" end="10238" title="Tubing (recreation)" label="tubing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567518" wikidata="Q309458" url="?curid=567518" title="Jardin du Luxembourg">
<text>The Jardin du Luxembourg (), known in English as the Luxembourg Garden, colloquially referred to as the Jardin du Sénat (Senate Garden), is located in the 6th arrondissement of Paris, France. The creation of the garden began in 1612 when Marie de&#x27; Medici, the widow of King Henry IV, constructed the Luxembourg Palace as her new residence. The garden today is owned by the French Senate, which meets in the palace. It covers 23 hectares (56.8 acres) and is known for its lawns, tree-lined promenades, tennis courts, flowerbeds, model sailboats on its octagonal Grand Bassin, as well as picturesque Medici Fountain, built in 1620. The name Luxembourg comes from the Latin Mons Lucotitius, the name of the hill where the garden is located, and locally the garden is informally called &quot;le Luco&quot;.

==History==


In 1611, Marie de&#x27; Medici, the widow of Henry IV and the regent for the King Louis XIII, decided to build a palace in imitation of the Pitti Palace in her native Florence. She purchased the Hôtel du Luxembourg (today the Petit Luxembourg) and began construction of the new palace. She commissioned Salomon de Brosse to build the palace and a fountain, which still exists. In 1612 she had 2,000 elm trees planted; she directed a series of gardeners, most notably Tommaso Francini, to build a park in the style she had known as a child in Florence. Francini planned two terraces with balustrades and parterres laid out along the axis of the château, aligned around a circular basin. He also built the Medici Fountain to the east of the palace as a nymphaeum, an artificial grotto and fountain, without its present pond and statuary. The original garden was just eight hectares in size.

In 1630 she bought additional land and enlarged the garden to thirty hectares, and entrusted the work to Jacques Boyceau de la Barauderie, the intendant of the royal Tuileries Garden and the early gardens of Versailles. He was one of the early theorists of the new and more formal garden à la française, and he laid out a series of squares along an east–west alley closed at the east end by the Medici Fountain, and a rectangle of parterres with broderies of flowers and hedges in front of the palace. In the center he placed an octagonal basin with a fountain, with a perspective toward what is now the Paris Observatory.

Later monarchs largely neglected the garden. In 1780, the Comte de Provence, the future Louis XVIII, sold the eastern part of the garden for real estate development. Following the French Revolution, however, the leaders of the French Directory expanded the garden to forty hectares by confiscating the land of the neighboring religious order of the Carthusian monks. The architect Jean Chalgrin, the architect of the Arc de Triomphe, took on the task of restoring the garden. He remade the Medici Fountain and laid out a long perspective from the palace to the observatory. He preserved the famous pepiniere, or nursery garden of the Carthusian order, and the old vineyards, and kept the garden in a formal French style.

During and after the July Monarchy, the park became the home of a large population of statues; first the queens and famous women of France, lined along the terraces; then, in 1880s and 1890s, monuments to writers and artists, a small-scale model by Bartholdi of his &quot;Liberty Enlightening the World&quot; (commonly known as the Statue of Liberty) and one modern sculpture by Zadkine.

In 1865, during the reconstruction of Paris by Napoleon III, the rue de l&#x27;Abbé de l&#x27;Épée, (now rue Auguste Comte) was extended into the park, cutting off about seven hectares, including a large part of the old nursery garden. The building of new streets next to the park also required moving and rebuilding the Medici Fountain to its present location. The long basin of the fountain was added at this time, along with the statues at the foot of the fountain.

During this reconstruction, the chief architect of parks and promenades of Paris, Gabriel Davioud, under the leadership of Adolphe Alphand, built new ornamental gates and fences around the park, and polychrome brick garden houses. He also transformed what remained of the old Chartreux nursery garden, at the south end of the park, into an English garden with winding paths, and planted a fruit garden in the southwest corner. He kept the regular geometric pattern of the paths and alleys, but did create one diagonal alley near the Medici fountain, which opened a view of the Panthéon.

The garden in the late nineteenth century contained a marionette theater, a music kiosk, greenhouses, an apiary (or bee-house); an orangerie also used for displaying sculpture and modern art (used until the 1930s); a rose garden, the fruit orchard, and about seventy works of sculpture.

== Features ==
The garden is largely devoted to a green parterre of gravel and lawn populated with statues and centred on a large octagonal basin of water, with a central jet of water; in it children sail model boats. The garden is famed for its calm atmosphere. Surrounding the &quot;bassin&quot; on the raised balustraded terraces are a series of statues of former French queens, saints and copies after the antique. In the southwest corner, there is an orchard of apple and pear trees and the &quot;théâtre des marionnettes&quot; (puppet theatre). The gardens include a large fenced-in playground for young children and their parents and a vintage carousel. In addition, free musical performances are presented in a gazebo on the grounds and there is a small cafe restaurant nearby, under the trees, with both indoor and outdoor seating from which many people enjoy the music over a glass of wine. The orangerie displays art, photography and sculptures. The model boat pond in Conservatory Water in Central Park in Manhattan, New York City, is loosely based on that of one in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

The École nationale supérieure des Mines de Paris and the Odéon theatre stand next to the Luxembourg Garden.

The central axis of the garden is extended, beyond its wrought iron grill and gates opening to rue Auguste Comte, by the central esplanade of the rue de l&#x27;Observatoire, officially the &quot;Jardin Marco Polo&quot;, where sculptures of the four &quot;Times of Day&quot; alternate with columns and culminate at the southern end with the 1874 &quot;Fountain of the Observatory&quot;, also known as the &quot;Fontaine des Quatre-Parties-du-Monde&quot; or the &quot;Carpeaux Fountain&quot;, for its sculptures by Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux. It was installed as part of the development of the avenue de l&#x27;Observatoire by Gabriel Davioud in 1867.

The bronze fountain represents the work of four sculptors: Louis Vuillemot carved the garlands and festoons around the pedestal, Pierre Legrain carved the armillary with interior globe and zodiac band; the animalier Emmanuel Fremiet designed the eight horses, marine turtles and spouting fish. Most importantly Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux sculpted the four nude women supporting the globe, representing the Four Continents of classical iconography.

Open hours for the Luxembourg Garden depend on the month: opening between 7:30 and 8:15 am; closing at dusk between 4:45 and 9:45 pm.

== Statuary ==
The garden contains just over a hundred statues, monuments, and fountains, scattered throughout the grounds. Surrounding the central green space are twenty figures of French queens and illustrious women standing on pedestals. They were commissioned by Louis-Philippe in 1848 and include: Anne of Austria, Anne of Brittany, Anne of France, Anne Marie Louise of Orléans, Bertha of Burgundy, Blanche of Castile, Clémence Isaure, Jeanne III of Navarre, Laure de Noves, Louise of Savoy, Margaret of Anjou, Margaret of Provence, Marguerite of Navarre, Marie de&#x27; Medici, Mary, Queen of Scots, Matilda, Duchess of Normandy, Saint Balthild, Saint Clotilde, Saint Genevieve, and Valentina Visconti.

Other sculpted work includes:
* &quot;Pierre Guillaume Frédéric le Play&quot;, by André-Joseph Allar, 1906
* &quot;Liberty Enlightening the World&quot;, commonly known as the Statue of Liberty, first model, by Frédéric Bartholdi, 1870
* &quot;La Bocca della Verità&quot;, by Jules Blanchard
* Ludwig van Beethoven, by Antoine Bourdelle, placed here 1978
* &quot;Monument to Henri Murger&quot;, by Théophile-Henri Bouillon, 1895
* multiple animal sculptures by Auguste Cain
* &quot;Le Triomphe de Silène&quot;, 1885, &quot;Hommage to Delacroix&quot;, 1890, and &quot;Monument to Auguste Scheurer-Kestner&quot;, 1908, both by Jules Dalou
* Monument to Jean-Antoine Watteau, by Henri Désiré Gauquié, 1896
* &quot;Narcissus&quot;, 1869, and &quot;Arion assis sur un dauphin&quot;, 1870, both by Ernest-Eugène Hiolle
* &quot;Hippomenes&quot; by Jean Antoine Injalbert
* Bust of Charles Baudelaire, by Pierre Félix Masseau
* &quot;Polyphemus Surprising Acis and Galatea&quot;, the Fontaine Médicis, by Auguste Ottin, 1866
* &quot;Clémence Isaure&quot; by Antoine-Augustin Préault
* &quot;Theseus and the Minotaur&quot;, by Etienne-Jules Ramey, 1826
* &quot;Hercules Diverting the River Alpheus&quot;, 1900, and &quot;L&#x27;Effort&quot;, 1902, both by Pierre Roche
* Paul Verlaine, by Rodo (Auguste de Niederhäusern), 1911
* &quot;Monument to Édouard Branly&quot;, by Charles Marie Louis Joseph Sarrabezolles
* &quot;George Sand&quot;, by François-Léon Sicard, 1904
* Jules Massenet, by Raoul Verlet, 1926
*Marshal Ney, by François Rude (sculptor) and Alphonse de Gisors (pedestal), 1853.

== Medici Fountain ==
The Medici Fountain (&quot;La fontaine Médicis&quot;) was built in 1630 by Marie de&#x27; Medici, the widow of King Henry IV of France and regent of King Louis XIII of France. It was designed by Tommaso Francini, a Florentine fountain maker and hydraulic engineer who was brought from Florence to France by King Henry IV. It was in the form of a grotto, a popular feature of the Italian Renaissance garden. It fell into ruins during the 18th century, but in 1811, at the command of Napoleon Bonaparte, the fountain was restored by Jean Chalgrin, the architect of the Arc de Triomphe. In 1864–66, the fountain was moved to its present location, centered on the east front of the Palais du Luxembourg. The long basin of water was built and flanked by plane trees, and the sculptures of the giant Polyphemus surprising the lovers Acis and Galatea, by French classical sculptor Auguste Ottin, were added to the grotto&#x27;s rockwork.

Hidden behind the Medici Fountain is the Fontaine de Léda, (1807), a wall fountain built during the time of Napoleon Bonaparte at the corner of the Rue du Regard and Rue de Vaugirard, with a bas-relief sculpture depicting the legend of Leda and the Swan by Achille Valois. When the original site was destroyed during the extension of the Rue de Rennes in 1856 by Napoleon III, the fountain was preserved and moved in 1866 to the Luxembourg Gardens and attached to the back of the Medici Fountain.

== In popular culture ==
The gardens are featured prominently in Victor Hugo&#x27;s novel &quot;Les Misérables&quot;. It is here that the principal love story of the novel unfolds, as the characters Marius Pontmercy and Cosette first meet. Several scenes of André Gide&#x27;s novel &quot;The Counterfeiters&quot; also take place in the gardens.

Henry James also uses the gardens, in &quot;The Ambassadors&quot;, as the place in which his character Lambert Strether has an epiphany about his identity. The final scene of William Faulkner&#x27;s novel &quot;Sanctuary&quot; is set in the gardens. Patrick Modiano heard the news he had won the 2014 Nobel Prize in Literature via a mobile phone call from his daughter while he was walking through Paris &quot;just next to the Jardin du Luxembourg&quot;.

Non-literary references include as the setting for a few episodes of &quot;French in Action&quot;, the 10th Joe Dassin&#x27;s 1976 studio album &quot;Le Jardin du Luxembourg&quot;, the cover of Tame Impala&#x27;s 2012 album &quot;Lonerism&quot;, the title of a song by the band The Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger and the gardens and palace being added as a mission in the video game &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed Unity&quot;.

== Images ==
== See also ==

*List of parks and gardens in Paris
*Luxembourg station (Paris)

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*André Arnold-Peltier and Vassili Karist, &quot;Le Jardin du Luxembourg / The Luxembourg gardens&quot;, Éditions Pippa, collection Itinérances () (photos)
*&quot;Paris et ses fontaines, de la Renaissance à nos jours&quot;, texts assembled by Dominque Massounie, Pauline-Prevost-Marcilhacy and Daniel Rabreau, Délegation a l&#x27;action artistique de la Ville de Paris. from the Collection Paris et son Patrimoine, directed by Beatrice de Andia. Paris, 1995.
*Dominique Jarrassé, &quot;Grammaire des Jardins Parisiens&quot;, Parigramme, Paris, 2007. ()

==External links==

*The Luxembourg Gardens page at the Project for Public Spaces
*The Jardin du Luxembourg - Current and old photographs of the garden, statues, fountains
*Info and Jardin du Luxembourg Walk
*&quot;The Luxembourg Gardens at Twilight&quot; - One of a series of paintings featuring the gardens by American (b. Italy) artist John Singer Sargent
*Webpages about the Garden </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q309458" start="4" end="24" title="Jardin du Luxembourg" label="Jardin du Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q309458" start="53" end="70" title="Jardin du Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q309458" start="104" end="119" title="Jardin du Luxembourg" label="Jardin du Sénat"/>
<link wikidata="Q245546" start="155" end="182" title="6th arrondissement of Paris" label="6th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="184" end="190" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q182021" start="238" end="259" title="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="279" end="287" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q329852" start="305" end="322" title="Luxembourg Palace" label="Luxembourg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="378" end="391" title="Senate (France)" label="French Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076041" start="603" end="618" title="Medici Fountain" label="Medici Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182021" start="832" end="853" title="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="868" end="876" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="905" end="915" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q29286" start="963" end="975" title="Pitti Palace" label="Pitti Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="990" end="998" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377183" start="1049" end="1065" title="Petit Luxembourg" label="Petit Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q725816" start="1126" end="1143" title="Salomon de Brosse" label="Salomon de Brosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="1222" end="1225" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583516" start="1290" end="1306" title="Tommaso Francini" label="Tommaso Francini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244939" start="1331" end="1350" title="Italian Renaissance garden" label="style she had known"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067316" start="1426" end="1434" title="parterre" label="parterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076041" start="1527" end="1542" title="Medici Fountain" label="Medici Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q731966" start="1574" end="1583" title="nymphaeum" label="nymphaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q349207" start="1818" end="1833" title="Jacques Boyceau" label="Jacques Boyceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q818517" start="1879" end="1895" title="Tuileries Garden" label="Tuileries Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162464" start="1910" end="1931" title="gardens of Versailles" label="gardens of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12774" start="1994" end="2015" title="French formal garden" label="garden à la française"/>
<link wikidata="Q461340" start="2317" end="2334" title="Paris Observatory" label="Paris Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="2425" end="2436" title="Louis XVIII" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2517" end="2534" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="2564" end="2580" title="French Directory" label="French Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="2686" end="2696" title="Carthusian" label="Carthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q525487" start="2718" end="2731" title="Jean Chalgrin" label="Jean Chalgrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="2754" end="2769" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="3080" end="3093" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223274" start="3308" end="3317" title="Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi" label="Bartholdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="3391" end="3408" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q160172" start="3438" end="3445" title="Ossip Zadkine" label="Zadkine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="3495" end="3507" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q979605" start="4000" end="4015" title="Gabriel Davioud" label="Gabriel Davioud"/>
<link wikidata="Q390367" start="4041" end="4056" title="Adolphe Alphand" label="Adolphe Alphand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12783" start="4258" end="4272" title="English garden" label="English garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q188856" start="4495" end="4503" title="Panthéon" label="Panthéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067316" start="4850" end="4858" title="parterre" label="parterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q658386" start="5106" end="5116" title="balustrade" label="balustrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249234" start="5118" end="5126" title="Terrace (gardening)" label="terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362251" start="5204" end="5211" title="Ancient Roman sculpture" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="5328" end="5342" title="puppet theatre" label="puppet theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q208322" start="5445" end="5453" title="carousel" label="carousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163141" start="5774" end="5792" title="Conservatory Water" label="Conservatory Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="5796" end="5808" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="5812" end="5821" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189954" start="5904" end="5949" title="École nationale supérieure des Mines de Paris" label="École nationale supérieure des Mines de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133501" start="5958" end="5963" title="Odéon" label="Odéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076255" start="6361" end="6388" title="Fontaine de l&amp;#x27;Observatoire" label="Fountain of the Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q182791" start="6523" end="6545" title="Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux" label="Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q979605" start="6631" end="6646" title="Gabriel Davioud" label="Gabriel Davioud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385903" start="6786" end="6800" title="Pierre Legrain" label="Pierre Legrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q328720" start="6812" end="6821" title="armillary" label="armillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116158" start="6863" end="6872" title="animalier" label="animalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q499022" start="6873" end="6889" title="Emmanuel Fremiet" label="Emmanuel Fremiet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182791" start="6968" end="6990" title="Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux" label="Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475656" start="7059" end="7074" title="Four Continents" label="Four Continents"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040503" start="7419" end="7454" title="Reines de France et Femmes illustres" label="French queens and illustrious women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="7504" end="7518" title="Louis-Philippe" label="Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151209" start="7540" end="7555" title="Anne of Austria" label="Anne of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q201143" start="7557" end="7573" title="Anne of Brittany" label="Anne of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q232801" start="7575" end="7589" title="Anne of France" label="Anne of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231832" start="7591" end="7619" title="Anne Marie Louise d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duchess of Montpensier" label="Anne Marie Louise of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q232522" start="7621" end="7639" title="Bertha of Burgundy" label="Bertha of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q353" start="7641" end="7659" title="Blanche of Castile" label="Blanche of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980546" start="7661" end="7676" title="Clémence Isaure" label="Clémence Isaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="7678" end="7699" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="Jeanne III of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q270227" start="7701" end="7715" title="Laura de Noves" label="Laure de Noves"/>
<link wikidata="Q233192" start="7717" end="7732" title="Louise of Savoy" label="Louise of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q231145" start="7734" end="7751" title="Margaret of Anjou" label="Margaret of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q230889" start="7753" end="7773" title="Margaret of Provence" label="Margaret of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q190058" start="7775" end="7796" title="Marguerite de Navarre" label="Marguerite of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182021" start="7798" end="7819" title="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="7821" end="7841" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q150872" start="7843" end="7871" title="Empress Matilda" label="Matilda, Duchess of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q237750" start="7879" end="7887" title="Balthild" label="Balthild"/>
<link wikidata="Q232365" start="7895" end="7903" title="Clotilde" label="Clotilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q235863" start="7911" end="7920" title="Genevieve" label="Genevieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q124682" start="7926" end="7944" title="Valentina Visconti, Duchess of Orléans" label="Valentina Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q452627" start="7985" end="8018" title="Pierre Guillaume Frédéric le Play" label="Pierre Guillaume Frédéric le Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847071" start="8029" end="8047" title="André-Joseph Allar" label="André-Joseph Allar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="8122" end="8139" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q223274" start="8157" end="8175" title="Frédéric Bartholdi" label="Frédéric Bartholdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q729490" start="8193" end="8211" title="Bocca della Verità" label="Bocca della Verità"/>
<link wikidata="Q321413" start="8222" end="8237" title="Jules Blanchard" label="Jules Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="8240" end="8260" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q314350" start="8265" end="8282" title="Antoine Bourdelle" label="Antoine Bourdelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31258" start="8321" end="8333" title="Henri Murger" label="Henri Murger"/>
<link wikidata="Q766022" start="8407" end="8419" title="Auguste Cain" label="Auguste Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="8480" end="8489" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q166297" start="8525" end="8549" title="Auguste Scheurer-Kestner" label="Auguste Scheurer-Kestner"/>
<link wikidata="Q551648" start="8571" end="8582" title="Jules Dalou" label="Jules Dalou"/>
<link wikidata="Q183221" start="8597" end="8617" title="Jean-Antoine Watteau" label="Jean-Antoine Watteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749109" start="8738" end="8758" title="Ernest-Eugène Hiolle" label="Ernest-Eugène Hiolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746989" start="8787" end="8809" title="Jean Antoine Injalbert" label="Jean Antoine Injalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="8820" end="8838" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Charles Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093012" start="8843" end="8863" title="Pierre Félix Masseau" label="Pierre Félix Masseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q766841" start="8943" end="8956" title="Auguste Ottin" label="Auguste Ottin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074586" start="8996" end="9020" title="Antoine-Augustin Préault" label="Antoine-Augustin Préault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466214" start="9064" end="9083" title="Etienne-Jules Ramey" label="Etienne-Jules Ramey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766428" start="9193" end="9205" title="Pierre Roche" label="Pierre Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="9208" end="9221" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Paul Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q680263" start="9226" end="9230" title="Rodo" label="Rodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q274251" start="9284" end="9298" title="Édouard Branly" label="Édouard Branly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939255" start="9309" end="9349" title="Charles Marie Louis Joseph Sarrabezolles" label="Charles Marie Louis Joseph Sarrabezolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816" start="9358" end="9369" title="George Sand" label="George Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739036" start="9380" end="9400" title="François-Léon Sicard" label="François-Léon Sicard"/>
<link wikidata="Q194436" start="9409" end="9423" title="Jules Massenet" label="Jules Massenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131299" start="9428" end="9440" title="Raoul Verlet" label="Raoul Verlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40756" start="9448" end="9459" title="Michel Ney" label="Marshal Ney"/>
<link wikidata="Q346491" start="9464" end="9477" title="François Rude" label="François Rude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840019" start="9493" end="9511" title="Alphonse de Gisors" label="Alphonse de Gisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076041" start="9557" end="9572" title="Medici Fountain" label="Medici Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182021" start="9628" end="9649" title="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="9669" end="9687" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="9707" end="9727" title="Louis XIII of France" label="Louis XIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583516" start="9748" end="9764" title="Tommaso Francini" label="Tommaso Francini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131329" start="9899" end="9905" title="grotto" label="grotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="10035" end="10053" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q525487" start="10084" end="10097" title="Jean Chalgrin" label="Jean Chalgrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="10120" end="10135" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163025" start="10302" end="10313" title="Platanus" label="plane trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="10347" end="10357" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628788" start="10380" end="10396" title="Acis and Galatea (mythology)" label="Acis and Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q766841" start="10427" end="10440" title="Auguste Ottin" label="Auguste Ottin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076156" start="10526" end="10542" title="Fontaine de Léda" label="Fontaine de Léda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707132" start="10651" end="10667" title="Rue de Vaugirard" label="Rue de Vaugirard"/>
<link wikidata="Q494762" start="10721" end="10738" title="Leda and the Swan" label="Leda and the Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823113" start="10742" end="10756" title="Achille Valois" label="Achille Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="10848" end="10860" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="11048" end="11059" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180736" start="11079" end="11093" title="Les Misérables" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634668" start="11182" end="11198" title="Marius Pontmercy" label="Marius Pontmercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453276" start="11203" end="11210" title="Cosette" label="Cosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484" start="11241" end="11251" title="André Gide" label="André Gide"/>
<link wikidata="Q276722" start="11271" end="11289" title="The Counterfeiters (novel)" label="The Counterfeiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="11329" end="11340" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q650571" start="11373" end="11388" title="The Ambassadors" label="The Ambassadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q38392" start="11504" end="11520" title="William Faulkner" label="William Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212765" start="11540" end="11549" title="Sanctuary (Faulkner novel)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q222944" start="11579" end="11594" title="Patrick Modiano" label="Patrick Modiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="11630" end="11655" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502253" start="11860" end="11876" title="French in Action" label="French in Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q272943" start="11893" end="11903" title="Joe Dassin" label="Joe Dassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071512" start="11935" end="11958" title="Le Jardin du Luxembourg" label="Le Jardin du Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9619" start="11979" end="11990" title="Tame Impala" label="Tame Impala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136228" start="12015" end="12023" title="Lonerism" label="Lonerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736332" start="12063" end="12095" title="The Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger" label="The Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983778" start="12172" end="12199" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed Unity" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729837" start="12238" end="12272" title="List of parks and gardens in Paris" label="List of parks and gardens in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772325" start="12274" end="12300" title="Luxembourg station (Paris)" label="Luxembourg station (Paris)"/>
<link wikidata="Q155626" start="13230" end="13249" title="John Singer Sargent" label="John Singer Sargent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567519" wikidata="Q7119718" url="?curid=567519" title="PMAC">
<text>PMAC may refer to:

* Permanent Magnet AC Motor, a type of electric motor that uses permanent magnets in addition to windings on its field, rather than windings only.
* PMAC (cryptography), a message authentication code algorithm
* Pete Maravich Assembly Center, Louisiana State University
* Provisional Military Administrative Council or Derg, a military junta that ruled Ethiopia 1974—1987
* Prevention and Management of Abortion and Its Complications, a Philippine government policy concerning abortion in the Philippines
* Purchasing Management Association of Canada, a co-sponsor of the Ivey Index
* &quot;Problem exists between monitor and chair&quot;, a term describing computer user error</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28454009" start="22" end="47" title="Permanent magnet motor" label="Permanent Magnet AC Motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119717" start="169" end="188" title="PMAC (cryptography)" label="PMAC (cryptography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738031" start="232" end="261" title="Pete Maravich Assembly Center" label="Pete Maravich Assembly Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q828005" start="292" end="335" title="Provisional Military Administrative Council" label="Provisional Military Administrative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668507" start="497" end="524" title="abortion in the Philippines" label="abortion in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098899" start="592" end="602" title="Ivey Index" label="Ivey Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650233" start="686" end="696" title="user error" label="user error"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567520" wikidata="Q134123" url="?curid=567520" title="Kiril, Prince of Preslav">
<text>Prince Kiril of Bulgaria, Prince of Preslav (, ; 17 November 1895 – 1 February 1945) was the second son of Ferdinand I of Bulgaria and his first wife Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma. He was a younger brother of Boris III of Bulgaria and a prince regent of the Kingdom of Bulgaria from 1943 to 1944. He was sentenced to death by the People&#x27;s Court and executed on the night of 1 February 1945.

==Biography==

He was born on 17 January 1895 in Sofia as the second son of Ferdinand I of Bulgaria and his first wife, Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma.

In September 1936, Prince Kiril accompanied King Edward VIII on a whistle-stop tour of Iceland.
Present at the death of his brother, Tsar Boris, on 28 August 1943, Prince Kiril was appointed head of a regency council by the Bulgarian parliament, to act as Head of State until the late Tsar&#x27;s son, Simeon II of Bulgaria, became 18.

Prince Kiril, with the widowed Tsaritsa, Giovanna of Savoy, daughter of the Italian king, led the state funeral for his brother Tsar Boris III on 5 September 1943 at the Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Sofia, thereafter proceeding across the city to the main railway station where the funeral train waited to take the body to the 12th-century Rila Monastery in the mountains. Thereafter, three consecutive governments made efforts to extricate themselves from Bulgaria&#x27;s agreements with Germany, notably that which permitted their use of the railway to Greece and the German troops stationed along it for protection. A Bulgarian delegation travelled to Cairo in an attempt to negotiate with the United States and the United Kingdom but failed, as the latter refused to meet the delegation without the participation of the Soviet Union.

Despite Sofia&#x27;s continuous diplomatic ties with the Soviet Union, on 5 September 1944, that country declared war on Bulgaria, and on 8 September Soviet armies crossed the Romanian border and the Danube. The Fatherland Front, a coalition of the Communist Party, the left wing of the Agrarian Union, the Zveno group, and a few pro-Soviet politicians who had returned from exile in the Soviet Union, executed a Soviet-backed military coup on 9 September and seized power.

In late January 1945 Prince Kiril was sentenced to death by the People&#x27;s Court. On the night of February 1, 1945 he was executed at Sofia Central Cemetery along with former Prime Minister and Regent Professor Bogdan Filov, Regent General Nikola Mihov, and a range of former cabinet ministers, royal advisors and 67 MPs.

On August 26, 1996, the Supreme Court overturned the sentences of February 1, 1945, which had sentenced the three regents, ministers, and councilors to death.

==Honours and arms==

;Decorations
* : Knight of the Royal Order of Saints Cyril and Methodius
* : Knight of the Order of the Black Eagle
* : Knight of the Order of Saint Hubert
* : Knight of the Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, &quot;1930&quot;
* : Grand Cross of the Royal Order of the Star of Karađorđe

;Arms
==Ancestors==

==References==

==Literature==
* &quot;Bulgaria in the Second World War&quot; by Marshall Lee Miller, Stanford University Press, 1975.
* &quot;Boris III of Bulgaria 1894–1943&quot;, by Pashanko Dimitroff, London, 1986, 
* &quot;Crown of Thorns&quot; by Stephane Groueff, Lanham MD., and London, 1987, 
* &quot;The Betrayal of Bulgaria&quot; by Gregory Lauder-Frost, Monarchist League Policy Paper, London, 1989.
* &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, Obituary for &quot;HM Queen Ioanna of the Bulgarians&quot;, London, 28 February 2000.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134123" start="0" end="43" title="Kiril, Prince of Preslav" label="Prince Kiril of Bulgaria, Prince of Preslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q151667" start="107" end="130" title="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria" label="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q235823" start="150" end="179" title="Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma" label="Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q159585" start="209" end="230" title="Boris III of Bulgaria" label="Boris III of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q729924" start="237" end="250" title="prince regent" label="prince regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="258" end="277" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Kingdom of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12287716" start="330" end="349" title="People&amp;#x27;s Court (Bulgaria)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="446" end="451" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151667" start="473" end="496" title="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria" label="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q235823" start="517" end="546" title="Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma" label="Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="593" end="609" title="King Edward VIII" label="King Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="636" end="643" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="750" end="757" title="regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="783" end="793" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="805" end="818" title="Head of State" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060355" start="851" end="872" title="Simeon II of Bulgaria" label="Simeon II of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q235168" start="927" end="944" title="Giovanna of Italy" label="Giovanna of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159585" start="1014" end="1028" title="Tsar Boris III" label="Tsar Boris III"/>
<link wikidata="Q43282" start="1056" end="1089" title="Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Sofia" label="Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207945" start="1225" end="1239" title="Rila Monastery" label="Rila Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1374" end="1381" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="1440" end="1446" title="Kingdom of Greece (Glücksburg)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="1540" end="1545" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1709" end="1721" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749284" start="1900" end="1915" title="Bulgaria–Romania border" label="Romanian border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1924" end="1930" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453048" start="1936" end="1952" title="Fatherland Front (Bulgaria)" label="Fatherland Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q155000" start="1973" end="1988" title="Bulgarian Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q834016" start="2011" end="2025" title="Bulgarian Agrarian National Union" label="Agrarian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507295" start="2031" end="2036" title="Zveno" label="Zveno"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2137" end="2143" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q618048" start="2151" end="2179" title="Bulgarian coup d&amp;#x27;état of 1944" label="military coup on 9 September"/>
<link wikidata="Q12287716" start="2263" end="2282" title="People&amp;#x27;s Court (Bulgaria)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400970" start="2336" end="2358" title="Central Sofia Cemetery" label="Sofia Central Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q463311" start="2413" end="2425" title="Bogdan Filov" label="Bogdan Filov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024362" start="2442" end="2454" title="Nikola Mihov" label="Nikola Mihov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644888" start="2549" end="2562" title="Supreme Court of Cassation of Bulgaria" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551843" start="2744" end="2779" title="Order of Saints Cyril and Methodius" label="Order of Saints Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q94145" start="2798" end="2822" title="Order of the Black Eagle" label="Order of the Black Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q699459" start="2841" end="2862" title="Order of Saint Hubert" label="Order of Saint Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q567417" start="2881" end="2924" title="Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation" label="Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545753" start="2972" end="3002" title="Order of the Star of Karađorđe" label="Order of the Star of Karađorđe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567523" wikidata="Q1052621" url="?curid=567523" title="Message authentication code">
<text>In cryptography, a message authentication code (MAC), sometimes known as an authentication tag, is a short piece of information used for authenticating and integrity-checking a message. In other words, it is used to confirm that the message came from the stated sender (its authenticity) and has not been changed (its integrity). The MAC value allows verifiers (who also possess a secret key) to detect any changes to the message content.

==Terminology==
The term message integrity code (MIC) is frequently substituted for the term &quot;MAC&quot;, especially in communications to distinguish it from the use of the latter as &quot;media access control address&quot; (&quot;MAC address&quot;). However, some authors use MIC to refer to a message digest, which aims only to uniquely but opaquely identify a single message. RFC 4949 recommends avoiding the term &quot;message integrity code&quot; (MIC), and instead using &quot;checksum&quot;, &quot;error detection code&quot;, &quot;hash&quot;, &quot;keyed hash&quot;, &quot;message authentication code&quot;, or &quot;protected checksum&quot;.

==Definitions==
Informally, a message authentication code system consists of three algorithms:
* A key generation algorithm selects a key from the key space uniformly at random.
* A MAC generation algorithm efficiently returns a tag given the key and the message.
* A verifying algorithm efficiently verifies the authenticity of the message given the same key and the tag. That is, return &quot;accepted&quot; when the message and tag are not tampered with or forged, and otherwise return &quot;rejected&quot;.

A secure message authentication code must resist attempts by an adversary to forge tags, for arbitrary, select, or all messages, including under conditions of known- or chosen-message. It should be computationally infeasible to compute a valid tag of the given message without knowledge of the key, even if for the worst case, we assume the adversary knows the tag of any message but the one in question.

Formally, a message authentication code (MAC) system is a triple of efficient algorithms (&quot;G&quot;, &quot;S&quot;, &quot;V&quot;) satisfying:
* &quot;G&quot; (key-generator) gives the key &quot;k&quot; on input 1&quot;n&quot;, where &quot;n&quot; is the security parameter.
* &quot;S&quot; (signing) outputs a tag &quot;t&quot; on the key &quot;k&quot; and the input string &quot;x&quot;.
* &quot;V&quot; (verifying) outputs &quot;accepted&quot; or &quot;rejected&quot; on inputs: the key &quot;k&quot;, the string &quot;x&quot; and the tag &quot;t&quot;.

&quot;S&quot; and &quot;V&quot; must satisfy the following:

A MAC is unforgeable if for every efficient adversary &quot;A&quot;

where &quot;A&quot;&quot;S&quot;(&quot;k&quot;, · ) denotes that &quot;A&quot; has access to the oracle &quot;S&quot;(&quot;k&quot;, · ), and Query(&quot;A&quot;&quot;S&quot;(&quot;k&quot;, · ), 1&quot;n&quot;) denotes the set of the queries on &quot;S&quot; made by &quot;A&quot;, which knows &quot;n&quot;. Clearly we require that any adversary cannot directly query the string &quot;x&quot; on &quot;S&quot;, since otherwise a valid tag can be easily obtained by that adversary.

==Security==
While MAC functions are similar to cryptographic hash functions, they possess different security requirements. To be considered secure, a MAC function must resist existential forgery under chosen-message attacks. This means that even if an attacker has access to an oracle which possesses the secret key and generates MACs for messages of the attacker&#x27;s choosing, the attacker cannot guess the MAC for other messages (which were not used to query the oracle) without performing infeasible amounts of computation.

MACs differ from digital signatures as MAC values are both generated and verified using the same secret key. This implies that the sender and receiver of a message must agree on the same key before initiating communications, as is the case with symmetric encryption. For the same reason, MACs do not provide the property of non-repudiation offered by signatures specifically in the case of a network-wide shared secret key: any user who can verify a MAC is also capable of generating MACs for other messages. In contrast, a digital signature is generated using the private key of a key pair, which is public-key cryptography. Since this private key is only accessible to its holder, a digital signature proves that a document was signed by none other than that holder. Thus, digital signatures do offer non-repudiation. However, non-repudiation can be provided by systems that securely bind key usage information to the MAC key; the same key is in the possession of two people, but one has a copy of the key that can be used for MAC generation while the other has a copy of the key in a hardware security module that only permits MAC verification. This is commonly done in the finance industry.
While the primary goal of a MAC is to prevent forgery by adversaries without knowledge of the secret key, this is insufficient in certain scenarios. When an adversary is able to control the MAC key, stronger guarantees are needed, akin to collision resistance or preimage security in hash functions. For MACs, these concepts are known as &quot;commitment&quot; and &quot;context-discovery&quot; security.

==Implementation==
MAC algorithms can be constructed from other cryptographic primitives, like cryptographic hash functions (as in the case of HMAC) or from block cipher algorithms (OMAC, CCM, GCM, and PMAC). However many of the fastest MAC algorithms, like UMAC-VMAC and Poly1305-AES, are constructed based on universal hashing.

Intrinsically keyed hash algorithms such as SipHash are also by definition MACs; they can be even faster than universal-hashing based MACs.

Additionally, the MAC algorithm can deliberately combine two or more cryptographic primitives, so as to maintain protection even if one of them is later found to be vulnerable. For instance, in Transport Layer Security (TLS) versions before 1.2, the input data is split in halves that are each processed with a different hashing primitive (SHA-1 and SHA-2) then XORed together to output the MAC.

===One-time MAC===
Universal hashing and in particular pairwise independent hash functions provide a secure message authentication code as long as the key is used at most once. This can be seen as the one-time pad for authentication.

The simplest such pairwise independent hash function is defined by the random key, , and the MAC tag for a message &quot;m&quot; is computed as , where &quot;p&quot; is prime.

More generally, &quot;k&quot;-independent hashing functions provide a secure message authentication code as long as the key is used less than &quot;k&quot; times for &quot;k&quot;-ways independent hashing functions.

Message authentication codes and data origin authentication have been also discussed in the framework of quantum cryptography. By contrast to other cryptographic tasks, such as key distribution, for a rather broad class of quantum MACs it has been shown that quantum resources do not offer any advantage over unconditionally secure one-time classical MACs.

==Standards==
Various standards exist that define MAC algorithms. These include:
* FIPS PUB 113 &quot;Computer Data Authentication&quot;, withdrawn in 2002, defines an algorithm based on DES.
* FIPS PUB 198-1 &quot;The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC)&quot;
* NIST SP800-185 &quot;SHA-3 Derived Functions: cSHAKE, KMAC, TupleHash, and ParallelHash&quot;
* ISO/IEC 9797-1 &quot;Mechanisms using a block cipher&quot;
* ISO/IEC 9797-2 &quot;Mechanisms using a dedicated hash-function&quot;
* ISO/IEC 9797-3 &quot;Mechanisms using a universal hash-function&quot;
* ISO/IEC 29192-6 &quot;Lightweight cryptography - Message authentication codes&quot;

ISO/IEC 9797-1 and -2 define generic models and algorithms that can be used with any block cipher or hash function, and a variety of different parameters. These models and parameters allow more specific algorithms to be defined by nominating the parameters. For example, the FIPS PUB 113 algorithm is functionally equivalent to ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC algorithm 1 with padding method 1 and a block cipher algorithm of DES.

==An example of MAC use==
 In this example, the sender of a message runs it through a MAC algorithm to produce a MAC data tag. The message and the MAC tag are then sent to the receiver. The receiver in turn runs the message portion of the transmission through the same MAC algorithm using the same key, producing a second MAC data tag. The receiver then compares the first MAC tag received in the transmission to the second generated MAC tag. If they are identical, the receiver can safely assume that the message was not altered or tampered with during transmission (data integrity).

However, to allow the receiver to be able to detect replay attacks, the message itself must contain data that assures that this same message can only be sent once (e.g. time stamp, sequence number or use of a one-time MAC). Otherwise an attacker could – without even understanding its content – record this message and play it back at a later time, producing the same result as the original sender.

==See also==
* Checksum
* CMAC
* HMAC (hash-based message authentication code)
* MAA
* MMH-Badger MAC
* Poly1305
* Authenticated encryption
* UMAC
* VMAC
* SipHash
* KMAC

==Notes==

==References==
*

==External links==
* RSA Laboratories entry on MACs
* Ron Rivest lecture on MACs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3" end="15" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="19" end="46" title="Message authentication code" label="message authentication code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="48" end="51" title="Message authentication code" label="MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="76" end="94" title="Message authentication code" label="authentication tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="137" end="151" title="authentication" label="authenticating"/>
<link wikidata="Q461671" start="156" end="165" title="Data integrity" label="integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q20484" start="633" end="661" title="media access control address" label="media access control address"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="739" end="753" title="message digest" label="message digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q218341" start="927" end="935" title="checksum" label="checksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="949" end="969" title="error detection code" label="error detection code"/>
<link wikidata="Q183427" start="983" end="987" title="hash function" label="hash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276161" start="1685" end="1735" title="digital signature forgery" label="forge tags, for arbitrary, select, or all messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276161" start="1767" end="1773" title="Digital signature forgery" label="known-"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276161" start="1777" end="1791" title="Digital signature forgery" label="chosen-message"/>
<link wikidata="Q724775" start="2230" end="2244" title="unary numeral system" label="1&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="3237" end="3264" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276161" start="3365" end="3384" title="existential forgery" label="existential forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276161" start="3391" end="3412" title="Digital signature forgery" label="chosen-message attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143357" start="3468" end="3474" title="oracle machine" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="3738" end="3755" title="digital signature" label="digital signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="3966" end="3986" title="symmetric encryption" label="symmetric encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327773" start="4045" end="4060" title="non-repudiation" label="non-repudiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q462624" start="4126" end="4139" title="shared secret" label="shared secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432354" start="4808" end="4832" title="hardware security module" label="hardware security module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779448" start="5155" end="5175" title="collision resistance" label="collision resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187426" start="5179" end="5196" title="Preimage attack" label="preimage security"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="5417" end="5444" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669397" start="5465" end="5469" title="HMAC" label="HMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="5479" end="5491" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092316" start="5504" end="5508" title="OMAC (cryptography)" label="OMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009649" start="5510" end="5513" title="CCM mode" label="CCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519271" start="5515" end="5518" title="Galois/Counter mode" label="GCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119717" start="5524" end="5528" title="PMAC (cryptography)" label="PMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088868" start="5580" end="5584" title="UMAC (cryptography)" label="UMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907187" start="5585" end="5589" title="VMAC" label="VMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226098" start="5594" end="5606" title="Poly1305-AES" label="Poly1305-AES"/>
<link wikidata="Q846912" start="5633" end="5650" title="universal hashing" label="universal hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525546" start="5697" end="5704" title="SipHash" label="SipHash"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="5988" end="6012" title="Transport Layer Security" label="Transport Layer Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="6044" end="6054" title="input data" label="input data"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="6134" end="6139" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968605" start="6144" end="6149" title="SHA-2" label="SHA-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="6156" end="6161" title="exclusive or" label="XORed"/>
<link wikidata="Q846912" start="6210" end="6227" title="Universal hashing" label="Universal hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104952" start="6246" end="6266" title="pairwise independent" label="pairwise independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q150474" start="6392" end="6404" title="one-time pad" label="one-time pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322840" start="6619" end="6652" title="k-independent hashing" label="&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-independent hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q135035" start="7365" end="7368" title="Data Encryption Standard" label="DES"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974107" start="7547" end="7561" title="ISO/IEC 9797-1" label="ISO/IEC 9797-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="7608" end="7611" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="7680" end="7683" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="7752" end="7755" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q461671" start="8824" end="8838" title="data integrity" label="data integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756025" start="8894" end="8907" title="replay attack" label="replay attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749235" start="9023" end="9038" title="Cryptographic nonce" label="sequence number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9051" end="9063" title="#One-time_MAC" label="one-time MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q218341" start="9257" end="9265" title="Checksum" label="Checksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092316" start="9268" end="9272" title="CMAC" label="CMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669397" start="9275" end="9279" title="HMAC" label="HMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044068" start="9323" end="9326" title="Message Authenticator Algorithm" label="MAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716783" start="9329" end="9343" title="MMH-Badger MAC" label="MMH-Badger MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226098" start="9346" end="9354" title="Poly1305" label="Poly1305"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263584" start="9357" end="9381" title="Authenticated encryption" label="Authenticated encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088868" start="9384" end="9388" title="UMAC (cryptography)" label="UMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907187" start="9391" end="9395" title="VMAC" label="VMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525546" start="9398" end="9405" title="SipHash" label="SipHash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9408" end="9412" title="SHA-3#Additional instances" label="KMAC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567526" wikidata="Q207246" url="?curid=567526" title="Magellanic penguin">
<text>The Magellanic penguin (Spheniscus magellanicus) is a South American penguin, breeding in coastal Patagonia, including Argentina, Chile, and the Falkland Islands, with some migrating to Brazil and Uruguay, where they are occasionally seen as far north as Espírito Santo. Vagrants have been found in El Salvador, the Avian Island in Antarctica, Australia, and New Zealand. It is the most numerous of the &quot;Spheniscus&quot; banded penguins. Its nearest relatives are the African penguin, the Humboldt penguin, and the Galápagos penguins. The Magellanic penguin was named after Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan, who spotted the birds in 1520. The species is listed as being of Least Concern by the IUCN.

== Description ==
Magellanic penguins are medium-sized penguins which grow to be tall and weigh between . The males are larger than the females, and the weight of both drops while the parents raise their young.

Adults have black backs and white abdomens. There are two black bands between the head and the breast, with the lower band shaped in an inverted horseshoe. The head is black with a broad white border that runs from behind the eye, around the black ear-coverts and chin, and joins at the throat. Chicks and younger penguins have grey-blue backs, with a more faded grey-blue colour on their chest. Magellanic penguins can live up to 25 years in the wild, but as much as 30 years in captivity. Captain Eo, a male Magellanic penguin at the San Francisco Zoo, died in 2022 at the age of 40.

Young birds usually have a blotched pattern on their feet, which fades as they grow up into adulthood. By the time these birds reach about ten years of age, their feet usually become all black.

Like other species of penguins, the Magellanic penguin has very rigid wings used to swim under water.

== Diet ==
Magellanic penguins feed in the water, preying on small pelagic fish, hagfish, cuttlefish, squid, krill, and other crustaceans, and ingest sea water with their prey. Their salt-excreting gland rids the salt from their bodies. Adult penguins can regularly dive to depths of deep in order to forage for prey. During the breeding season males and females have similar foraging and diving patterns as well as diet composition, however bone tissue analysis suggests that diets diverge post-season when limitations imposed by chick rearing are removed.

Magellanic penguins do not experience a severe shortage of food like the Galapagos penguins, because they have a consistent food supply being located on the Atlantic coast of South America. The presence of the large continental shelf in the Atlantic Ocean lets Magellanic penguins forage far from their breeding colony.

Jellyfish including species in the genera &quot;Chrysaora&quot; and &quot;Cyanea&quot; were found to be actively sought-out food items, while they previously had been thought to be only accidentally ingested. Similar preferences were found in the Adélie penguin, yellow-eyed penguin and little penguin.

==Breeding==


Magellanic penguins travel in large groups when hunting for food. In the breeding season, these birds gather in large nesting colonies at the coasts of Argentina, southern Chile, and the Falkland Islands, which have a density of 20 nests per . The breeding season begins with the arrival of adult Magellanic penguins at the breeding colonies in September and extends into late February and March when the chicks are mature enough to leave the colonies. One of the largest of these colonies is located at Punta Tombo. Nests are built under bushes or in burrows. Two eggs are laid. Incubation lasts 39–42 days, a task which the parents share in 10- to 15-day shifts. The chicks are cared for by both parents for 29 days and are fed every two to three days. Normally, both are raised through adulthood, though occasionally only one chick is raised. A successful Magellanic is considered to be able to raise 0.7 chicks on average per breeding season.

Magellanic penguins lay eggs in warm places where the temperature remains over .
The male and female penguins take turns hatching, as they forage far away from their nests. The males return from the sea on the day the second egg is laid to take their turn incubating The second eggs are generally larger and with higher temperature than the first egg. The first one is more likely to survive, but under some conditions both chicks may be raised successfully. Male and female Magellanic penguins overlap in the at-sea areas they use whilst foraging, and show only small difference in foraging behaviours during early chick-rearing.

Magellanic penguins mate with the same partner year after year. The male reclaims his burrow from the previous year and waits to reconnect with his female partner. The females are able to recognize their mates through their call alone.

Once the breeding season is complete, Magellanic penguins migrate north for the winter, where they feed in waters offshore from Peru and Brazil.

== Conservation status ==
The species is classified as Least Concern and decreasing.

== Threats ==
Magellanic penguin populations face various pressures, including exposure to reported and unreported oil spills, changes in prey availability and climate change. Natural predation occurs by sea lions, giant petrels, and leopard seals which prey on the chicks. The warrah preyed on the penguin prior to its extinction. Its major predator, however, is the puma, which can also take adults; penguins constitute the majority of prey items in puma diet in Patagonia&#x27;s Bosques Petrificados de Jaramillo National Park and Monte León National Park.

Human interactions can also cause stress to penguin chicks. Newly hatched chicks that are visited by tourists show a stress response, with elevated levels of corticosterone in their blood. The elevated corticosterone is detrimental to the development of muscle strength, growth, and immune function.

=== Oil spills ===
Large breeding colonies are vulnerable to oil spills, which kill 20,000 adults and 22,000 juveniles every year off the coast of Argentina. Chronic pollution by unreported oil discharges made at sea by international shipping is a persistent problem, particularly in the Strait of Magellan.

In Chile, the species is also exposed to oil spills from shipping. Chilean oil spills impacting penguins include spills from the &quot;Napier&quot; (1973) the VLCC &quot;Metula&quot; (1974), the &quot;Jose Fuchs&quot; (2001) and the tanker &quot;Berge Nice&quot; (2004).
The species is also exposed to spills which occur in other countries as penguins follow their annual migratory paths. In 2008, at least 72 Magellanic penguins were oiled and killed near Montevideo, Uruguay after a spill from the oil tanker &quot;Syros&quot;. After the event, oiled penguins were also found in Brazil, along with others in weakened or malnourished condition, which prompted speculation about the Uruguayan oil spill&#x27;s impact on prey availability.

Exposure to oil can reduce penguins&#x27; immunity and make them vulnerable to fungus, bacteria and lung problems.

Zoo representatives from around the world have adopted Magellanic penguin hatchlings and bred them in captivity, which serves to build insurance populations (though these animals are unable to participate in seasonal migration events or forage for prey, unlike wild populations).

=== Climate change ===
Climate change has displaced fish populations, causing some Magellanic penguins to swim an extra further from their nests to catch fish. While the penguins are swimming an extra , their mates are sitting on a nest, unable to feed. A colony being tracked by University of Washington professor P. Dee Boersma, about south of Buenos Aires, has fallen by more than 20 percent in the past 22 years, leaving 200,000 breeding pairs. Some younger penguins are now moving their breeding colonies north to be closer to fish, but, in some cases, this is putting them on private, unprotected lands. As a result of these changes, some penguins are known to have been lost or confused. At present, 12 of 17 penguin species are experiencing rapid population declines. A recent study of professor Dee Boersma showed that an increase of rainstorms caused by climate change affecting weather patterns has had a large impact in the chicks&#x27; population. The chicks have not yet grown waterproof feathers so they are more likely to die of hypothermia when they get wet during big storms.

Increased frequency of extreme events, such as storms, drought, temperature extremes, and wildfires, associated with climate change, increases the reproductive failure in Magellanic penguins.

=== Mass mortalities ===
In 2008, over 400 penguins were found dead on Rio de Janeiro beaches. That year, 100 had also been received by the Niteroi Zoo in an oiled condition and in need of treatment.

In 2010, 550 penguins were found on Brazil&#x27;s coastline. They were believed to have starved to death. In June 2012, higher numbers were recorded, with 742 Magellanic penguins discovered in a decomposed state on the shores of Brazil. The causes of death were investigated. The birds were young and &quot;natural causes&quot; were assumed. Prior to 2010, only roughly 10 dead penguins would be expected to be found ashore in a typical year.

In early March 2022, 115 penguins were found dead in the coast next to Toltén River, southern Chile. Besides the penguins 104 white-chinned petrel, five guanay cormorant, one Chilean dolphin and one South American sea lion were found dead.

In July 2023, more than 2000 dead penguins were washed up on the shores of Uruguay. According to Uruguayan authorities, 90% of these were juveniles without fat reserves and with empty stomachs. All carcasses tested negative for avian influenza. Other dead seabirds, sea turtles and sea lions were found on the coast of the Maldonado Department.

== Conservation ==
The provincial government of Chubut is committed to the creation of a marine protected area in order to protect the penguins and other marine species near the largest Magellanic breeding colony. The creation of a marine protected area would likely improve the breeding success of the colonies as well as increase prey availability, reduce foraging distance, and increase feeding frequency.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Planetark.org, 16 February 2009
* Magellanic Penguins in Chilean Patagonia
* Video – Magellanic penguin chicks at the San Francisco Zoo
* Video – March of the Penguin Chicks at the San Francisco Zoo
* Magellanic penguins from the International Penguin Conservation website
* Penguin World: Magellanic penguin
*Penguin Pedia: Magellanic Penguins
* Pinguins.info, information about all species of penguins
* A confused Magellanic penguin strays 5000km off course</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207246" start="4" end="22" title="Magellanic penguin" label="Magellanic penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="54" end="67" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="69" end="76" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="98" end="107" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="119" end="128" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="130" end="135" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="145" end="161" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="173" end="182" title="bird migration" label="migrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="186" end="192" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="197" end="204" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43233" start="255" end="269" title="Espírito Santo" label="Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="299" end="310" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828554" start="316" end="328" title="Avian Island" label="Avian Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="332" end="342" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="344" end="353" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="359" end="370" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q902912" start="426" end="440" title="banded penguin" label="banded penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q244813" start="473" end="488" title="African penguin" label="African penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q224151" start="494" end="510" title="Humboldt penguin" label="Humboldt penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206668" start="520" end="537" title="Galápagos penguin" label="Galápagos penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="599" end="617" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="684" end="697" title="Least Concern" label="Least Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886334" start="1460" end="1477" title="San Francisco Zoo" label="San Francisco Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809317" start="1876" end="1888" title="pelagic fish" label="pelagic fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q780327" start="1890" end="1897" title="Myxine glutinosa" label="hagfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q184479" start="1899" end="1909" title="cuttlefish" label="cuttlefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="1911" end="1916" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29498" start="1918" end="1923" title="krill" label="krill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="1935" end="1945" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151026" start="1992" end="2012" title="supraorbital gland" label="salt-excreting gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206668" start="2441" end="2458" title="Galapagos penguin" label="Galapagos penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q976832" start="2737" end="2746" title="Chrysaora" label="Chrysaora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706712" start="2763" end="2769" title="Cyanea (jellyfish)" label="Cyanea"/>
<link wikidata="Q187958" start="2936" end="2950" title="Adélie penguin" label="Adélie penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206654" start="2952" end="2971" title="yellow-eyed penguin" label="yellow-eyed penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203628" start="2976" end="2990" title="little penguin" label="little penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="3160" end="3169" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="3180" end="3185" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="3195" end="3211" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278405" start="3512" end="3523" title="Punta Tombo" label="Punta Tombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="4953" end="4957" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="4962" end="4968" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="5026" end="5039" title="Least-concern species" label="Least Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="5261" end="5269" title="sea lion" label="sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q598979" start="5272" end="5284" title="giant petrel" label="giant petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186663" start="5291" end="5304" title="leopard seals" label="leopard seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q205935" start="5335" end="5341" title="warrah" label="warrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="5425" end="5429" title="Cougar" label="puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q830083" start="5539" end="5586" title="Bosques Petrificados de Jaramillo National Park" label="Bosques Petrificados de Jaramillo National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q829872" start="5591" end="5615" title="Monte León National Park" label="Monte León National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q422543" start="5776" end="5790" title="corticosterone" label="corticosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="5980" end="5989" title="oil spill" label="oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="6207" end="6225" title="Strait of Magellan" label="Strait of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849285" start="6303" end="6332" title="List of oil spills impacting penguins" label="oil spills impacting penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="6697" end="6704" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971310" start="7680" end="7694" title="P. Dee Boersma" label="P. Dee Boersma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="7711" end="7723" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="8410" end="8421" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8793" end="8804" title="Niteroi Zoo" label="Niteroi Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426113" start="9369" end="9381" title="Toltén River" label="Toltén River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746706" start="9383" end="9397" title="Zona Sur" label="southern Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q276206" start="9424" end="9444" title="white-chinned petrel" label="white-chinned petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074617" start="9451" end="9467" title="guanay cormorant" label="guanay cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q755733" start="9473" end="9488" title="Chilean dolphin" label="Chilean dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q333649" start="9497" end="9520" title="South American sea lion" label="South American sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="9767" end="9782" title="avian influenza" label="avian influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q331196" start="9862" end="9882" title="Maldonado Department" label="Maldonado Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q45007" start="9933" end="9939" title="Chubut Province" label="Chubut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="9974" end="9995" title="marine protected area" label="marine protected area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567527" wikidata="Q1645659" url="?curid=567527" title="Provisional designation in astronomy">
<text>Provisional designation in astronomy is the naming convention applied to astronomical objects immediately following their discovery. The provisional designation is usually superseded by a permanent designation once a reliable orbit has been calculated. Approximately 47% of the more than 1,100,000 known minor planets remain provisionally designated, as hundreds of thousands have been discovered in the last two decades.

== Minor planets ==
The current system of provisional designation of minor planets (asteroids, centaurs and trans-Neptunian objects) has been in place since 1925. It superseded several previous conventions, each of which was in turn rendered obsolete by the increasing numbers of minor planet discoveries. A modern or new-style provisional designation consists of the year of discovery, followed by two letters and, possibly, a suffixed number.

=== New-style provisional designation ===
For example, the provisional designation codice_1(15760 Albion) stands for the 27th body identified during 16-31 Aug 1992:
* 1992 – the first element indicates the year of discovery.
* Q – the first letter indicates the half-month of the object&#x27;s discovery within that year and ranges from codice_2 (first half of January) to codice_3 (second half of December), while the letters codice_4 and codice_5 are not used &quot;(see table below)&quot;. The first half is always the 1st through to the 15th of the month, regardless of the numbers of days in the second &quot;half&quot;. Thus, codice_6 indicates the period from Aug 16 to 31.
* B1 – the second letter and a numerical suffix indicate the order of discovery within that half-month. The first 25 discoveries of the half-month only receive a letter (A to Z) without a suffix, while the letter codice_4 is not used (to avoid potential confusions with the digit 1). Because modern techniques typically yield hundreds if not thousands of discoveries per half-month, the subscript number is appended to indicate the number of times that the letters from A to Z have cycled through. The suffix codice_8 indicates one completed cycle (1 cycle × 25 letters = 25), while codice_9 is the 2nd position in the current cycle. Thus, B1 stands for the 27th minor planet discovered in a half-month.
* The packed form of is written as .

This scheme is now also used retrospectively for pre-1925 discoveries. For these, the first digit of the year is replaced by an A. For example, A801 AA indicates the first object discovered in the first half of January 1801 (1 Ceres).

=== Further explanations ===
* During the first half-month of January 2014, the first minor planet identification was assigned the provisional designation . Then the assignment continued to the end of the cycle at , which was in turn followed by the first identification of the second cycle, . The assignment in this second cycle continued with , , ... until , and then was continued with the first item in the third cycle. With the beginning of a new half-month on 16 January 2014, the first letter changed to &quot;B&quot;, and the series started with .
* An idiosyncrasy of this system is that the second letter is listed before the number, even though the second letter is considered &quot;least-significant&quot;. This is in contrast to most of the world&#x27;s numbering systems. This idiosyncrasy is not seen, however, in the so-called packed form (packed designation).
* A packed designation has no spaces. It may also use letters to codify for the designation&#x27;s year and subscript number. It is frequently used in online and electronic documents. For example, the provisional designation is written as codice_10 in the packed form, where &quot;K07&quot; stands for the year 2007, and &quot;f8&quot; for the subscript number 418.
* 90377 Sedna, a large trans-Neptunian object, had the provisional designation , meaning it was identified in the first half of November 2003 (as indicated by the letter &quot;V&quot;), and that it was the 302nd object identified during that time, as 12 cycles of 25 letters give 300, and the letter &quot;B&quot; is the second position in the current cycle.
* Survey designations do not follow the rules for new-style provisional designations.
* For technical reasons, such as ASCII limitations, the numerical suffix is not always subscripted, but sometimes &quot;flattened out&quot;, so that can also be written as .
* A very busy half month was the second half of January 2015 (letter &quot;B&quot;), which saw a total of 14,208 new minor planet identifications . One of the last assignments in this period was and corresponds to the 14,208th position in the sequence.

=== Survey designations ===
Minor planets discovered during the Palomar–Leiden survey including three subsequent Trojan-campaigns, which altogether discovered more than 4,000 asteroids and Jupiter trojans between 1960 and 1977, have custom designations that consist of a number (order in the survey) followed by a space and one of the following identifiers:
* P-L  Palomar–Leiden survey (1960–1970)
* T-1  Palomar–Leiden Trojan survey (1971)
* T-2  Palomar–Leiden Trojan survey (1973)
* T-3  Palomar–Leiden Trojan survey (1977)

For example, the asteroid 6344 P-L is the 6344th minor planet in the original Palomar–Leiden survey, while the asteroid 4835 T-1 was discovered during the first Trojan-campaign. The majority of these bodies have since been assigned a number and many are already named.

=== Historical designations ===

The first four minor planets were discovered in the early 19th century, after which there was a lengthy gap before the discovery of the fifth. Astronomers initially had no reason to believe that there would be countless thousands of minor planets, and strove to assign a symbol to each new discovery, in the tradition of the symbols used for the major planets. For example, 1 Ceres was assigned a stylized sickle (⚳), 2 Pallas a stylized lance or spear (⚴), 3 Juno a scepter (⚵), and 4 Vesta an altar with a sacred fire (). All had various graphic forms, some of considerable complexity.

It soon became apparent, though, that continuing to assign symbols was impractical and provided no assistance when the number of known minor planets was in the dozens. Johann Franz Encke introduced a new system in the &quot;Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch&quot; (BAJ) for 1854, published in 1851, in which he used encircled numbers instead of symbols. Encke&#x27;s system began the numbering with Astrea which was given the number (1) and went through (11) Eunomia, while Ceres, Pallas, Juno and Vesta continued to be denoted by symbols, but in the following year&#x27;s BAJ, the numbering was changed so that Astraea was number (5).

The new system found popularity among astronomers, and since then, the final designation of a minor planet is a number indicating its order of discovery followed by a name. Even after the adoption of this system, though, several more minor planets received symbols, including 28 Bellona the morning star and lance of Mars&#x27;s martial sister, 35 Leukothea an ancient lighthouse and 37 Fides a Latin cross (). According to Webster&#x27;s &quot;A Dictionary of the English Language&quot;, four more minor planets were also given symbols: 16 Psyche, 17 Thetis, 26 Proserpina, and 29 Amphitrite. However, there is no evidence that these symbols were ever used outside of their initial publication in the &quot;Astronomische Nachrichten&quot;.

134340 Pluto is an exception: it is a high-numbered minor planet that received a graphical symbol with significant astronomical use (♇), because it was considered a major planet on its discovery, and did not receive a minor planet number until 2006.

Graphical symbols continue to be used for some minor planets, and assigned for some recently discovered larger ones, mostly by astrologers (see astronomical symbol and astrological symbol). Three centaurs – 2060 Chiron, 5145 Pholus, and 7066 Nessus – and the largest trans-Neptunian objects – 50000 Quaoar, 90377 Sedna, 90482 Orcus, 136108 Haumea, 136199 Eris, 136472 Makemake, and 225088 Gonggong – have relatively standard symbols among astrologers: the symbols for Haumea, Makemake, and Eris have even been occasionally used in astronomy. However, such symbols are generally not in use among astronomers.

=== Genesis of the current system ===

Several different notation and symbolic schemes were used during the latter half of the nineteenth century, but the present form first appeared in the journal &quot;Astronomische Nachrichten&quot; (AN) in 1892. New numbers were assigned by the AN on receipt of a discovery announcement, and a permanent designation was then assigned once an orbit had been calculated for the new object.

At first, the provisional designation consisted of the year of discovery followed by a letter indicating the sequence of the discovery, but omitting the letter I (historically, sometimes J was omitted instead). Under this scheme, 333 Badenia was initially designated , 163 Erigone was , etc. In 1893, though, increasing numbers of discoveries forced the revision of the system to use double letters instead, in the sequence AA, AB... AZ, BA and so on. The sequence of double letters was not restarted each year, so that followed and so on. In 1916, the letters reached ZZ and, rather than starting a series of triple-letter designations, the double-letter series was restarted with .

Because a considerable amount of time could sometimes elapse between exposing the photographic plates of an astronomical survey and actually spotting a small Solar System object on them (witness the story of Phoebe&#x27;s discovery), or even between the actual discovery and the delivery of the message (from some far-flung observatory) to the central authority, it became necessary to retrofit discoveries into the sequence — to this day, discoveries are still dated based on when the images were taken, and not on when a human realised they were looking at something new. In the double-letter scheme, this was not generally possible once designations had been assigned in a subsequent year. The scheme used to get around this problem was rather clumsy and used a designation consisting of the year and a lower-case letter in a manner similar to the old provisional-designation scheme for comets. For example, (note that there is a space between the year and the letter to distinguish this designation from the old-style comet designation 1915a, Mellish&#x27;s first comet of 1915), 1917 b. In 1914 designations of the form year plus Greek letter were used in addition.

=== Temporary minor planet designations ===

Temporary designations are custom designations given by an observer or discovering observatory prior to the assignment of a provisional designation by the MPC. These intricate designations were used prior to the Digital Age, when communication was slow or even impossible (e.g. during WWI). The listed temporary designations by observatory/observer use uppercase and lowercase letters (codice_11, codice_12), digits, numbers and years, as well Roman numerals (codice_13) and Greek letters (codice_14).

== Comets ==
The system used for comets was complex previous to 1995. Originally, the year was followed by a space and then a Roman numeral (indicating the sequence of discovery) in most cases, but difficulties always arose when an object needed to be placed between previous discoveries. For example, after Comet 1881 III and Comet 1881 IV might be reported, an object discovered in between the discovery dates but reported much later couldn&#x27;t be designated &quot;Comet 1881 III½&quot;. More commonly comets were known by the discoverer&#x27;s name and the year. An alternate scheme also listed comets in order of time of perihelion passage, using lower-case letters; thus &quot;Comet Faye&quot; (modern designation 4P/Faye) was both Comet 1881 I (first comet to pass perihelion in 1881) and Comet 1880c (third comet to be discovered in 1880).

The system since 1995 is similar to the provisional designation of minor planets. For comets, the provisional designation consists of the year of discovery, a space, &quot;one&quot; letter (unlike the minor planets with two) indicating the half-month of discovery within that year (A=first half of January, B=second half of January, etc. skipping I (to avoid confusion with the number 1 or the numeral I) and not reaching Z), and finally a number (not subscripted as with minor planets), indicating the sequence of discovery within the half-month. Thus, the eighth comet discovered in the second half of March 2006 would be given the provisional designation 2006 F8, whilst the tenth comet of late March would be 2006 F10.

If a comet splits, its segments are given the same provisional designation with a suffixed letter A, B, C, ..., Z, AA, AB, AC...

If an object is originally found asteroidal, and later develops a cometary tail, it retains its asteroidal designation. For example, minor planet 1954 PC turned out to be Comet Faye, and we thus have &quot;4P/1954 PC&quot; as one of the designations of said comet. Similarly, minor planet was reclassified as a comet, and because it was discovered by LINEAR, it is now known as 176P/LINEAR (LINEAR 52) &quot;and&quot; (118401) LINEAR.

Provisional designations for comets are given condensed or &quot;packed form&quot; in the same manner as minor planets. 2006 F8, if a periodic comet, would be listed in the IAU Minor Planet Database as PK06F080. The last character is purposely a zero, as that allows comet and minor planet designations not to overlap.

=== Periodic comets ===

Comets are assigned one of four possible prefixes as a rough classification. The prefix &quot;P&quot; (as in, for example, P/1997 C1, a.k.a. Comet Gehrels 4) designates a &quot;periodic comet&quot;, one which has an orbital period of less than 200 years or which has been observed during more than a single perihelion passage (e.g. 153P/Ikeya-Zhang, whose period is 367 years). They receive a permanent number prefix after their second observed perihelion passage &quot;(see List of periodic comets)&quot;.

=== Non-periodic comets ===
Comets which do not fulfill the &quot;periodic&quot; requirements receive the &quot;C&quot; prefix (e.g. C/2006 P1, the Great Comet of 2007). Comets initially labeled as &quot;non-periodic&quot; may, however, switch to &quot;P&quot; if they later fulfill the requirements.

Comets which have been lost or have disintegrated are prefixed &quot;D&quot; (e.g. D/1993 F2, Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9).

Finally, comets for which no reliable orbit could be calculated, but are known from historical records, are prefixed &quot;X&quot; as in, for example, X/1106 C1. &quot;(Also see List of non-periodic comets and List of hyperbolic comets.)&quot;

== Satellites and rings of planets ==

When satellites or rings are first discovered, they are given provisional designations such as &quot; (the 11th new satellite of Jupiter discovered in 2000), &quot; (the first new satellite of Pluto discovered in 2005), or &quot;&quot; (the second new ring of Saturn discovered in 2004). The initial &quot;S/&quot; or &quot;R/&quot; stands for &quot;satellite&quot; or &quot;ring&quot;, respectively, distinguishing the designation from the prefixes &quot;C/&quot;, &quot;D/&quot;, &quot;P/&quot;, and &quot;X/&quot; used for comets. These designations are sometimes written as &quot;&quot;, dropping the second space.

The prefix &quot;S/&quot; indicates a natural satellite, and is followed by a year (using the year when the discovery image was acquired, not necessarily the date of discovery). A one-letter code written in upper case identifies the planet such as J and S for Jupiter and Saturn, respectively &quot;(see list of one-letter abbreviations)&quot;, and then a number identifies sequentially the observation. For example, Naiad, the innermost moon of Neptune, was at first designated &quot;. Later, once its existence and orbit were confirmed, it received its full designation, &quot;.

The Roman numbering system arose with the very first discovery of natural satellites other than Earth&#x27;s Moon: Galileo referred to the Galilean moons as I through IV (counting from Jupiter outward), in part to spite his rival Simon Marius, who had proposed the names now adopted. Similar numbering schemes naturally arose with the discovery of moons around Saturn and Uranus. Although the numbers initially designated the moons in orbital sequence, new discoveries soon failed to conform with this scheme (e.g. &quot;&quot; is Amalthea, which orbits closer to Jupiter than does Io). The unstated convention then became, at the close of the 19th century, that the numbers more or less reflected the order of discovery, except for prior historical exceptions &quot;(see the Timeline of discovery of Solar System planets and their natural satellites)&quot;. The convention has been extended to natural satellites of minor planets, such as &quot;&quot;.

== Moons of minor planets ==

The provisional designation system for minor planet satellites, such as asteroid moons, follows that established for the satellites of the major planets. With minor planets, the planet letter code is replaced by the minor planet number in parentheses. Thus, the first observed moon of 87 Sylvia, discovered in 2001, was at first designated S/2001 (87) 1, later receiving its permanent designation of (87) Sylvia I Romulus. Where more than one moon has been discovered, Roman numerals specify the discovery sequence, so that Sylvia&#x27;s second moon is designated (87) Sylvia II Remus.

Since Pluto was reclassified in 2006, discoveries of Plutonian moons since then follow the minor-planet system: thus Nix and Hydra, discovered in 2005, were S/2005 P 2 and S/2005 P 1, but Kerberos and Styx, discovered in 2011 and 2012 respectively, were S/2011 (134340) 1 and S/2012 (134340) 1. That said, there has been some unofficial use of the formats &quot;S/2011 P 1&quot; and &quot;S/2012 P 1&quot;.

== Packed designation ==

Packed designations are used in online and electronic documents as well as databases.

=== Packed minor planet designation ===

The Orbit Database (MPCORB) of the Minor Planet Center (MPC) uses the &quot;packed form&quot; to refer to all provisionally designated minor planets. The idiosyncrasy found in the new-style provisional designations, no longer exists in this packed-notation system, as the second letter is now listed &quot;after&quot; the subscript number, or its equivalent 2-digit code. For an introduction on provisional minor planet designations in the &quot;un-packed&quot; form, see .

=== Provisional packed designations ===

The system of packed provisional minor planet designations:
* uses exactly 7 characters with no spaces for all designations
* compacts 4 digit years to a 3-character code, e.g. codice_15 is written as codice_16 &quot;(see tables below)&quot;
* converts all subscript numbers to a 2-character code (codice_17 is used when there is no following subscript, codice_18 is used for subscript 99, codice_19 is used for subscript 100, and codice_20 is used for 101)
* the packed 2 character subscript code is placed &quot;between&quot; the half-month letter and the second (discovery order) letter (e.g. has discovery order K so the last three characters for its packed form are codice_21)

Contrary to the new-style system, the letter &quot;i&quot; is used in the packed form both for the year and the numeric suffix. The compacting system provides upper and lowercase letters to encode up to 619 &quot;cycles&quot;. This means that 15,500 designations () within a half-month can be packed, which is a few times more than the designations assigned monthly in recent years.

; Examples:

# is written as codice_22
# is written as codice_23
# is written as codice_24
# is written as codice_10
; Description
# The year 1995 is compacted to codice_26. As it has no subscript number, codice_17 is used as placeholder instead, and directly placed after the half-month letter &quot;X&quot;.
# The year 1995 is compacted to codice_26. Subscript number &quot;1&quot; is padded to codice_29 to maintain the length of 7 characters, and placed after the first letter.
# The year 2016 is compacted to codice_30. The subscript number &quot;156&quot; exceeds 2 digits and is converted to codice_31, &quot;(see table below)&quot;
# The year 2007 is compacted to codice_32. The subscript number &quot;418&quot; exceeds 2 digits and is converted to codice_33, &quot;(see table below)&quot;

; Conversion tables


Comets follow the minor-planet scheme for their first four characters. The fifth and sixth characters encode the number. The seventh character is usually 0, unless it is a component of a split comet, in which case it encodes in lowercase the letter of the fragment.

; Examples:
# 1995 A1 is written as codice_34
# 1995 P1-B is written as codice_35 (i.e. fragment B of comet )
# 2088 A103 is written as codice_36 (as the subscript number exceeds two digits and is converted according to the above table).

There is also an extended form that adds five characters to the front. The fifth character is one of &quot;C&quot;, &quot;D&quot;, &quot;P&quot;, or &quot;X&quot;, according to the status of the comet. If the comet is periodic, then the first four characters are the periodic-comet number (padded to the left with zeroes); otherwise, they are blank.

Natural satellites use the format for comets, except that the last column is always 0.

=== Packed survey designations ===
Survey designations used during the Palomar–Leiden Survey (PLS) have a simpler packed form, as for example: 
* is written as codice_37
* is written as codice_38
* is written as codice_39
* is written as codice_40

Note that the survey designations are distinguished from provisional designations by having the letter codice_41 in the third character, which contains a decimal digit in provisional designations and permanent numbers.

=== Permanent packed designations ===
A packed form for permanent designations also exists (these are numbered minor planets, with or without a name). In this case, only the designation&#x27;s number is used and converted to a 5-character string. The rest of the permanent designation is ignored. Minor planet numbers below 100,000 are simply zero-padded to 5 digits from the left side. For minor planets between 100,000 and 619,999 inclusive, a single letter (A–Z and a–z) is used, similar as for the provisional subscript number &quot;(also see table above)&quot;:
* codice_2 covers the number range 100,000–109,999
* codice_9 covers the number range 110,000–119,999
* codice_44 covers the number range 360,000–369,999
* codice_45 covers the number range 610,000–619,999

; Examples:
* codice_46 encodes 1 Ceres
* codice_47 encodes 
* codice_48 encodes 100000 Astronautica, () 
* codice_49 encodes ()
* codice_50 encodes ()
* codice_51 encodes 163693 Atira ()
* codice_52 encodes 342843 Davidbowie ()
* codice_53 encodes 420356 Praamzius ()
* codice_54 encodes ()

For minor planets numbered 620,000 or higher, a tilde codice_55 is used as the first character. The subsequent 4 characters encoded in Base62 (using 0–9, then A–Z, and a–z, in this specific order) are used to store the difference of the object&#x27;s number minus 620,000. This extended system allows for the encoding of more than 15 million minor planet numbers. For example:
* is represented as codice_56 (
* is represented as codice_57 (
* (3140113) will be represented as codice_58 (
* (15396335) will be represented as codice_59 (

For comets, permanent designations only apply to periodic comets that are seen to return. The first four characters are the number of the comet (left-padded with zeroes). The fifth character is &quot;P&quot;, unless the periodic comet is lost or defunct, in which case it is &quot;D&quot;.

For natural satellites, permanent packed designations take the form of the planet letter, then three digits containing the converted Roman numeral (left-padded with zeroes), and finally an &quot;S&quot;. For example, Jupiter XIII Leda is codice_60, and Neptune II Nereid is codice_61.

== See also ==
* Minor-planet designation
* Naming of moons

== References ==



== External links ==
* New- And Old-Style Minor Planet Designations (Minor Planet Center)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1645659" start="0" end="36" title="Provisional designation in astronomy" label="Provisional designation in astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q643921" start="44" end="61" title="astronomical naming conventions" label="naming convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="73" end="92" title="astronomical object" label="astronomical object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="304" end="316" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="492" end="504" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="507" end="515" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="518" end="526" title="centaur (minor planet)" label="centaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="531" end="553" title="trans-Neptunian object" label="trans-Neptunian object"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641618" start="1131" end="1141" title="half-month" label="half-month"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2260" end="2271" title="#Packed designation" label="packed form"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="2517" end="2524" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="1 Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3371" end="3382" title="#Packed designation" label="packed form"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3409" end="3427" title="#Packed designation" label="packed designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15610" start="3773" end="3784" title="90377 Sedna" label="90377 Sedna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4132" end="4151" title="#Survey designations" label="Survey designations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="4249" end="4254" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048368" start="4708" end="4729" title="Palomar–Leiden survey" label="Palomar–Leiden survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272478" start="5199" end="5207" title="6344 P-L" label="6344 P-L"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598068" start="5293" end="5301" title="20936 Nemrut Dagi" label="4835 T-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="5491" end="5503" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5801" end="5808" title="Astronomical symbol#Symbols for dwarf planets and asteroids" label="symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="5850" end="5857" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="1 Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="5894" end="5902" title="2 Pallas" label="2 Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009" start="5934" end="5940" title="3 Juno" label="3 Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="5960" end="5967" title="4 Vesta" label="4 Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q57294" start="6233" end="6251" title="Johann Franz Encke" label="Johann Franz Encke"/>
<link wikidata="Q150114" start="6977" end="6987" title="28 Bellona" label="28 Bellona"/>
<link wikidata="Q151709" start="7046" end="7058" title="35 Leukothea" label="35 Leukothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q206982" start="7085" end="7093" title="37 Fides" label="37 Fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q107517" start="7239" end="7248" title="16 Psyche" label="16 Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q142553" start="7250" end="7259" title="17 Thetis" label="17 Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q149658" start="7261" end="7274" title="26 Proserpina" label="26 Proserpina"/>
<link wikidata="Q108343" start="7280" end="7293" title="29 Amphitrite" label="29 Amphitrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="7443" end="7455" title="134340 Pluto" label="134340 Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q645745" start="7838" end="7857" title="astronomical symbol" label="astronomical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174349" start="7862" end="7881" title="astrological symbol" label="astrological symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="7890" end="7898" title="centaur (small Solar System body)" label="centaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15611" start="7901" end="7912" title="2060 Chiron" label="2060 Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q155042" start="7914" end="7925" title="5145 Pholus" label="5145 Pholus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156664" start="7931" end="7942" title="7066 Nessus" label="7066 Nessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15586" start="7987" end="7999" title="50000 Quaoar" label="50000 Quaoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15610" start="8001" end="8012" title="90377 Sedna" label="90377 Sedna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15603" start="8014" end="8025" title="90482 Orcus" label="90482 Orcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q601" start="8027" end="8040" title="136108 Haumea" label="136108 Haumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q611" start="8042" end="8053" title="136199 Eris" label="136199 Eris"/>
<link wikidata="Q604" start="8055" end="8070" title="136472 Makemake" label="136472 Makemake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587" start="8076" end="8091" title="225088 Gonggong" label="225088 Gonggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q697945" start="8507" end="8532" title="Astronomische Nachrichten" label="Astronomische Nachrichten"/>
<link wikidata="Q817125" start="8635" end="8656" title="Minor planet designation" label="permanent designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151327" start="8960" end="8971" title="333 Badenia" label="333 Badenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110027" start="8999" end="9010" title="163 Erigone" label="163 Erigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q157320" start="9299" end="9301" title="830 Petropolitana" label="ZZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q17975" start="9623" end="9629" title="Phoebe (moon)" label="Phoebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648285" start="10455" end="10460" title="C/1915 C1" label="1915a"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809237" start="10462" end="10476" title="John E. Mellish" label="Mellish&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q112385" start="10499" end="10505" title="886 Washingtonia" label="1917 b"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="10844" end="10855" title="Digital Age" label="Digital Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="11076" end="11090" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="11107" end="11120" title="Greek letters" label="Greek letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="11168" end="11173" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="11763" end="11773" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422981" start="11857" end="11864" title="4P/Faye" label="4P/Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422981" start="11875" end="11887" title="Comet 1881 I" label="Comet 1881 I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422981" start="11933" end="11944" title="Comet 1880c" label="Comet 1880c"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641618" start="12226" end="12236" title="half-month" label="half-month"/>
<link wikidata="Q735603" start="13191" end="13197" title="LINEAR" label="LINEAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272752" start="13218" end="13229" title="176P/LINEAR" label="176P/LINEAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272752" start="13258" end="13273" title="(118401) LINEAR" label="(118401) LINEAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717865" start="13744" end="13753" title="P/1997 C1" label="P/1997 C1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353961" start="13953" end="13969" title="153P/Ikeya-Zhang" label="153P/Ikeya-Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q28872341" start="14096" end="14119" title="List of periodic comets" label="List of periodic comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705" start="14262" end="14271" title="C/2006 P1" label="C/2006 P1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076" start="14514" end="14523" title="D/1993 F2" label="D/1993 F2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548760" start="14702" end="14711" title="X/1106 C1" label="X/1106 C1"/>
<link wikidata="Q123542205" start="14729" end="14756" title="List of non-periodic comets" label="List of non-periodic comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q123541602" start="14761" end="14786" title="List of hyperbolic comets" label="List of hyperbolic comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q28951811" start="14854" end="14859" title="planetary ring" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="14964" end="14971" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="15028" end="15033" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="15095" end="15101" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15361" end="15366" title="#Comets" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15759" end="15791" title="Astronomical naming conventions#Natural satellites" label="list of one-letter abbreviations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062" start="15872" end="15877" title="Naiad (moon)" label="Naiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q835598" start="16041" end="16063" title="Roman numeral designation" label="Roman numbering system"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="16152" end="16159" title="Galileo" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203" start="16176" end="16190" title="Galilean moons" label="Galilean moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q76684" start="16267" end="16279" title="Simon Marius" label="Simon Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257" start="16568" end="16576" title="Amalthea (moon)" label="Amalthea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="16619" end="16621" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q37642" start="16813" end="16887" title="Timeline of discovery of Solar System planets and their natural satellites" label="Timeline of discovery of Solar System planets and their natural satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q657829" start="17094" end="17107" title="asteroid moon" label="asteroid moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107673" start="17307" end="17316" title="87 Sylvia" label="87 Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102694" start="17726" end="17729" title="Nix (moon)" label="Nix"/>
<link wikidata="Q102701" start="17734" end="17739" title="Hydra (moon)" label="Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q105636" start="17797" end="17805" title="Kerberos (moon)" label="Kerberos"/>
<link wikidata="Q105713" start="17810" end="17814" title="Styx (moon)" label="Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="18206" end="18225" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21555" end="21574" title="#Survey designations" label="Survey designations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048368" start="21591" end="21612" title="Palomar–Leiden Survey" label="Palomar–Leiden Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q817125" start="22045" end="22067" title="Minor planet designation" label="permanent designations"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="22795" end="22802" title="1 Ceres" label="1 Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q922315" start="22844" end="22863" title="100000 Astronautica" label="100000 Astronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q141774" start="22935" end="22947" title="163693 Atira" label="163693 Atira"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094177" start="22971" end="22988" title="342843 Davidbowie" label="342843 Davidbowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032902" start="23012" end="23028" title="420356 Praamzius" label="420356 Praamzius"/>
<link wikidata="Q809817" start="23191" end="23197" title="Base62" label="Base62"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837" start="24114" end="24118" title="Leda (moon)" label="Leda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16076" start="24148" end="24154" title="Nereid (moon)" label="Nereid"/>
<link wikidata="Q817125" start="24187" end="24211" title="Minor-planet designation" label="Minor-planet designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q835598" start="24214" end="24229" title="Naming of moons" label="Naming of moons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567547" wikidata="Q469996" url="?curid=567547" title="József Eötvös">
<text>József baron Eötvös de [[Vásárosnamény]] (pronunciation: [&#x27;jɔ:ʒef &#x27;øtvøʃ dɛ &#x27;va:ʃa:rɔʃnɒme:ɲ]; 3 September 1813 – 2 February 1871) was a Hungarian writer and statesman, the son of Ignác baron Eötvös de Vásárosnamény and Anna von Lilien, who stemmed from an Erbsälzer family of Werl in Germany. Eötvös name is sometimes anglicised as Joseph von Eotvos.

==Biography==
The Baron József Eötvös de Vásárosnamény was born in the Hungarian aristocratic family Eötvös de Vásárosnamény. His father was the Baron Ignác Eötvös de Vásárosnamény (1786–1851), lord of the bedchamber, vice-chancellor of the Kingdom of Hungary, and his mother was the Baroness Anne von der Lilien (1786–1858).

He received an excellent education and also spent many years in western Europe, assimilating the new ideas both literary and political, and making the acquaintance of the leaders of the Romantic school. On his return to Hungary he wrote his first political work, &quot;Prison Reform&quot;; and at the diet of 1839–1840 he made a great impression by his eloquence and learning. One of his first speeches (published, with additional matter, in 1841) warmly advocated Jewish emancipation. On 13 September 1842 he married the noble lady Ágnes Rosty de Barkóc (1825–1913), member of the illustrious noble family Rosty de Barkóc that originally hailed from the Vas county, daughter of Albert Rosty de Barkóc (1779–1847), jurist, landowner, vice-ispán of the county of Békés (&quot;alispán of Békés&quot;). Baron Eötvös&#x27; brother in law was Pál Rosty de Barkócz (1830–1874), a Hungarian nobleman, photographer, explorer, who visited Texas, New Mexico, Mexico, Cuba and Venezuela between 1857 and 1859. His other brother-in-law through his wife was Dr. Ágoston Trefort (1817–1888) was a Hungarian politician, who served as Minister of Religion and Education, as he married the other Rosty sister, Ilona Rosty de Barkóc (1826–1870).

Eötvös disseminated his progressive ideas in the columns of the &quot;Pesti Hírlap&quot;, as well as in his novels &quot;The Village Notary&quot; (1844–1846) – one of the classics of Hungarian literature – &quot;Hungary in 1514&quot;, and the comedy &quot;Long live Equality!&quot;. The February Hungarian Revolution of 1848 was the complete triumph of Eötvös&#x27;s ideas, and he held the portfolio of public worship and instruction in the first Hungarian ministry. Eötvös, Ferenc Deák and István Széchenyi represented the pacific, moderating influence in the council of ministers, but when the premier, Lajos Batthyány, resigned, Eötvös retired for a time to Munich during the War of Independence. Yet he continued to serve the cause in his influential writings, for example &quot;Influence of the Ruling Ideas of the 19th century on the State&quot; (Pest, 1851–1854, German editions at Vienna and Leipzig the same year).

On his return home, in 1851, he abstained from all political movements. In 1859 he published &quot;The Guarantees of the Power and Unity of Austria&quot; (the German edition was published in Leipzig the same year), in which he tried to arrive at a compromise between personal union and ministerial responsibility on the one hand and centralization on the other. After the Italian war, however, such a position was regarded as inadequate by the majority of the nation. In the diets of 1861, 1865, and 1867 Eötvös was one of the most loyal followers of Deák, with whose policy he now completely associated himself. On the formation of the Andrássy cabinet in February 1867 he once more accepted the portfolio of public worship and education, being the only one of the ministers of 1848 who thus returned to office. He had now, at last, the opportunity of realizing the ideals of a lifetime. That very year the diet passed his bill for the emancipation of the Jews; though his further efforts in the direction of religious liberty were less successful, owing to the opposition of the Catholics. Perhaps his greatest achievement was the National Schools Act, the most complete system of education provided for Hungary since the days of Maria Theresa. In 1866, he was elected president of the Hungarian academy. He died at Pest on 2 February 1871. On 3 May 1879 a statue was erected to him at Pest in the square which bears his name.

Eötvös occupies a prominent place in Hungarian literature. The best of his verses are to be found in his ballads, but he is better known for his novels. When he published &quot;The Carthusians&quot;, written on the occasion of the floods at Pest in 1838, the Hungarian novel was still in its infancy, being chiefly represented by the historico-epics of Miklós Jósika. Eötvös first modernized it, giving prominence in his pages to current social problems and political aspirations. The famous &quot;Village Notary&quot; came still nearer to actual life, while &quot;Hungary in 1514&quot; is especially interesting because it attributes the great national catastrophe of the Battle of Mohács to the blind selfishness of the Hungarian nobility and the intense sufferings of the people under them. The best edition of Eötvös collected works is that of 1891, in 17 volumes. Comparatively few of his writings have been translated, but there is a good English version (London, 1850) and numerous German versions of &quot;The Village Notary&quot;, while &quot;The Emancipation of the Jews&quot; has been translated into Italian and German (Pest, 1841– 1842), and a German translation of &quot;Hungary in 1514&quot;, under the title of &quot;Der Bauernkrieg in Ungarn&quot; was published at Pest in 1850.

==Family==
* Loránd Eötvös
* Actor and playwright Leo Ditrichstein was his grandson. Eotvos&#x27;s name is sometimes spelled Joseph von Etooes.

== References ==

Attribution:
* ; Endnotes:
** A. Ban, &quot;Life and Art of Baron Joseph Eotvos&quot; (Hung.) (Budapest, 1902);
** Zoltan Ferenczi &quot;Baron Joseph Eotvos (Hung.) (Budapest, 1903), the best biography
** M. Berkovics, &quot;Baron Joseph Eotvos and the French Literature&quot; (Hung.) (Budapest, 1904)

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q469996" start="0" end="40" title="József Eötvös" label="József baron Eötvös de [[Vásárosnamény]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="152" end="161" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q469996" start="348" end="365" title="József Eötvös" label="Joseph von Eotvos"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="386" end="391" title="Baron" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q927915" start="439" end="461" title="Hungarian nobility" label="Hungarian aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="469" end="492" title="Eötvös de Vásárosnamény" label="Eötvös de Vásárosnamény"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="609" end="627" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="881" end="889" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282872" start="996" end="1000" title="diet (assembly)" label="diet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1302" end="1317" title="Rosty de Barkóc" label="Rosty de Barkóc"/>
<link wikidata="Q305116" start="1350" end="1360" title="Vas County (former)" label="Vas county"/>
<link wikidata="Q17393320" start="1429" end="1439" title="Ispán" label="vice-ispán"/>
<link wikidata="Q639617" start="1447" end="1462" title="Békés County (former)" label="county of Békés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251123" start="1533" end="1553" title="Pál Rosty de Barkócz" label="Pál Rosty de Barkócz"/>
<link wikidata="Q927915" start="1569" end="1587" title="Hungarian nobility" label="Hungarian nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="1603" end="1611" title="Exploration" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1625" end="1630" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="1632" end="1642" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="1652" end="1656" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="1661" end="1670" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q559099" start="1744" end="1759" title="Ágoston Trefort" label="Ágoston Trefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018482" start="1814" end="1848" title="Minister of Education" label="Minister of Religion and Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="2107" end="2116" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="2220" end="2248" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q508823" start="2399" end="2410" title="Ferenc Deák (politician)" label="Ferenc Deák"/>
<link wikidata="Q279397" start="2415" end="2431" title="István Széchenyi" label="István Széchenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q702016" start="2529" end="2544" title="Lajos Batthyány" label="Lajos Batthyány"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="2585" end="2591" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142793" start="2891" end="2919" title="Passive Resistance (Hungary)" label="from all political movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q313557" start="3486" end="3494" title="Julius Andrássy" label="Andrássy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210205" start="4167" end="4171" title="Pest (city)" label="Pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="4384" end="4390" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q634047" start="4632" end="4645" title="Miklós Jósika" label="Miklós Jósika"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="4952" end="4968" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q323260" start="5589" end="5602" title="Loránd Eötvös" label="Loránd Eötvös"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523671" start="5626" end="5642" title="Leo Ditrichstein" label="Leo Ditrichstein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567548" wikidata="Q7092316" url="?curid=567548" title="One-key MAC">
<text>One-key MAC (OMAC) is a family of message authentication codes constructed from a block cipher much like the CBC-MAC algorithm. It may be used to provide assurance of the authenticity and, hence, the integrity of data. Two versions are defined:
* The original OMAC of February 2003, which is seldom used. The preferred name is now &quot;OMAC2&quot;.
* The OMAC1 refinement, which became an NIST recommendation in May 2005 under the name CMAC.

OMAC is free for all uses: it is not covered by any patents.

== History ==

The core of the CMAC algorithm is a variation of CBC-MAC that Black and Rogaway proposed and analyzed under the name &quot;XCBC&quot; and submitted to NIST. The XCBC algorithm efficiently addresses the security deficiencies of CBC-MAC, but requires three keys.

Iwata and Kurosawa proposed an improvement of XCBC that requires less key material (just one key) and named the resulting algorithm &quot;One-Key CBC-MAC&quot; (OMAC) in their papers. They later submitted the OMAC1 (= CMAC), a refinement of OMAC, and additional security analysis.

== Algorithm ==
To generate an ℓ-bit CMAC tag (&quot;t&quot;) of a message (&quot;m&quot;) using a &quot;b&quot;-bit block cipher (&quot;E&quot;) and a secret key (&quot;k&quot;), one first generates two &quot;b&quot;-bit sub-keys (&quot;k&quot;1 and &quot;k&quot;2) using the following algorithm (this is equivalent to multiplication by &quot;x&quot; and &quot;x&quot;2 in a finite field GF(2&quot;b&quot;)). Let ≪ denote the standard left-shift operator and ⊕ denote bit-wise exclusive or:

# Calculate a temporary value &quot;k&quot;0 = &quot;Ek&quot;(0).
# If msb(&quot;k&quot;0) = 0, then &quot;k&quot;1 = &quot;k&quot;0 ≪ 1, else &quot;k&quot;1 = (&quot;k&quot;0 ≪ 1) ⊕ &quot;C&quot;; where &quot;C&quot; is a certain constant that depends only on &quot;b&quot;. (Specifically, &quot;C&quot; is the non-leading coefficients of the lexicographically first irreducible degree-&quot;b&quot; binary polynomial with the minimal number of ones: 0x1B for 64-bit, 0x87 for 128-bit, and 0x425 for 256-bit blocks.)
# If , then , else .
# Return keys (&quot;k&quot;1, &quot;k&quot;2) for the MAC generation process.

As a small example, suppose , , and . Then and .

The CMAC tag generation process is as follows:
# Divide message into &quot;b&quot;-bit blocks , where &quot;m&quot;1, ..., &quot;m&quot;&quot;n&quot;−1 are complete blocks. (The empty message is treated as one incomplete block.)
# If &quot;mn&quot; is a complete block then else .
# Let .
# For , calculate .
# Output .

The verification process is as follows:
# Use the above algorithm to generate the tag.
# Check that the generated tag is equal to the received tag.

== Variants ==
CMAC-C1 is a variant of CMAC that provides additional commitment and context-discovery security guarantees.

==Implementations==
* Python implementation: see the usage of the codice_1 function in &quot;impacket/blob/master/tests/misc/test_crypto.py&quot;, and its definition in &quot;impacket/blob/master/impacket/crypto.py&quot;
* Ruby implementation

==References==
==External links==
* The AES-CMAC Algorithm
* The AES-CMAC-96 Algorithm and Its Use with IPsec
* The Advanced Encryption Standard-Cipher-based Message Authentication Code-Pseudo-Random Function-128 (AES-CMAC-PRF-128)
* OMAC Online Test
* More information on OMAC
* Rust implementation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7092316" start="0" end="11" title="One-key MAC" label="One-key MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092316" start="13" end="17" title="One-key MAC" label="OMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="34" end="61" title="message authentication code" label="message authentication code"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="82" end="94" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736227" start="109" end="116" title="CBC-MAC" label="CBC-MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="390" end="394" title="NIST" label="NIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092316" start="437" end="441" title="One-key MAC" label="CMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736227" start="570" end="577" title="CBC-MAC" label="CBC-MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727531" start="583" end="588" title="John Black (cryptographer)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185796" start="593" end="600" title="Phillip Rogaway" label="Rogaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="672" end="676" title="NIST" label="NIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q603880" start="1441" end="1453" title="finite field" label="finite field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1543" end="1555" title="Exclusive or#Computer science" label="exclusive or"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2766" end="2807" title="Message authentication code#Security" label="commitment and context-discovery security"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="2843" end="2849" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="3044" end="3048" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567551" wikidata="Q297276" url="?curid=567551" title="Lilith (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Lilith]] is a character in Jewish mythology.

Lilith, Lillith, or Lilit may also refer to:
== Fictional characters==
===In anime===
* Lilith (&quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot;), an angel character
* Lilith, a small fairy in the &quot;Rosario + Vampire&quot; manga and anime series
* Lilith Aensland, a character in &quot;Darkstalkers&quot;
* Lilith Aileron, in &quot;Tales of Destiny&quot; 
* Lilith Asami, in &quot;Trinity Seven&quot;

===In film and television===
* Lilith (&quot;Supernatural&quot;), a fictional demon in &quot;Supernatural&quot;
* Lilith, a villain in the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; episode &quot;The Shakespeare Code&quot;
* Lilith, a character in &quot;Tales from the Crypt Presents: Bordello of Blood&quot;
* Lilith, the host of the TV series &quot;Femme Fatales&quot;
* Lilith, the vampire Goddess in season five of &quot;True Blood&quot;
* Lilith, a demon referred to as the mother of all demons who is the main villain in season 3 of &quot;Shadowhunters&quot;
* Lilith, also known as Madam Satan, in &quot;Chilling Adventures of Sabrina&quot; (2018–2020)
* Lilith, a demon in episode 4 of season 5 of &quot;Lucifer&quot;
* Lilith Clawthorne, a character from the animated fantasy series &quot;The Owl House&quot;
* Lilith Hughes, mother of Cassie Hughes in the Sky One series &quot;Hex&quot;
* Lilith Sternin, on &quot;Cheers&quot; and &quot;Frasier&quot;
* Lillith Sullivan, main character in the film &quot;Case 39&quot;

===In games===
* Lilith (&quot;World of Darkness&quot;), mother of all demons in the &quot;World of Darkness&quot; series of games
* Lilith (&quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;), a consort she-devil in &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;
* Lilith, aka Lil, the protagonist of &quot;Lil&#x27; Guardsman&quot;
* Lilith, a succubus in &quot;Darkstalkers&quot;
* Lilith, a Siren in the &quot;Borderlands series&quot;
* Lilith, a character in &quot;Darksiders II&quot;
* Lilith, a character in &quot;Devil May Cry&quot;
* Lilith, a character in &quot;The Secret World&quot;
* Lilith, the &quot;Mother of Monsters,&quot; a playable master in &quot;Malifaux&quot;
* Lilith, a character in &quot;The Binding of Isaac: Afterbirth&quot;
* Lilith, a character from &quot;Fire Emblem Fates&quot;
* Lilith, antagonist of Amazing Princess Sarah
* Lilith, antagonist of &quot;Diablo IV&quot;

===In literature===
* Lilith (Marvel Comics), two characters in the Marvel Comics universe
* Lilith (DC Comics), a supervillain in the DC Comics universe
* Lilith, a demon in the &quot;City of Fallen Angels&quot;
* Lilith, the title character in the &quot;Lilith&#x27;s Brood&quot; science-fiction trilogy by Octavia E. Butler
* Lilith, a villain in the &quot;Nightside&quot; series by S. Green
* Lilith, a character in the play &quot;She Kills Monsters&quot; by Qui Nguyen
* Lilith, a character in &quot;Sinfest&quot;
* Lilith, a character in &quot;Trinity Blood&quot;
* Lilith, a character in &quot;Yami to Bōshi to Hon no Tabibito&quot;
* Lilith Clay, a superheroine in the DC Comics universe
* Lilith Clay, also known as Judy, from the &quot;Girl Genius&quot; comic/webcomic
* Dr. Lilith Ritter, a character in &quot;Nightmare Alley&quot;
* Lilith Weatherwax, a character in &quot;Witches Abroad&quot;

==Music==
* &quot;Lilith&quot; (album), a 2017 album by Butcher Babies
* &quot;Lilith&quot; (opera), a 2001 opera by Deborah Drattell
* &quot;Lilith&quot;, a song by Chelsea Grin from &quot;Evolve&quot;
* &quot;Lilith&quot;, a song by Halsey from &quot;If I Can&#x27;t Have Love, I Want Power&quot;
* &quot;Lilith&quot;, a song by Therion from &quot;Les Fleurs du Mal&quot;
* &quot;Lilith/Eve&quot;, a song by Machines of Loving Grace from &quot;Concentration&quot;
* Lilith, a dark ambient music project of Scott Gibbons
* &quot;Lilith&quot;, a song by Varien

==People with the given name==

*Lilith (given name), the given name, including a list of people with this name
* Lilit Hovhannisyan (born 1987), Armenian pop singer
* Lilit Mkrtchian (born 1982), Armenian chess player
* Lilit Pipoyan (born 1955), Armenian musician

==Publications==
* &quot;Lilith&quot; (magazine), a Jewish feminist magazine
* &quot;Lilith&quot; (novel), an 1895 gothic novel by George MacDonald

==Other uses==
*1181 Lilith, an asteroid
*Lilith (computer), a computer designed in the late 1970s by Niklaus Wirth at ETH Zürich
* &quot;Lilith&quot; (film), a 1964 film set in an asylum based on a novel by the same name by J. R. Salamanca
*Lilith (fictitious moon), an invisible moon from astrology
* Lilith (Lurianic Kabbalah), characters called Lilith in the teachings of 16th century rabbi Isaac Luria
*&quot;Lilith&quot; (painting), an 1889 painting by John Collier
*&quot;Lilith&quot; (play), an acclaimed 1919 play by George Sterling

==See also==
* &quot;Lady Lilith&quot;, a painting by Dante Rossetti
* Lilith in popular culture
* Lilith Fair, an annual concert tour from 1997 to 1999
* &quot;The Lilith Project&quot;, by David deFeis from the heavy metal band Virgin Steele</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q297276" start="0" end="10" title="Lilith (disambiguation)" label="[[Lilith]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q297276" start="48" end="54" title="Lilith (disambiguation)" label="Lilith"/>
<link wikidata="Q297276" start="56" end="63" title="Lilith (disambiguation)" label="Lillith"/>
<link wikidata="Q297276" start="68" end="73" title="Lilith (disambiguation)" label="Lilit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331128" start="136" end="180" title="Lilith (Neon Genesis Evangelion)" label="Lilith (&amp;quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="232" end="284" title="List of Rosario + Vampire characters#Supporting characters" label="&amp;quot;Rosario + Vampire&amp;quot; manga and anime series"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354865" start="306" end="343" title="Lilith (Darkstalkers)" label="character in &amp;quot;Darkstalkers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q336100" start="371" end="387" title="Tales of Destiny" label="Tales of Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q11321983" start="420" end="433" title="Trinity Seven" label="Trinity Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240861" start="472" end="505" title="Lilith (Supernatural)" label="Lilith (&amp;quot;Supernatural&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089582" start="617" end="637" title="The Shakespeare Code" label="The Shakespeare Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q893399" start="675" end="723" title="Bordello of Blood" label="Tales from the Crypt Presents: Bordello of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742367" start="772" end="785" title="Femme Fatales (TV series)" label="Femme Fatales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705697" start="825" end="862" title="True Blood season 5" label="season five of &amp;quot;True Blood&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756164" start="966" end="979" title="Shadowhunters" label="Shadowhunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q50809037" start="1026" end="1068" title="Chilling Adventures of Sabrina (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Chilling Adventures of Sabrina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1133" end="1140" title="Lucifer (TV series)" label="Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102069479" start="1149" end="1166" title="Lilith Clawthorne" label="Lilith Clawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008581" start="1308" end="1311" title="Hex (TV series)" label="Hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204902" start="1320" end="1334" title="Lilith Sternin" label="Lilith Sternin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164919" start="1435" end="1442" title="Case 39" label="Case 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q650924" start="1467" end="1505" title="Lilith (World of Darkness)" label="Lilith (&amp;quot;World of Darkness&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054383" start="1583" end="1626" title="Lilith (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="Lilith (&amp;quot;Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255978" start="1730" end="1749" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Guardsman" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Guardsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633506" start="1786" end="1798" title="Darkstalkers" label="Darkstalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820462" start="1830" end="1860" title="Borderlands (series)" label="&amp;quot;Borderlands series&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166314" start="1892" end="1905" title="Darksiders II" label="Darksiders II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1924" end="1962" title="Characters of Devil May Cry#Lilith" label="character in &amp;quot;Devil May Cry&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270292" start="1994" end="2010" title="The Secret World" label="The Secret World"/>
<link wikidata="Q8579944" start="2090" end="2098" title="Malifaux" label="Malifaux"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2136" end="2168" title="The Binding of Isaac: Afterbirth" label="The Binding of Isaac: Afterbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762399" start="2208" end="2225" title="Fire Emblem Fates" label="Fire Emblem Fates"/>
<link wikidata="Q20031728" start="2256" end="2278" title="Amazing Princess Sarah" label="Amazing Princess Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q73154387" start="2309" end="2318" title="Diablo IV" label="Diablo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240860" start="2348" end="2370" title="Lilith (Marvel Comics)" label="Lilith (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568337" start="2419" end="2437" title="Lilith (DC Comics)" label="Lilith (DC Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055621" start="2511" end="2532" title="City of Fallen Angels" label="City of Fallen Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547847" start="2582" end="2601" title="Lilith&amp;#x27;s Brood" label="Lilith&amp;#x27;s Brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635776" start="2686" end="2695" title="Nightside (book series)" label="Nightside"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688143" start="2761" end="2779" title="She Kills Monsters" label="She Kills Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q597010" start="2831" end="2838" title="Sinfest" label="Sinfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q128338" start="2876" end="2889" title="Trinity Blood" label="Trinity Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234084" start="2927" end="2959" title="Yami to Bōshi to Hon no Tabibito" label="Yami to Bōshi to Hon no Tabibito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631446" start="2968" end="2979" title="Lilith Clay" label="Lilith Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639409" start="3072" end="3083" title="Girl Genius" label="Girl Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033898" start="3147" end="3162" title="Nightmare Alley (novel)" label="Nightmare Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994566" start="3211" end="3225" title="Witches Abroad" label="Witches Abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616867" start="3245" end="3271" title="Lilith (album)" label="&amp;quot;Lilith&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547856" start="3306" end="3332" title="Lilith (opera)" label="&amp;quot;Lilith&amp;quot; (opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418729" start="3423" end="3429" title="Evolve (EP)" label="Evolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q107451200" start="3486" end="3525" title="If I Can&amp;#x27;t Have Love, I Want Power" label="If I Can&amp;#x27;t Have Love, I Want Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940337" start="3583" end="3600" title="Les Fleurs du Mal (Therion album)" label="Les Fleurs du Mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158317" start="3679" end="3692" title="Concentration (album)" label="Concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436403" start="3741" end="3754" title="Scott Gibbons" label="Scott Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821111" start="3787" end="3793" title="Varien discography" label="Varien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756762" start="3828" end="3847" title="Lilith (given name)" label="Lilith (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554744" start="3909" end="3927" title="Lilit Hovhannisyan" label="Lilit Hovhannisyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q468769" start="3963" end="3978" title="Lilit Mkrtchian" label="Lilit Mkrtchian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167976" start="4016" end="4029" title="Lilit Pipoyan" label="Lilit Pipoyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547855" start="4081" end="4110" title="Lilith (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Lilith&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832392" start="4141" end="4167" title="Lilith (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Lilith&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q136830" start="4227" end="4238" title="1181 Lilith" label="1181 Lilith"/>
<link wikidata="Q278299" start="4253" end="4270" title="Lilith (computer)" label="Lilith (computer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604524" start="4343" end="4368" title="Lilith (film)" label="&amp;quot;Lilith&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q367831" start="4453" end="4477" title="Lilith (fictitious moon)" label="Lilith (fictitious moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547851" start="4514" end="4540" title="Lilith (Lurianic Kabbalah)" label="Lilith (Lurianic Kabbalah)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39926338" start="4619" end="4648" title="Lilith (painting)" label="&amp;quot;Lilith&amp;quot; (painting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124314428" start="4684" end="4709" title="Lilith (play)" label="&amp;quot;Lilith&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470337" start="4775" end="4786" title="Lady Lilith" label="Lady Lilith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547861" start="4825" end="4850" title="Lilith in popular culture" label="Lilith in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770211" start="4853" end="4864" title="Lilith Fair" label="Lilith Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544403" start="4983" end="4996" title="Virgin Steele" label="Virgin Steele"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567555" wikidata="Q1754022" url="?curid=567555" title="Tree-adjoining grammar">
<text>Tree-adjoining grammar (TAG) is a grammar formalism defined by Aravind Joshi. Tree-adjoining grammars are somewhat similar to context-free grammars, but the elementary unit of rewriting is the tree rather than the symbol. Whereas context-free grammars have rules for rewriting symbols as strings of other symbols, tree-adjoining grammars have rules for rewriting the nodes of trees as other trees (see tree (graph theory) and tree (data structure)).

==History==
TAG originated in investigations by Joshi and his students into the family of adjunction grammars (AG), 
the &quot;string grammar&quot; of Zellig Harris. AGs handle exocentric properties of language in a natural and effective way, but do not have a good characterization of endocentric constructions; the converse is true of rewrite grammars, or phrase-structure grammar (PSG). In 1969, Joshi introduced a family of grammars that exploits this complementarity by mixing the two types of rules. A few very simple rewrite rules suffice to generate the vocabulary of strings for adjunction rules. This family is distinct from the Chomsky-Schützenberger hierarchy but intersects it in interesting and linguistically relevant ways. The center strings and adjunct strings can also be generated by a dependency grammar, avoiding the limitations of rewrite systems entirely.
==Description==
The rules in a TAG are trees with a special leaf node known as the &quot;foot node&quot;, which is anchored to a word. 
There are two types of basic trees in TAG: &quot;initial&quot; trees (often represented as &#x27;formula_1&#x27;) and &quot;auxiliary&quot; trees (&#x27;formula_2&#x27;). Initial trees represent basic valency relations, while auxiliary trees allow for recursion.
Auxiliary trees have the root (top) node and foot node labeled with the same symbol.
A derivation starts with an initial tree, combining via either &quot;substitution&quot; or &quot;adjunction&quot;. Substitution replaces a frontier node with another tree whose top node has the same label. The root/foot label of the auxiliary tree must match the label of the node at which it adjoins. Adjunction can thus have the effect of inserting an auxiliary tree into the center of another tree.

Other variants of TAG allow multi-component trees, trees with multiple foot nodes, and other extensions.

==Complexity and application==

Tree-adjoining grammars are more powerful (in terms of weak generative capacity) than context-free grammars, but less powerful than linear context-free rewriting systems, indexed or context-sensitive grammars.

A TAG can describe the language of squares (in which some arbitrary string is repeated), and the language formula_3. This type of processing can be represented by an embedded pushdown automaton.
Languages with cubes (i.e. triplicated strings) or with more than four distinct character strings of equal length cannot be generated by tree-adjoining grammars.

For these reasons, tree-adjoining grammars are often described as mildly context-sensitive.
These grammar classes are conjectured to be powerful enough to model natural languages while remaining efficiently parsable in the general case.

===Equivalences===

Vijay-Shanker and Weir (1994) demonstrate that linear indexed grammars, combinatory categorial grammar, tree-adjoining grammars, and head grammars are weakly equivalent formalisms, in that they all define the same string languages.

==Lexicalized ==
Lexicalized tree-adjoining grammars (LTAG) are a variant of TAG in which each elementary tree (initial or auxiliary) is associated with a lexical item. A lexicalized grammar for English has been developed by the XTAG Research Group of the Institute for Research in Cognitive Science at the University of Pennsylvania.

==See also==
* String grammar

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*The XTAG project, which uses a TAG for natural language processing.
*A tutorial on TAG
*SemConst Documentation A quick survey on Syntax and Semantic Interface problematic within the TAG framework.
*The TuLiPa project The Tübingen Linguistic Parsing Architecture (TuLiPA) is a multi-formalism syntactic (and semantic) parsing environment, designed mainly for multi-component tree adjoining grammars with tree tuples
*The Metagrammar Toolkit which provides several tools to edit and compile MetaGrammars into TAGs. It also include a wide coverage French Metagrammars.
*LLP2 A lexicalized tree adjoining grammar parser which provides an easy to use graphical environment (page in French)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1754022" start="0" end="22" title="Tree-adjoining grammar" label="Tree-adjoining grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754022" start="24" end="27" title="Tree-adjoining grammar" label="TAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="34" end="51" title="grammar formalism" label="grammar formalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q92965" start="63" end="76" title="Aravind Joshi" label="Aravind Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="126" end="146" title="context-free grammar" label="context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q272735" start="402" end="421" title="tree (graph theory)" label="tree (graph theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="426" end="447" title="tree (data structure)" label="tree (data structure)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189047" start="602" end="615" title="Zellig Harris" label="Zellig Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q123134063" start="628" end="638" title="exocentric" label="exocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q123134063" start="737" end="748" title="endocentric" label="endocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668499" start="788" end="804" title="rewrite rule" label="rewrite grammars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134367" start="809" end="833" title="phrase-structure grammar" label="phrase-structure grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190913" start="1090" end="1122" title="Chomsky hierarchy" label="Chomsky-Schützenberger hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q674834" start="1256" end="1274" title="dependency grammar" label="dependency grammar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2245" end="2266" title="multi-component tree adjoining grammars" label="multi-component trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977945" start="2410" end="2434" title="weak generative capacity" label="weak generative capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="2441" end="2461" title="context-free grammar" label="context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532466" start="2487" end="2523" title="linear context-free rewriting system" label="linear context-free rewriting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590011" start="2526" end="2533" title="indexed grammar" label="indexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q908674" start="2537" end="2554" title="context-sensitive grammar" label="context-sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370010" start="2732" end="2759" title="embedded pushdown automaton" label="embedded pushdown automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134957" start="2990" end="3014" title="Mildly context-sensitive grammar" label="mildly context-sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="3085" end="3101" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="3131" end="3139" title="parser" label="parsable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3229" end="3252" title="Indexed grammar#Linear indexed grammars" label="linear indexed grammars"/>
<link wikidata="Q730974" start="3254" end="3284" title="combinatory categorial grammar" label="combinatory categorial grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689303" start="3315" end="3327" title="head grammar" label="head grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977945" start="3333" end="3350" title="Weak equivalence (formal languages)" label="weakly equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623977" start="3766" end="3780" title="String grammar" label="String grammar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4185" end="4223" title="multi-component tree adjoining grammar" label="multi-component tree adjoining grammar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4230" end="4240" title="tree tuple" label="tree tuple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4316" end="4328" title="MetaGrammars" label="MetaGrammars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4401" end="4435" title="lexicalized tree adjoining grammar" label="lexicalized tree adjoining grammar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567567" wikidata="Q1893324" url="?curid=567567" title="Whirlpool (hash function)">
<text>In computer science and cryptography, Whirlpool (sometimes styled WHIRLPOOL) is a cryptographic hash function. It was designed by Vincent Rijmen (co-creator of the Advanced Encryption Standard) and Paulo S. L. M. Barreto, who first described it in 2000. 

The hash has been recommended by the NESSIE project. It has also been adopted by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) as part of the joint ISO/IEC 10118-3 international standard.

== Design features ==
Whirlpool is a hash designed after the Square block cipher, and is considered to be in that family of block cipher functions. 

Whirlpool is a Miyaguchi-Preneel construction based on a substantially modified Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). 

Whirlpool takes a message of any length less than 2256 bits and returns a 512-bit message digest.

The authors have declared that
:&quot;WHIRLPOOL is not (and will never be) patented. It may be used free of charge for any purpose.&quot;

=== Version changes ===
The original Whirlpool will be called &quot;Whirlpool-0&quot;, the first revision of Whirlpool will be called &quot;Whirlpool-T&quot; and the latest version will be called &quot;Whirlpool&quot; in the following test vectors.

* In the first revision in 2001, the S-box was changed from a randomly generated one with good cryptographic properties to one which has better cryptographic properties and is easier to implement in hardware.
* In the second revision (2003), a flaw in the diffusion matrix was found that lowered the estimated security of the algorithm below its potential. Changing the 8x8 rotating matrix constants from (1, 1, 3, 1, 5, 8, 9, 5) to (1, 1, 4, 1, 8, 5, 2, 9) solved this issue.

== Internal structure ==
The Whirlpool hash function is a Merkle–Damgård construction based on an AES-like block cipher W in Miyaguchi–Preneel mode. 

The block cipher W consists of an 8×8 state matrix formula_1 of bytes, for a total of 512 bits.

The encryption process consists of updating the state with four round functions over 10 rounds. The four round functions are SubBytes (SB), ShiftColumns (SC), MixRows (MR) and AddRoundKey (AK). During each round the new state is computed as
formula_2.

=== SubBytes ===
The SubBytes operation applies a non-linear permutation (the S-box) to each byte of the state independently. The 8-bit S-box is composed of 3 smaller 4-bit S-boxes.

=== ShiftColumns ===
The ShiftColumns operation cyclically shifts each byte in each column of the state. Column &quot;j&quot; has its bytes shifted downwards by &quot;j&quot; positions.

=== MixRows ===
The MixRows operation is a right-multiplication of each row by an 8×8 matrix over formula_3. The matrix is chosen such that the branch number (an important property when looking at resistance to differential cryptanalysis) is 9, which is maximal.

=== AddRoundKey ===
The AddRoundKey operation uses bitwise xor to add a key calculated by the key schedule to the current state. The key schedule is identical to the encryption itself, except the AddRoundKey function is replaced by an AddRoundConstant function that adds a predetermined constant in each round.

== Whirlpool hashes ==
The Whirlpool algorithm has undergone two revisions since its original 2000 specification.

People incorporating Whirlpool will most likely use the most recent revision of Whirlpool; while there are no known security weaknesses in earlier versions of Whirlpool, the most recent revision has better hardware implementation efficiency characteristics, and is also likely to be more secure. As mentioned earlier, it is also the version adopted in the ISO/IEC 10118-3 international standard.

The 512-bit (64-byte) Whirlpool hashes (also termed &quot;message digests&quot;) are typically represented as 128-digit hexadecimal numbers.
The following demonstrates a 43-byte ASCII input (not including quotes) and the corresponding Whirlpool hashes:

== Implementations ==
The authors provide reference implementations of the Whirlpool algorithm, including a version written in C and a version written in Java. These reference implementations have been released into the public domain.

Research on the security analysis of the Whirlpool function however, has revealed that on average, the introduction of 8 random faults is sufficient to compromise the 512-bit Whirlpool hash message being processed and the secret key of HMAC-Whirlpool within the context of Cloud of Things (CoTs). This emphasizes the need for increased security measures in its implementation.

== Adoption ==
Two of the first widely used mainstream cryptographic programs that started using Whirlpool were FreeOTFE, followed by TrueCrypt in 2005.

VeraCrypt (a fork of TrueCrypt) included Whirlpool (the final version) as one of its supported hash algorithms.

== See also ==
* Digital timestamping

== References ==
== External links ==
* , a Java implementation of all three revisions of Whirlpool
* – An open source Go implementation of the latest revision of Whirlpool
* A Matlab Implementation of the Whirlpool Hashing Function
* RHash, an open source command-line tool, which can calculate and verify Whirlpool hash.
* Perl Whirlpool module at CPAN
* Digest module implementing the Whirlpool hashing algorithm in Ruby
* Ironclad a Common Lisp cryptography package containing a Whirlpool implementation
* The ISO/IEC 10118-3:2004 standard
* Test vectors for the Whirlpool hash from the NESSIE project
* Managed C# implementation
* Python Whirlpool module</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="24" end="36" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893324" start="38" end="47" title="Whirlpool (hash function)" label="Whirlpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893324" start="66" end="75" title="Whirlpool (hash function)" label="WHIRLPOOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="82" end="109" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q433933" start="130" end="144" title="Vincent Rijmen" label="Vincent Rijmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="164" end="192" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="Advanced Encryption Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372793" start="198" end="220" title="Paulo S. L. M. Barreto" label="Paulo S. L. M. Barreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663719" start="293" end="299" title="NESSIE" label="NESSIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="341" end="387" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="402" end="443" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="International Electrotechnical Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334738" start="487" end="509" title="international standard" label="international standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755328" start="573" end="579" title="Square (cipher)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="580" end="592" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="677" end="694" title="One-way compression function#Miyaguchi–Preneel" label="Miyaguchi-Preneel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="742" end="770" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="Advanced Encryption Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="862" end="876" title="message digest" label="message digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="954" end="962" title="Patent" label="patented"/>
<link wikidata="Q748364" start="1305" end="1310" title="S-box" label="S-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715197" start="1524" end="1540" title="MDS matrix" label="diffusion matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757463" start="1804" end="1831" title="Merkle–Damgård construction" label="Merkle–Damgård construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="1844" end="1847" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="AES"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="1853" end="1865" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1871" end="1888" title="One-way compression function#Miyaguchi–Preneel" label="Miyaguchi–Preneel"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="1901" end="1913" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q117744380" start="2761" end="2774" title="branch number" label="branch number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224471" start="2828" end="2854" title="differential cryptanalysis" label="differential cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="2940" end="2943" title="Exclusive or" label="xor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334738" start="3680" end="3702" title="international standard" label="international standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="3825" end="3836" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="3883" end="3888" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136722" start="4001" end="4025" title="reference implementation" label="reference implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="4086" end="4087" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="4113" end="4117" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q732074" start="4685" end="4693" title="FreeOTFE" label="FreeOTFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q542836" start="4707" end="4716" title="TrueCrypt" label="TrueCrypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19911889" start="4727" end="4736" title="VeraCrypt" label="VeraCrypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q542836" start="4748" end="4757" title="TrueCrypt" label="TrueCrypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132224" start="4857" end="4877" title="Digital timestamping" label="Digital timestamping"/>
<link wikidata="Q37227" start="4998" end="5000" title="Go_(programming_language)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="5124" end="5135" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q841507" start="5229" end="5233" title="CPAN" label="CPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="5298" end="5302" title="Ruby_(programming_language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="5316" end="5327" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663719" start="5470" end="5476" title="NESSIE" label="NESSIE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567579" wikidata="Q289398" url="?curid=567579" title="Chris Mullin">
<text>Christopher Paul Mullin (born July 30, 1963) is an American former professional basketball player, executive and coach. He is a five time NBA All-Star and four time All-NBA Team member. He is also two-time Olympic Gold medalist and a two-time Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductee (in 2010 as a member of the 1992 United States men&#x27;s Olympic basketball team—&quot;The Dream Team&quot;—and in 2011 for his individual career).

Mullin played shooting guard and small forward in the National Basketball Association (NBA) from 1985 to 2001. During his college basketball career for the St. John&#x27;s Redmen, he was named Big East Player of the Year three times and was a member of the 1984 U.S. Men&#x27;s Olympic Basketball team, Mullin was chosen as the seventh pick by the Golden State Warriors in the first round of the 1985 NBA draft. He returned to the Olympics in 1992 as a member of the &quot;Dream Team&quot;, which was the first American Olympic basketball team to include professional players.

He played with the Warriors from 1985 until 1997. Thereafter, Mullin played with the Indiana Pacers from 1997 until the 1999–2000 season. He retired after the 2000–01 season, playing for his original team, the Warriors. He later served as special advisor for the Sacramento Kings and general manager of the Golden State Warriors.

Mullin served as the head coach of the Red Storm men&#x27;s basketball team from 2015 to 2019.

==Early life==
Mullin was born in Brooklyn, New York. As a young player in New York, he studied the games of Knicks stars Walt Frazier and Earl Monroe while admiring Larry Bird and wearing #17 in honor of John Havlicek. As a youth, he regularly traveled to the Bronx and Harlem, in predominantly Black neighborhoods, to play against the best basketball players in New York City. His name began to spread while playing CYO basketball at St. Thomas Aquinas Parish on Flatlands Avenue. He was also a winner of the 1974 &quot;Elks Hoops Shoot&quot; which is a national free throw contest for youth.

Along with playing CYO basketball at St. Thomas Aquinas Parish, Mullin attended Lou Carnesecca&#x27;s basketball camp with future Xaverian teammates Roger McCready, Danny Treacy, Jimmy Howard, Gerard Shepard, Mike O&#x27;Reilly, Joe Cannizzo and Pete Cannizzo.

Mullin began his high school career at Power Memorial Academy, where he was a teammate of Mario Elie. He transferred as a junior to Xaverian High School and led them to a New York Class A state championship in 1981.

== College career ==
Mullin was recruited by the Hall of Fame coach Lou Carnesecca to play for St. John&#x27;s University in nearby Queens. After signing, Mullin averaged 16.6 points per game in his freshman year (also setting the school freshman record for points scored). In his subsequent three years for the Redmen (now known as the Red Storm), he was named Big East Player of the Year three times, named to the All-America team three times, played for the gold medal-winning 1984 Olympic team, and received the 1985 Wooden Award and USBWA College Player of the Year.

As a senior who averaged 19.8 points per game, Mullin led St. John&#x27;s to the 1985 Final Four and its first #1 ranking since 1951. Mullin, who averaged 19.5 points per game, finished his career as the Redmen&#x27;s all-time leading scorer with 2,440 career points. He also holds the distinction of being one of only three players in history to win the Haggerty Award (given to the best college player in the New York City area) three times (1983–1985). From 1983 to 1985, Mullin was also named the Big East conference&#x27;s player of the year, making him the only men&#x27;s basketball player to receive this award three different seasons.

==Professional career==
=== Golden State Warriors (1985–1997) ===
In the 1985 NBA draft, the Golden State Warriors selected Mullin in the first round with the seventh pick. In Mullin&#x27;s first three seasons with the Warriors, he was primarily a spot-up shooting guard playing in the backcourt alongside Eric &quot;Sleepy&quot; Floyd.

In his second season, 1986–87, the Warriors advanced to the Western Conference semifinals under George Karl, where they lost to the eventual NBA champion Los Angeles Lakers. The next season, Don Nelson became the Warriors&#x27; coach and had plans to move Mullin to small forward. During his third season in the NBA, Mullin admitted to Nelson that he was an alcoholic. After missing several practices, Mullin was suspended, then entered an alcohol rehabilitation program.

For five consecutive seasons, from 1988 until 1993, Mullin scored an average of 25 or more points and five rebounds. Additionally, the Warriors made five straight playoff appearances. Mullin, Mitch Richmond, and 1989 first-round draftee Tim Hardaway formed the trio &quot;Run TMC&quot; (the initials of the players&#x27; first names and a play on the name of the popular rap group Run–D.M.C.) that were the focal stars of this playoff run. Mullin was a five-time All-Star during his time in Golden State and won his second Olympic gold medal in 1992 as a member of the Dream Team.

In 1993, Nelson traded for Chris Webber on NBA Draft day, hoping to make the Warriors stronger in the frontcourt. Mullin&#x27;s body began breaking down, and he began to miss significant numbers of games. The Warriors had a successful first season with Webber, but he and Nelson began to bicker over his use as a player. This led Nelson to resign, and subsequent coaches saw Mullin as injury-prone and began to center the team around Latrell Sprewell.

=== Indiana Pacers (1997–2000) ===
Mullin was traded after the 1996–97 season to the Indiana Pacers for second-year center Erick Dampier and NBA journeyman Duane Ferrell.

In his first season with the Pacers, coached by Larry Bird, Mullin started all 82 games, averaged 11.3 points per game, and helped the Pacers to the Eastern Conference Finals, where they lost to the Chicago Bulls in seven games. He had a career high in 3-point shots made (107) and led the NBA in free-throw percentage (.939) that season as well. Bird began to phase Mullin out and give more time to Jalen Rose at small forward during his second season with the team. As a member of the Indiana Pacers, Mullin, who was primarily a bench player at this time, appeared in three games of the 2000 NBA Finals against the Los Angeles Lakers and scored four points total. After that season, Mullin was waived by the Pacers.

=== Return to Golden State (2000–2001) ===
Mullin again signed with Warriors for the 2000–01 season, his last season as a player.

=== Legacy ===
According to Jim O&#x27;Brien, Mullin was similar to NBA legend Larry Bird because both players lacked speed, had a great outside shot and had the innate ability to put their defender off guard. He was on the All-NBA second team (1989 and 1991), third team (1990), and first team (1992).

== National team career ==
During the 1992 Summer Olympics, Mullin, who started two games, averaged 12.9 points per game, shot 61.9% from the field and 53.8% from the three-point line. He was a member of the &quot;Dream Team,&quot; which is widely regarded as one of the greatest sports teams ever.

Mullin also won gold medals in the 1992 Tournament of the Americas with the &quot;Dream Team&quot;, the 1984 Summer Olympics, the 1983 Pan American Games, the 1982 Jones Cup, and the 1982 Seoul Invitational.

==Coaching career==

=== St. John&#x27;s (2015–2019) ===
On March 30, 2015, Mullin accepted the vacant head coaching position at St. John&#x27;s University.

In the 2018–19 season, his team reached the NCAA tournament as they went 21-13 and reached the First Four. The 21 wins matched their highest total since 1999–2000.

On April 9, 2019, Mullin resigned as head coach after compiling a 59–73 record in four seasons, including 20–52 in Big East play, citing a &quot;personal loss&quot; which was widely seen as the death of his brother.

==Executive career==
After his playing days were over, Mullin was hired by the Warriors as a special assistant, dealing with daily business operations. On April 22, 2004, he was named Executive Vice President of Basketball Operations for the team. On May 11, 2009, the team announced that Mullin&#x27;s expiring contract would not be renewed. He was replaced by Larry Riley as the Warriors&#x27; General Manager.

Mullin began working with the Sacramento Kings in May 2013 when Vivek Ranadivé became owner. In September 2013, the Sacramento Kings hired him as an advisor. As an advisor, Mullin&#x27;s duties were not only to provide advice to Ranadive and D&#x27;Alessandro on player transactions, but to also supervise the organization&#x27;s college and overseas scouting program.

==Broadcasting career==
Mullin has worked as an NBA analyst for ESPN. On October 22, 2010, Mullin made his network debut as an ESPN studio analyst on Kia NBA Countdown.

In December 2011, Mullin worked with the ESPN broadcasting crew for Mark Jackson&#x27;s coaching debut with the Golden State Warriors. Mullin joined his former television colleagues, Jeff Van Gundy and Mike Breen to announce the game against the Los Angeles Clippers in the season opener and Christmas finale.

In September 2019, after leaving St. John&#x27;s University, Mullin was announced as a pregame and postgame studio analyst for Warriors games on NBC Sports Bay Area. He also will contribute to Warriors coverage on radio affiliate KNBR.

==Honors==
In 2010, Mullin was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame as part of the &quot;Dream Team&quot;.

On February 28, 2011, Mullin was elected to the College Basketball Hall of Fame.

On April 4, 2011, Mullin was inducted again to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, this time for his individual career.

On March 19, 2012, Mullin&#x27;s number 17 was retired by the Golden State Warriors, making him the sixth player in team history to have his jersey retired.

==Personal life==
Mullin is a devout Catholic, and has stated that he relies upon his faith daily. He and his wife, Elizabeth (&quot;Liz&quot;), live in Flower Hill, New York. They have four children. Mullin was very good friends with former teammate, Sudanese NBA player Manute Bol. After Bol was badly injured in a taxi cab incident in 2004, Mullin and the Warriors offered to raise money for Bol&#x27;s medical bills by organizing a fantasy camp. On November 19, 2004, the Warriors, Mullin and his former teammates Mitch Richmond and Tim Hardaway participated in the fantasy camp named &quot;Run With TMC&quot;.

In March 2012, PG&amp;E joined the Golden State Warriors to restore a pair of basketball courts in Mullin&#x27;s honor. Both courts were named the &quot;Chris Mullin Basketball Courts at Arroyo Recreation Center Presented by PG&amp;E&quot;.
In July 2014, Mullin was featured at a wheelchair basketball charity and opportunity event hosted in Puerto Rico by Max International. Before the event, he was presented a jersey from Federacion de Baloncesto en Silla de Ruedas de Puerto Rico (FEBASIRU), the local wheelchair basketball team. In this event, Mullin participated in a wheelchair basketball game for the first time with Max International Associate Héctor Marcano Lopez and the local Puerto Rican wheelchair basketball team (FEBASIRU). He participated in &quot;Max and Mullin Legends Classic Exhibition Game&quot; with 20 local Puerto Rican basketball legends.

== NBA career statistics ==

!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 55 || 30 || 25.3 || .463 || .185 || .896 || 2.1 || 1.9 || 1.3 || 0.4 || 14.0
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 82 || 82 || 29.0 || .514 || .302 || .825 || 2.2 || 3.2 || 1.2 || 0.4 || 15.1
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 60 || 55 || 33.9 || .508 || .351 || .885 || 3.4 || 4.8 || 1.9 || 0.5 || 20.2
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 82 || 82 || 33.7 || .509 || .230 || .892 || 5.9 || 5.1 || 2.1 || 0.5 || 26.5
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 78 || 78 || 36.3 || .536 || .372 || .889 || 5.9 || 4.1 || 1.6 || 0.6 || 25.1
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 82 || 82 ||style=&quot;background:#cfecec;&quot;| 40.4* || .536 || .301 || .884 || 5.4 || 4.0 || 2.1 || 0.8 || 25.7
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 81 || 81 ||style=&quot;background:#cfecec;&quot;| 41.3* || .524 || .366 || .833 || 5.6 || 3.5 || 2.1 || 0.8 || 25.6
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 46 || 46 || 41.3 || .510 || .451 || .810 || 5.0 || 3.6 || 1.5 || 0.9 || 25.9
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 62 || 39 || 37.5 || .472 || .364 || .753 || 5.6 || 5.1 || 1.7 || 0.9 || 16.8
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 25 || 23 || 35.6 || .489 || .452 || .879 || 4.6 || 5.0 || 1.5 || 0.8 || 19.0
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 55 || 19 || 29.4 || .499 || .393 || .856 || 2.9 || 3.5 || 1.4 || 0.6 || 13.3
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 79 || 63 || 34.6 || .553 || .411 || .864 || 4.0 || 4.1 || 1.6 || 0.4 || 14.5
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Indiana
| style=&quot;background:#cfecec;&quot;| 82* || style=&quot;background:#cfecec;&quot;| 82* || 26.5 || .481 || .440 ||style=&quot;background:#cfecec;&quot;| .939* || 3.0 || 2.3 || 1.2 || 0.5 || 11.3
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Indiana
| style=&quot;background:#cfecec;&quot;| 50* || style=&quot;background:#cfecec;&quot;| 50* || 23.6 || .477 || .465 || .870 || 3.2 || 1.6 || 0.9 || 0.3 || 10.1
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Indiana
| 47 || 2 || 12.4 || .428 || .409 || .902 || 1.6 || 0.8 || 0.6 || 0.2 || 5.1
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
| 20 || 8 || 18.7 || .340 || .365 || .857 || 2.1 || 1.0 || 0.8 || 0.5 || 5.8
|- class=&quot;sortbottom&quot;
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=&quot;2&quot;| Career
| 986 || 822 || 32.6 || .509 || .384 || .865 || 4.1 || 3.5 || 1.6 || 0.6 || 18.2
|- class=&quot;sortbottom&quot;
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=&quot;2&quot;| All-Star
| 4 || 2 || 19.5 || .500 || 1.000 || .875 || 2.0 || 2.0 || 1.0 || 0.3 || 8.3

!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1987
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
|10||10||26.2||.500||.750||.750||1.5||2.3||0.9||0.2||11.3
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1989
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
|8||8||42.6||.540||.125||.866||5.9||4.5||1.8||1.4||29.4
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1991
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
|8||8||style=&quot;background:#cfecec;&quot;|45.8*||.527||.692||.860||7.3||2.9||1.9||1.5||23.8
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1992
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
|4||4||42.0||.429||.333||.929||3.0||3.0||1.3||0.5||17.8
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1994
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Golden State
|3||3||45.0||.588||.500||.909||4.7||3.7||0.0||1.7||25.3
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1998
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Indiana
|16||16||25.8||.460||.385||.857||3.6||1.4||0.9||0.6||8.9
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|1999
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Indiana
|13||13||21.8||.410||.400||.870||1.5||1.2||0.8||0.2||9.5
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|2000
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|Indiana
|9||1||10.0||.476||.250||.818||1.6||0.6||0.7||0.1||3.4
|- class=&quot;sortbottom&quot;
!scope=&quot;row&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=&quot;2&quot;| Career
| 71 || 63 || 29.0 || .495 || .409 || .859 || 3.3 || 2.1 || 1.0 || 0.6 || 13.8
==Head coaching record==



==See also==
* Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame
* List of National Basketball Association career steals leaders
* List of National Basketball Association career free throw percentage leaders
* List of National Basketball Association annual minutes leaders

==References==
==External links==

* St. John&#x27;s University coaching bio
*NBA bio of Mullin (from 2000)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q289398" start="0" end="23" title="Chris Mullin" label="Christopher Paul Mullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="80" end="90" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740530" start="138" end="150" title="NBA All-Star" label="NBA All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q674359" start="165" end="177" title="All-NBA Team" label="All-NBA Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="243" end="284" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q369529" start="322" end="375" title="1992 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="1992 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q273199" start="458" end="472" title="shooting guard" label="shooting guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q308879" start="477" end="490" title="small forward" label="small forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="498" end="529" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="566" end="584" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588820" start="600" end="622" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Red Storm men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Redmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905618" start="637" end="664" title="Big East Conference Men&amp;#x27;s Basketball Player of the Year" label="Big East Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="792" end="813" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632257" start="840" end="854" title="1985 NBA draft" label="1985 NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q369529" start="911" end="933" title="1992 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="&amp;quot;Dream Team&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069819" start="1055" end="1059" title="1985–86 NBA season" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321749" start="1066" end="1071" title="1996–97 NBA season" label="1997."/>
<link wikidata="Q170329" start="1107" end="1121" title="Indiana Pacers" label="Indiana Pacers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132641" start="1142" end="1158" title="1999–2000 NBA season" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132667" start="1181" end="1195" title="2000–01 NBA season" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q166105" start="1285" end="1301" title="Sacramento Kings" label="Sacramento Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210069" start="1306" end="1321" title="general manager" label="general manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="1329" end="1350" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1483" end="1501" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q348696" start="1571" end="1583" title="Walt Frazier" label="Walt Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q540498" start="1588" end="1599" title="Earl Monroe" label="Earl Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190152" start="1615" end="1625" title="Larry Bird" label="Larry Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q71127" start="1654" end="1667" title="John Havlicek" label="John Havlicek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="1706" end="1715" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="1720" end="1726" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053279" start="1867" end="1870" title="Catholic Youth Organization (CYO)" label="CYO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236369" start="2346" end="2368" title="Power Memorial Academy" label="Power Memorial Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q581976" start="2397" end="2407" title="Mario Elie" label="Mario Elie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043181" start="2439" end="2459" title="Xaverian High School" label="Xaverian High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q321367" start="2592" end="2606" title="Lou Carnesecca" label="Lou Carnesecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905618" start="2886" end="2913" title="Big East Conference Men&amp;#x27;s Basketball Player of the Year" label="Big East Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641970" start="3045" end="3057" title="John R. Wooden Award" label="Wooden Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404133" start="3062" end="3094" title="Oscar Robertson Trophy" label="USBWA College Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638698" start="3452" end="3466" title="Haggerty Award" label="Haggerty Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632257" start="3815" end="3829" title="1985 NBA draft" label="1985 NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q925099" start="4048" end="4077" title="Eric &amp;quot;Sleepy&amp;quot; Floyd" label="Eric &amp;quot;Sleepy&amp;quot; Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q930865" start="4176" end="4187" title="George Karl" label="George Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="4234" end="4252" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q375600" start="4271" end="4281" title="Don Nelson" label="Don Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q375767" start="4745" end="4759" title="Mitch Richmond" label="Mitch Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q352319" start="4790" end="4802" title="Tim Hardaway" label="Tim Hardaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379534" start="4825" end="4832" title="Run TMC" label="Run TMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="4934" end="4944" title="Run–D.M.C." label="Run–D.M.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="5076" end="5083" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5122" end="5132" title="Dream Team (basketball)#1992 The Dream Team" label="Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q314415" start="5162" end="5174" title="Chris Webber" label="Chris Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q729281" start="5569" end="5585" title="Latrell Sprewell" label="Latrell Sprewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q170329" start="5673" end="5687" title="Indiana Pacers" label="Indiana Pacers"/>
<link wikidata="Q521908" start="5711" end="5724" title="Erick Dampier" label="Erick Dampier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715641" start="5744" end="5757" title="Duane Ferrell" label="Duane Ferrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190152" start="5808" end="5818" title="Larry Bird" label="Larry Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="5959" end="5972" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q984367" start="6160" end="6170" title="Jalen Rose" label="Jalen Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597667" start="6349" end="6364" title="2000 NBA Finals" label="2000 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="6377" end="6395" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737523" start="6638" end="6654" title="Jim O&amp;#x27;Brien (basketball, born 1952)" label="Jim O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="6952" end="6972" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q369529" start="7128" end="7138" title="1992 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q369529" start="7296" end="7306" title="1992 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="7318" end="7338" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138374" start="7552" end="7578" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s University (New York City)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q796919" start="7771" end="7779" title="resignation" label="resigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806108" start="8325" end="8336" title="Larry Riley (basketball)" label="Larry Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121205" start="8441" end="8455" title="Vivek Ranadivé" label="Vivek Ranadivé"/>
<link wikidata="Q166105" start="8493" end="8509" title="Sacramento Kings" label="Sacramento Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607858" start="9100" end="9114" title="Jeff Van Gundy" label="Jeff Van Gundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846125" start="9119" end="9129" title="Mike Breen" label="Mike Breen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151007" start="9373" end="9392" title="NBC Sports Bay Area" label="NBC Sports Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334168" start="9458" end="9462" title="KNBR (AM)" label="KNBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="9514" end="9555" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336862" start="9644" end="9675" title="College Basketball Hall of Fame" label="College Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="9729" end="9770" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="9872" end="9893" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10005" end="10013" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451947" start="10121" end="10142" title="Flower Hill, New York" label="Flower Hill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q313479" start="10240" end="10250" title="Manute Bol" label="Manute Bol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815011" start="10599" end="10607" title="PG&amp;amp;E" label="PG&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696814" start="11237" end="11251" title="Héctor Marcano" label="Héctor Marcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773024" start="11576" end="11588" title="1985–86 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773026" start="11765" end="11777" title="1986–87 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773027" start="11954" end="11966" title="1987–88 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773028" start="12143" end="12155" title="1988–89 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773030" start="12332" end="12344" title="1989–90 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773031" start="12521" end="12533" title="1990–91 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773033" start="12749" end="12761" title="1991–92 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773034" start="12977" end="12989" title="1992–93 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773036" start="13166" end="13178" title="1993–94 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773037" start="13355" end="13367" title="1994–95 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773039" start="13544" end="13556" title="1995–96 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773040" start="13733" end="13745" title="1996–97 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798065" start="13922" end="13929" title="1997–98 Indiana Pacers season" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798066" start="14225" end="14232" title="1998–99 Indiana Pacers season" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798067" start="14489" end="14496" title="1999–2000 Indiana Pacers season" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773046" start="14671" end="14683" title="2000–01 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564555" start="15224" end="15228" title="1987 NBA Playoffs" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773026" start="15266" end="15278" title="1986-87 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565095" start="15395" end="15399" title="1989 NBA Playoffs" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773028" start="15437" end="15449" title="1988-89 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724216" start="15564" end="15568" title="1991 NBA Playoffs" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773031" start="15606" end="15618" title="1990-91 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564201" start="15772" end="15776" title="1992 NBA Playoffs" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773033" start="15814" end="15826" title="1991-92 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564153" start="15941" end="15945" title="1994 NBA Playoffs" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773036" start="15983" end="15995" title="1993-94 Golden State Warriors season" label="Golden State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556684" start="16110" end="16114" title="1998 NBA Playoffs" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798065" start="16152" end="16159" title="1997-98 Indiana Pacers season" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555430" start="16275" end="16279" title="1999 NBA Playoffs" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798066" start="16317" end="16324" title="1998-99 Indiana Pacers season" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553767" start="16440" end="16444" title="2000 NBA Playoffs" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798067" start="16482" end="16489" title="1999-2000 Indiana Pacers season" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873930" start="16789" end="16817" title="Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame" label="Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251679" start="16820" end="16881" title="List of National Basketball Association career steals leaders" label="List of National Basketball Association career steals leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945333" start="16884" end="16960" title="List of National Basketball Association career free throw percentage leaders" label="List of National Basketball Association career free throw percentage leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591348" start="16963" end="17025" title="List of National Basketball Association annual minutes leaders" label="List of National Basketball Association annual minutes leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567580" wikidata="Q1060321" url="?curid=567580" title="Gaussian integral">
<text>The Gaussian integral, also known as the Euler–Poisson integral, is the integral of the Gaussian function formula_1 over the entire real line. Named after the German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss, the integral is
formula_2

Abraham de Moivre originally discovered this type of integral in 1733, while Gauss published the precise integral in 1809, attributing its discovery to Laplace. The integral has a wide range of applications. For example, with a slight change of variables it is used to compute the normalizing constant of the normal distribution. The same integral with finite limits is closely related to both the error function and the cumulative distribution function of the normal distribution. In physics this type of integral appears frequently, for example, in quantum mechanics, to find the probability density of the ground state of the harmonic oscillator. This integral is also used in the path integral formulation, to find the propagator of the harmonic oscillator, and in statistical mechanics, to find its partition function.

Although no elementary function exists for the error function, as can be proven by the Risch algorithm, the Gaussian integral can be solved analytically through the methods of multivariable calculus. That is, there is no elementary &quot;indefinite integral&quot; for
formula_3
but the definite integral
formula_4
can be evaluated. The definite integral of an arbitrary Gaussian function is
formula_5

==Computation==

===By polar coordinates===
A standard way to compute the Gaussian integral, the idea of which goes back to Poisson, is to make use of the property that:

formula_6

Consider the function formula_7on the plane formula_8, and compute its integral two ways:
# on the one hand, by double integration in the Cartesian coordinate system, its integral is a square: formula_9
# on the other hand, by shell integration (a case of double integration in polar coordinates), its integral is computed to be formula_10

Comparing these two computations yields the integral, though one should take care about the improper integrals involved.

formula_11
where the factor of is the Jacobian determinant which appears because of the transform to polar coordinates ( is the standard measure on the plane, expressed in polar coordinates ), and the substitution involves taking , so .

Combining these yields
formula_12
so
formula_13

====Complete proof====
To justify the improper double integrals and equating the two expressions, we begin with an approximating function:
formula_14

If the integral
formula_15
were absolutely convergent we would have that its Cauchy principal value, that is, the limit
formula_16
would coincide with
formula_17
To see that this is the case, consider that

formula_18

So we can compute
formula_15
by just taking the limit
formula_20

Taking the square of formula_21 yields

formula_22

Using Fubini&#x27;s theorem, the above double integral can be seen as an area integral
formula_23
taken over a square with vertices on the &quot;xy&quot;-plane.

Since the exponential function is greater than 0 for all real numbers, it then follows that the integral taken over the square&#x27;s incircle must be less than formula_24, and similarly the integral taken over the square&#x27;s circumcircle must be greater than formula_24. The integrals over the two disks can easily be computed by switching from Cartesian coordinates to polar coordinates:

formula_26
formula_27
formula_28
formula_29

(See to polar coordinates from Cartesian coordinates for help with polar transformation.)

Integrating,
formula_30

By the squeeze theorem, this gives the Gaussian integral
formula_31

===By Cartesian coordinates===
A different technique, which goes back to Laplace (1812), is the following. Let
formula_32

Since the limits on as depend on the sign of , it simplifies the calculation to use the fact that is an even function, and, therefore, the integral over all real numbers is just twice the integral from zero to infinity. That is,

formula_33

Thus, over the range of integration, , and the variables and have the same limits. This yields:
formula_34
Then, using Fubini&#x27;s theorem to switch the order of integration:
formula_35

Therefore, formula_36, as expected.

=== By Laplace&#x27;s method ===

In Laplace approximation, we deal only with up to second-order terms in Taylor expansion, so we consider formula_37. 

In fact, since formula_38 for all formula_39, we have the exact bounds:formula_40Then we can do the bound at Laplace approximation limit:formula_41 

That is,
formula_42 

By trigonometric substitution, we exactly compute those two bounds: formula_43 and formula_44 

By taking the square root of the Wallis formula, formula_45we have formula_46, the desired lower bound limit. Similarly we can get the desired upper bound limit.
Conversely, if we first compute the integral with one of the other methods above, we would obtain a proof of the Wallis formula.

==Relation to the gamma function==

The integrand is an even function,

formula_47

Thus, after the change of variable formula_48, this turns into the Euler integral

formula_49

where formula_50 is the gamma function. This shows why the factorial of a half-integer is a rational multiple of formula_51. More generally,
formula_52
which can be obtained by substituting formula_53 in the integrand of the gamma function to get formula_54.

==Generalizations==

===The integral of a Gaussian function===

The integral of an arbitrary Gaussian function is
formula_5

An alternative form is
formula_56

This form is useful for calculating expectations of some continuous probability distributions related to the normal distribution, such as the log-normal distribution, for example.

=== Complex form ===

formula_57and more generally,formula_58for any positive-definite symmetric matrix formula_59.

===&quot;n&quot;-dimensional and functional generalization===

Suppose &quot;A&quot; is a symmetric positive-definite (hence invertible) precision matrix, which is the matrix inverse of the covariance matrix. Then,

formula_60By completing the square, this generalizes toformula_61

This fact is applied in the study of the multivariate normal distribution.

Also,
formula_62
where &quot;σ&quot; is a permutation of and the extra factor on the right-hand side is the sum over all combinatorial pairings of of &quot;N&quot; copies of &quot;A&quot;−1.

Alternatively,

formula_63

for some analytic function &quot;f&quot;, provided it satisfies some appropriate bounds on its growth and some other technical criteria. (It works for some functions and fails for others. Polynomials are fine.) The exponential over a differential operator is understood as a power series.

While functional integrals have no rigorous definition (or even a nonrigorous computational one in most cases), we can &quot;define&quot; a Gaussian functional integral in analogy to the finite-dimensional case. There is still the problem, though, that formula_64 is infinite and also, the functional determinant would also be infinite in general. This can be taken care of if we only consider ratios:

: formula_65

In the DeWitt notation, the equation looks identical to the finite-dimensional case.

===&quot;n&quot;-dimensional with linear term===
If A is again a symmetric positive-definite matrix, then (assuming all are column vectors)
formula_66

===Integrals of similar form===
formula_67
formula_68
formula_69
formula_70
formula_71
where formula_72 is a positive integer

An easy way to derive these is by differentiating under the integral sign.

formula_73

One could also integrate by parts and find a recurrence relation to solve this.

===Higher-order polynomials===

Applying a linear change of basis shows that the integral of the exponential of a homogeneous polynomial in &quot;n&quot; variables may depend only on SL(&quot;n&quot;)-invariants of the polynomial. One such invariant is the discriminant,
zeros of which mark the singularities of the integral. However, the integral may also depend on other invariants.

Exponentials of other even polynomials can numerically be solved using series. These may be interpreted as formal calculations when there is no convergence. For example, the solution to the integral of the exponential of a quartic polynomial is

formula_74

The mod 2 requirement is because the integral from −∞ to 0 contributes a factor of to each term, while the integral from 0 to +∞ contributes a factor of 1/2 to each term. These integrals turn up in subjects such as quantum field theory.

==See also==

* List of integrals of Gaussian functions
* Common integrals in quantum field theory
* Normal distribution
* List of integrals of exponential functions
* Error function
* Berezin integral

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1060321" start="4" end="21" title="Gaussian integral" label="Gaussian integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060321" start="41" end="63" title="Gaussian integral" label="Euler–Poisson integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054475" start="88" end="105" title="Gaussian function" label="Gaussian function"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="180" end="200" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q200397" start="229" end="246" title="Abraham de Moivre" label="Abraham de Moivre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="381" end="388" title="Laplace" label="Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095069" start="510" end="530" title="normalizing constant" label="normalizing constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="538" end="557" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q579262" start="627" end="641" title="error function" label="error function"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="650" end="682" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="690" end="709" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="780" end="797" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="998" end="1019" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q230963" start="1033" end="1051" title="partition function (statistical mechanics)" label="partition function"/>
<link wikidata="Q824282" start="1066" end="1085" title="elementary function" label="elementary function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382512" start="1141" end="1156" title="Risch algorithm" label="Risch algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035437" start="1230" end="1252" title="multivariable calculus" label="multivariable calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q114326" start="1292" end="1311" title="indefinite integral" label="indefinite integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="1340" end="1357" title="definite integral" label="definite integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054475" start="1424" end="1441" title="Gaussian function" label="Gaussian function"/>
<link wikidata="Q844937" start="1750" end="1768" title="double integration" label="double integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="1776" end="1803" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="Cartesian coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493717" start="1865" end="1882" title="shell integration" label="shell integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="1916" end="1933" title="polar coordinates" label="polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q464118" start="2071" end="2088" title="improper integral" label="improper integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q506041" start="2139" end="2159" title="Jacobian determinant" label="Jacobian determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4814133" start="2189" end="2219" title="list of canonical coordinate transformations" label="transform to polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q332465" start="2571" end="2592" title="absolutely convergent" label="absolutely convergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q769374" start="2616" end="2638" title="Cauchy principal value" label="Cauchy principal value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149022" start="2882" end="2903" title="Fubini&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Fubini&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="3030" end="3035" title="Cartesian plane" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q10615255" start="3172" end="3180" title="incircle" label="incircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q110176" start="3267" end="3279" title="circumcircle" label="circumcircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4814133" start="3412" end="3429" title="list of canonical coordinate transformations" label="polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4814133" start="3482" end="3529" title="list of canonical coordinate transformations" label="to polar coordinates from Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065257" start="3600" end="3615" title="squeeze theorem" label="squeeze theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="3889" end="3902" title="even function" label="even function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149022" start="4146" end="4167" title="Fubini&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Fubini&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825182" start="4182" end="4202" title="order of integration (calculus)" label="order of integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058297" start="4260" end="4281" title="Laplace&amp;#x27;s method" label="Laplace&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501324" start="4707" end="4721" title="Wallis formula" label="Wallis formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="5022" end="5035" title="even function" label="even function"/>
<link wikidata="Q190573" start="5169" end="5183" title="gamma function" label="gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="5204" end="5213" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054475" start="5498" end="5515" title="Gaussian function" label="Gaussian function"/>
<link wikidata="Q826116" start="5707" end="5730" title="log-normal distribution" label="log-normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q254860" start="6000" end="6016" title="precision matrix" label="precision matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134404" start="6053" end="6070" title="covariance matrix" label="covariance matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149000" start="6187" end="6219" title="multivariate normal distribution" label="multivariate normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="6264" end="6275" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="6451" end="6468" title="analytic function" label="analytic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="6717" end="6729" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450135" start="6738" end="6757" title="functional integral" label="functional integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947601" start="7022" end="7044" title="functional determinant" label="functional determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244204" start="7156" end="7171" title="DeWitt notation" label="DeWitt notation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7548" end="7587" title="Leibniz integral rule#Evaluating definite integrals" label="differentiating under the integral sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="7647" end="7666" title="recurrence relation" label="recurrence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140900" start="7866" end="7883" title="SL(n)" label="SL(&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192487" start="7940" end="7952" title="discriminant" label="discriminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469955" start="8176" end="8194" title="formal calculation" label="formal calculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="8542" end="8562" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q635136" start="8581" end="8620" title="List of integrals of Gaussian functions" label="List of integrals of Gaussian functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153552" start="8623" end="8663" title="Common integrals in quantum field theory" label="Common integrals in quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="8666" end="8685" title="Normal distribution" label="Normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q579258" start="8688" end="8730" title="List of integrals of exponential functions" label="List of integrals of exponential functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q579262" start="8733" end="8747" title="Error function" label="Error function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891358" start="8750" end="8766" title="Berezin integral" label="Berezin integral"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567584" wikidata="Q2559165" url="?curid=567584" title="Tony Slattery">
<text>Tony Declan James Slattery (9 November 1959 – 14 January 2025) was a British actor and comedian. He appeared on British television regularly from the mid-1980s, including as a regular on the Channel 4 improvisation show &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot;. His serious and comedic film work included roles in &quot;The Crying Game&quot;, &quot;Peter&#x27;s Friends&quot; and &quot;How to Get Ahead in Advertising&quot;.

==Early life and education==
Slattery was born in Stonebridge, London, into a working-class background, the fifth and last child of Catholic Irish immigrants, Michael and Margaret Slattery.

In April 2019 Slattery revealed that he had been repeatedly sexually abused by a priest at the age of eight, but had never told his parents; he believed the event contributed to his unstable character later in life. He was educated at Gunnersbury Boys&#x27; School in west London and won a scholarship to read Modern and Medieval Languages at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, specialising in French literature and Spanish poetry. Slattery held a black belt in judo and represented England internationally for under-15s.

At the University of Cambridge, Slattery discovered a love of the theatre, taking delight in making people laugh. He met Stephen Fry, who invited him to join the Cambridge Footlights. Other members at that time included Hugh Laurie, Emma Thompson, Sandi Toksvig, Jan Ravens and Richard Vranch.

In 1981 Slattery, Fry, Laurie, Thompson and Toksvig won the inaugural Perrier Award for their revue &quot;The Cellar Tapes&quot;. The following year, Slattery was made President of the Footlights. During his tenure, the touring annual revue was &quot;Premises, Premises&quot;.

==Television and film==
===Breakthrough and peak===
Slattery first broke into television as a regular performer on Chris Tarrant&#x27;s follow up to &quot;O.T.T.&quot;, &quot;Saturday Stayback&quot; (1983), while also appearing for children in &quot;Behind the Bike Sheds&quot; and the Saturday-morning show &quot;TX&quot;. In 1988 he appeared in the first series of comedy improvisation show &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot; and quickly became a regular performer on the show. In 1991 he and fellow &quot;Whose Line&quot; regular Mike McShane starred in their own improvisational comedy series, &quot;S&amp;M&quot;. During the 1990s he was also a regular guest on comedy panel show &quot;Have I Got News for You&quot;.

As a dramatic actor he appeared in &quot;The Crying Game&quot;, &quot;To Die For&quot;, &quot;Peter&#x27;s Friends&quot;, &quot;Up &#x27;n&#x27; Under&quot; and &quot;The Wedding Tackle&quot; (1999) as Little Ted.

At the end of the 1980s he became a film critic, presenting his own show on British television, &quot;Saturday Night at the Movies&quot;. He also appeared in the ITV sitcom &quot;That&#x27;s Love&quot; with Jimmy Mulville.

Slattery was also a regular guest with the Comedy Store Players, both at The Comedy Store in London and on tour.

In 1990, Slattery appeared as a contestant on &quot;Cluedo&quot;, facing off against David Yip. From 1993 to 1994 he was the host of the game show &quot;Trivial Pursuit&quot;.

In 1992 Slattery appeared in the film &quot;Carry On Columbus&quot;. In the same year he appeared in the series &quot;Dead Ringer&quot;, filmed for the observation round in &quot;The Krypton Factor&quot;. Also in 1992 Slattery appeared as a contestant on the Channel 4 show &quot;GamesMaster&quot;, and in 1993 he starred in the ITV sitcom &quot;Just a Gigolo&quot;.

He was featured in all episodes of the televised version of the long-running radio gameshow Just A Minute in 1994, and became a team captain when the format was revised in 1995, again appearing in all episodes.

He starred in a pilot episode of gentlemen detective spoof &quot;Tiger Bastable&quot; for ITV in 1995 which was not picked up as a series.

===Later appearances===
Personal problems later overshadowed Slattery&#x27;s career, leading to a reduced profile. He made his last appearance on &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot; in 1995, and due to an extended period of illness, he undertook only occasional television work from the mid-1990s to the early 2000s. He reappeared in &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; in 1999 as the voice of a vending machine.

In 2005 Slattery appeared in the TV film &quot;Ahead of the Class&quot; with Julie Walters, portrayed D.I. Alan Hayes in series 7 of &quot;Bad Girls&quot;, and made a cameo appearance in ITV&#x27;s &quot;Life Begins&quot;. He won a celebrity edition of the game show &quot;The Weakest Link&quot;, defeating Vanessa Feltz in the final round. At the end of the show, he announced that he would donate his prize money to the Terrence Higgins Trust. In December 2005, he joined the soap opera &quot;Coronation Street&quot; as Eric Talford.

In 2007 Slattery played Tom O&#x27;Driscoll in the feature film &quot;Lady Godiva: Back in the Saddle&quot;, and the Canon of Birkley in the &quot;Robin Hood&quot; episode &quot;Show Me the Money&quot;. From 2007 to 2009, Slattery was a regular cast member in the ITV series &quot;Kingdom&quot;.

In March 2011, Slattery appeared in a reunion special of &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot; along with David Walliams, Josie Lawrence, Clive Anderson, Humphrey Ker and Neil Mullarkey for the BBC Comic Relief show &quot;24-Hour Panel People&quot;.

===Documentary about his life===
In April 2019, an interview with Slattery was published in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, which led to his participation in a television documentary.

In 2020 Slattery and his partner Mark Hutchinson were featured in an edition of the BBC &quot;Horizon&quot; series entitled &quot;What&#x27;s the Matter with Tony Slattery?&quot; In a detailed examination of his mental health, childhood trauma and substance addictions, medical professionals concluded that Slattery continued to experience the effects of trauma relating to childhood sexual abuse; was on the bipolar spectrum; and suffered alcohol dependence. The professionals advised Slattery on steps to take to improve his mental health and his physical wellbeing.

==Theatre and comedy==
In 1981 he teamed with Richard Vranch as a comedic duo calling themselves &quot;Aftertaste&quot;. For a number of years they toured throughout Great Britain performing in small venues: theatres and clubs, including the Tunnel Club, King&#x27;s Head Theatre in London and aboard the Thekla ship in Bristol. Together they hosted the Channel 4 quiz &quot;The Music Game&quot; (1992–93) and some episodes of the ITV series &quot;Cue the Music&quot;.

Featuring his baritone voice, Slattery appeared on London&#x27;s West End stages in the musicals &quot;Me and My Girl&quot; and &quot;Radio Times&quot;, as well as in the play &quot;Neville&#x27;s Island&quot; at Nottingham Playhouse in 1994.

In May 1998 he was elected as Rector of the University of Dundee, his first job in two years. In 2000, his poor attendance record (a single visit in a one-year period) led to calls for his resignation from some students. The official view was that it would not be worthwhile ousting him, because his term was to end in February 2001.

In May 2006 he was a narrator in Richard O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s &quot;Rocky Horror Tribute Show&quot;, at the Royal Court Theatre as part of the 50th anniversary celebrations.

In 2017–2018 he was the eponymous star of &quot;Slattery Night Fever&quot;, an improvised comedy show on London&#x27;s off-West End, directed by Lesley Ann Abiston.

In 2017, Slattery returned to Edinburgh and appeared at the Fringe, as a guest joining other performers. In 2018 Slattery was performing his own again at the Fringe and appeared in shows with the title &quot;Slattery will get you Nowhere&quot;. He launched a fundraising appeal in May 2019, in support of his continuing to appear on stage.

Starting in 2024, Slattery appeared on a weekly improvised podcast, Tony Slattery&#x27;s Rambling Club. Special guests included Robin Ince, Richard Vranch and Julian Clary.

==Personal life and death==
In the mid-1990s, after leaving &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot;, Slattery suffered what he described as a &quot;midlife crisis&quot;, triggered by cocaine use and excessive drinking. Slattery said he did not remember how much he had spent on cocaine but &quot;would not be surprised&quot; if media reports that he spent £4,000 per week on the drug were accurate.

In 1996, Slattery&#x27;s crisis culminated with a six-month period as a recluse, during which he did not answer his door or telephone, &quot;or open bills, or wash... I just sat.&quot; Eventually, one of his friends broke down the door of his flat and persuaded him to go to hospital. He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. He discussed this period and his subsequent living with the disorder in a documentary made by Stephen Fry, &quot;The Secret Life of the Manic Depressive&quot;, in 2006; Slattery said that he spent time living in a warehouse and &quot;throwing [his] furniture into the Thames.&quot;

He said: &quot;I&#x27;m happily described as gay&quot;, and was in a relationship with the actor Mark Michael Hutchinson from 1986 until his death.

In September 2020, Slattery signed a publishing deal to write his memoirs, but the autobiography did not materialise.

Slattery died aged 65 on 14 January 2025, having suffered a heart attack two days previously. His friend Sir Stephen Fry led a tribute on BBC Radio 4&#x27;s obituary series &quot;Last Word&quot;.

== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2559165" start="0" end="26" title="Tony Slattery" label="Tony Declan James Slattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="191" end="200" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q922713" start="226" end="250" title="Whose Line Is It Anyway? (British TV series)" label="Whose Line Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q182727" start="316" end="331" title="The Crying Game" label="The Crying Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q249235" start="345" end="365" title="Peter&amp;#x27;s Friends" label="Peter&amp;#x27;s Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208846" start="382" end="413" title="How to Get Ahead in Advertising" label="How to Get Ahead in Advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q146360" start="472" end="491" title="Stonebridge, London" label="Stonebridge, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="554" end="562" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="563" end="579" title="Irish immigrants" label="Irish immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="673" end="688" title="sexually abused" label="sexually abused"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619225" start="848" end="877" title="Gunnersbury Boys&amp;#x27; School" label="Gunnersbury Boys&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="881" end="892" title="London" label="west London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244704" start="956" end="979" title="Trinity Hall, Cambridge" label="Trinity Hall, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q684402" start="1051" end="1061" title="Black belt (martial arts)" label="black belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1133" end="1156" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="1247" end="1258" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q857679" start="1288" end="1308" title="Cambridge Footlights" label="Cambridge Footlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="1346" end="1357" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q168724" start="1359" end="1372" title="Emma Thompson" label="Emma Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q293020" start="1374" end="1387" title="Sandi Toksvig" label="Sandi Toksvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149788" start="1389" end="1399" title="Jan Ravens" label="Jan Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329683" start="1404" end="1418" title="Richard Vranch" label="Richard Vranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284722" start="1491" end="1504" title="Perrier Award" label="Perrier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="1515" end="1520" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025421" start="1527" end="1543" title="The Cellar Tapes" label="The Cellar Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944522" start="1814" end="1827" title="Chris Tarrant" label="Chris Tarrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072078" start="1854" end="1860" title="O.T.T. (television series)" label="O.T.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q7426747" start="1874" end="1891" title="Saturday Stayback" label="Saturday Stayback"/>
<link wikidata="Q922713" start="2098" end="2122" title="Whose Line Is It Anyway? (British TV series)" label="Whose Line Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384407" start="2234" end="2246" title="Mike McShane" label="Mike McShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="2392" end="2415" title="Have I Got News for You" label="Have I Got News for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q182727" start="2465" end="2480" title="The Crying Game" label="The Crying Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810899" start="2494" end="2504" title="To Die For (1994 film)" label="To Die For"/>
<link wikidata="Q249235" start="2518" end="2538" title="Peter&amp;#x27;s Friends" label="Peter&amp;#x27;s Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897923" start="2552" end="2574" title="Up &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Under (film)" label="Up &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="2801" end="2804" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710951" start="2818" end="2834" title="That&amp;#x27;s Love (TV series)" label="That&amp;#x27;s Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353206" start="2846" end="2860" title="Jimmy Mulville" label="Jimmy Mulville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520352" start="2936" end="2952" title="The Comedy Store (London)" label="The Comedy Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136582" start="3029" end="3035" title="Cluedo (British game show)" label="Cluedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177291" start="3062" end="3071" title="David Yip" label="David Yip"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036304" start="3130" end="3145" title="Trivial Pursuit (UK game show)" label="Trivial Pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q204414" start="3198" end="3215" title="Carry On Columbus" label="Carry On Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790380" start="3333" end="3351" title="The Krypton Factor" label="The Krypton Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520071" start="3434" end="3445" title="GamesMaster" label="GamesMaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316525" start="3500" end="3513" title="Just a Gigolo (TV series)" label="Just a Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331688" start="3614" end="3627" title="Just A Minute" label="Just A Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533732" start="3767" end="3786" title="Gentleman_detective" label="gentlemen detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183796" start="3787" end="3792" title="spoof" label="spoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="4215" end="4224" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695049" start="4322" end="4340" title="Ahead of the Class" label="Ahead of the Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="4352" end="4365" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098236" start="4414" end="4423" title="Bad Girls (TV series)" label="Bad Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039222" start="4479" end="4490" title="Life Begins (TV series)" label="Life Begins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956169" start="4548" end="4564" title="The Weakest Link (British game show)" label="The Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914639" start="4582" end="4595" title="Vanessa Feltz" label="Vanessa Feltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q723759" start="4697" end="4719" title="Terrence Higgins Trust" label="Terrence Higgins Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="4770" end="4787" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567932" start="4797" end="4809" title="Eric Talford" label="Eric Talford"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4882" end="4913" title="Lady Godiva: Back in the Saddle" label="Lady Godiva: Back in the Saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40028" start="4959" end="4969" title="Robin Hood (2006 TV series)" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q523487" start="4990" end="5007" title="Show Me the Money (Robin Hood episode)" label="Show Me the Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667814" start="5093" end="5100" title="Kingdom (British TV series)" label="Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q922713" start="5172" end="5196" title="Whose Line Is It Anyway? (British TV series)" label="Whose Line Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q359665" start="5214" end="5228" title="David Walliams" label="David Walliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072690" start="5230" end="5244" title="Josie Lawrence" label="Josie Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979423" start="5246" end="5260" title="Clive Anderson" label="Clive Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941484" start="5262" end="5274" title="Humphrey Ker" label="Humphrey Ker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990189" start="5279" end="5293" title="Neil Mullarkey" label="Neil Mullarkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="5306" end="5318" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="5457" end="5469" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112475" start="5632" end="5639" title="Horizon (British TV series)" label="Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713263" start="5978" end="5996" title="alcohol dependence" label="alcohol dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329683" start="6154" end="6168" title="Richard Vranch" label="Richard Vranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410962" start="6363" end="6387" title="King&amp;#x27;s Head Theatre" label="King&amp;#x27;s Head Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768639" start="6409" end="6419" title="the Thekla" label="the Thekla"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="6428" end="6435" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="6462" end="6471" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6483" end="6497" title="The Music Game" label="The Music Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="6539" end="6542" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="6592" end="6600" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="6643" end="6651" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470358" start="6681" end="6695" title="Me and My Girl" label="Me and My Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q128033678" start="6760" end="6781" title="Neville&amp;#x27;s Island (play)" label="Neville&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303223" start="6852" end="6886" title="Rector of the University of Dundee" label="Rector of the University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q982182" start="7190" end="7210" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="7224" end="7249" title="Rocky Horror Show" label="Rocky Horror Tribute Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="7264" end="7283" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="Royal Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352559" start="7966" end="7976" title="Robin Ince" label="Robin Ince"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329683" start="7978" end="7992" title="Richard Vranch" label="Richard Vranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307060" start="7997" end="8009" title="Julian Clary" label="Julian Clary"/>
<link wikidata="Q922713" start="8078" end="8102" title="Whose Line Is It Anyway? (British TV series)" label="Whose Line Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332059" start="8157" end="8171" title="midlife crisis" label="midlife crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="8192" end="8199" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="8716" end="8732" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609250" start="8847" end="8886" title="The Secret Life of the Manic Depressive" label="The Secret Life of the Manic Depressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="9002" end="9008" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q15435723" start="9114" end="9137" title="Mark Michael Hutchinson" label="Mark Michael Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494762" start="9464" end="9473" title="Last Word" label="Last Word"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567589" wikidata="Q2072063" url="?curid=567589" title="Patent ductus arteriosus">
<text>Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a medical condition in which the &quot;ductus arteriosus&quot; fails to close after birth: this allows a portion of oxygenated blood from the left heart to flow back to the lungs from the aorta, which has a higher blood pressure, to the pulmonary artery, which has a lower blood pressure. Symptoms are uncommon at birth and shortly thereafter, but later in the first year of life there is often the onset of an increased work of breathing and failure to gain weight at a normal rate. With time, an uncorrected PDA usually leads to pulmonary hypertension followed by right-sided heart failure.

The &quot;ductus arteriosus&quot; is a fetal blood vessel that normally closes soon after birth. This closure is caused by vessel constriction immediately after birth as circulation changes occur, followed by the occlusion of the vessel’s lumen in the following days. In a PDA, the vessel does not close, but remains &quot;patent&quot; (open), resulting in an abnormal transmission of blood from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. PDA is common in newborns with persistent respiratory problems such as hypoxia, and has a high occurrence in premature newborns. Premature newborns are more likely to be hypoxic and have PDA due to underdevelopment of the heart and lungs.

If the congenital defect transposition of the great vessels is present in addition to a PDA, the PDA is not surgically closed since it is the only way that oxygenated blood can mix with deoxygenated blood. In these cases, prostaglandins are used to keep the PDA open, and NSAIDs are not administered until surgical correction of the two defects is completed.

In full-term newborns, PDA occurs in 1 in 2,000 births, and accounts for 5–10% of congenital heart disease cases. PDA occurs in 20–60% of all premature newborns, where its incidence inversely linked with gestational age and weight.

== Signs and symptoms ==
Common symptoms include:
* dyspnea (shortness of breath)

Signs include:
* tachycardia (a heart rate exceeding the normal resting rate)
* continuous &quot;machine-like&quot; (also described as &quot;rolling-thunder&quot; and &quot;to-and-fro&quot;) heart murmur (usually from aorta to pulmonary artery, with higher flow during systole and lower flow during diastole)
* cardiomegaly (enlarged heart, reflecting ventricular dilation and volume overload)
* left subclavicular thrill
* bounding pulse
* widened pulse pressure
* increased cardiac output
* increased systolic pressure
* poor growth
* differential cyanosis, i.e. cyanosis of the lower extremities but not of the upper body.

People with patent ductus arteriosus typically present in good health, with normal respirations and heart rate. If the PDA is moderate or large, widened pulse pressure and bounding peripheral pulses are frequently present, reflecting increased left ventricular stroke volume and diastolic run-off of blood into the (initially lower-resistance) pulmonary vascular bed. Eisenmenger physiology is pulmonary hypertension due to a left-to-right shunt. Prominent suprasternal and carotid pulsations may be noted secondary to increased left ventricular stroke volume.

==Risk factors==
Known risk factors include:
* Preterm birth
* Congenital rubella syndrome
* Chromosomal abnormalities (e.g., Down syndrome)
* Genetic conditions such as Loeys–Dietz syndrome (would also present with other heart defects), Wiedemann–Steiner syndrome, and CHARGE syndrome.
* Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder

== Diagnosis ==

PDA is usually diagnosed using noninvasive techniques. Echocardiography (in which sound waves are used to capture the motion of the heart) and associated Doppler studies are the primary methods of detecting PDA. Electrocardiography (ECG), in which electrodes are used to record the electrical activity of the heart, is not particularly helpful as no specific rhythms or ECG patterns can be used to detect PDA.

A chest X-ray may be taken, which reveals overall heart size (as a reflection of the combined mass of the cardiac chambers) and the appearance of blood flow to the lungs. A small PDA most often accompanies a normal-sized heart and normal blood flow to the lungs. A large PDA generally accompanies an enlarged cardiac silhouette and increased blood flow to the lungs.

== Prevention ==
Some evidence suggests that intravenous NSAIDs, such as indomethacin, administration on the first day of life to all preterm infants reduces the risk of developing a PDA and the complications associated with PDA. Intravenous indomethacin treatment in premature infants also may reduce the need for surgical intervention. Administering ibuprofen probably helps to prevent PDA and reduce the need for surgery but it also likely increases the risk of kidney complications.

== Treatment ==
Symptomatic PDA can be treated with both surgical and non-surgical methods.

=== Conservative ===
Neonates without adverse symptoms may simply be monitored as outpatients.

=== Surgery ===
Surgically, the DA may be closed by ligation (though support in premature infants is mixed). This can either be performed manually and be tied shut, or with intravascular coils or plugs that leads to formation of a thrombus in the DA.

Devices developed by Franz Freudenthal block the blood vessel with woven structures of nitinol wire. Newer procedures performed effectively in older, bigger children include catheter PDA occlusion and video-assisted thoracoscopic PDA clipping.

=== Prostaglandin inhibitors ===
Because prostaglandin E2 is responsible for keeping the DA open, NSAIDs (which can inhibit prostaglandin synthesis) such as indomethacin or a special form of ibuprofen have been suggested as therapy to initiate PDA closure. Findings from a 2015 systematic review concluded that, for closure of a PDA in preterm and/or low birth weight infants, ibuprofen is as effective as indomethacin. It also causes fewer side effects (such as transient acute kidney injury) and reduces the risk of necrotising enterocolitis. The evidence supporting the effectiveness and safety of paracetamol (acetaminophen) is less clear. A review and meta-analysis showed that paracetamol may be effective for closure of a PDA in preterm infants. A 2018 network meta-analysis that compared indomethacin, paracetamol and ibuprofen at different doses and administration schemes among them found that a high dose of oral ibuprofen may offer the highest likelihood of closure in preterm infants. However, a 2020 systematic review found that early (≤7 days of life) or very early (≤72 hours of life) pharmacological treatment of symptomatic PDA does not reduce death or other poor clinical outcomes in preterm infants but instead increases their exposure to NSAIDS. Vasodilator therapy is suitable for people with Eisenmenger physiology. To assess improvement in people with Eisenmenger physiology, close monitory of toe oxygen saturation is required, for there exists a chance of reversal after a successful right-to-left shunt 

While indometacin can be used to close a PDA, some neonates require their PDA be kept open. Keeping a &quot;ductus arteriosus patent&quot; is indicated in neonates born with concurrent heart malformations, such as transposition of the great vessels. Drugs such as alprostadil, a PGE-1 analog, can be used to keep a PDA open until the primary defect is corrected surgically.

== Prognosis ==
If left untreated, the disease may progress from left-to-right shunt (acyanotic heart) to right-to-left shunt (cyanotic heart), called Eisenmenger&#x27;s syndrome. Pulmonary hypertension is a potential long-term outcome, which may require a heart and/or lung transplant. Another complication of PDA is intraventricular hemorrhage.

==History==
Robert Edward Gross, MD performed the first successful ligation of a patent ductus arteriosus on a seven-year-old girl at Children&#x27;s Hospital Boston in 1938.

== Adult ==
Since PDA is usually identified in infants, it is less common in adults, but it can have serious consequences, and is usually corrected surgically upon diagnosis.

==See also==
* George Alexander Gibson

==References==
== External links ==
* Patent Ductus Arteriosus Causes from US Department of Health and Human Services
* Patent Ductus Arteriosus from Merck
* Patent ductus arteriosus information for parents.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2072063" start="0" end="24" title="Patent ductus arteriosus" label="Patent ductus arteriosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072063" start="26" end="29" title="Patent ductus arteriosus" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163923" start="73" end="90" title="ductus arteriosus" label="ductus arteriosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="118" end="123" title="childbirth" label="birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="161" end="166" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="181" end="186" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q101004" start="222" end="227" title="aorta" label="aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="248" end="262" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q206280" start="271" end="287" title="pulmonary artery" label="pulmonary artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808249" start="455" end="472" title="work of breathing" label="work of breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497481" start="477" end="516" title="Failure to thrive" label="failure to gain weight at a normal rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128595" start="565" end="587" title="pulmonary hypertension" label="pulmonary hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="612" end="625" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657962" start="667" end="685" title="Fetal circulation" label="fetal blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="1130" end="1137" title="hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="1168" end="1185" title="premature newborn" label="premature newborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758730" start="1324" end="1358" title="transposition of the great vessels" label="transposition of the great vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q209717" start="1521" end="1534" title="prostaglandin" label="prostaglandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="1944" end="1951" title="dyspnea" label="dyspnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="1992" end="2003" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060911" start="2166" end="2178" title="heart murmur" label="heart murmur"/>
<link wikidata="Q496359" start="2244" end="2251" title="systole" label="systole"/>
<link wikidata="Q492905" start="2274" end="2282" title="diastole" label="diastole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729124" start="2286" end="2298" title="cardiomegaly" label="cardiomegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729124" start="2327" end="2347" title="ventricular dilation" label="ventricular dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143767" start="2352" end="2367" title="volume overload" label="volume overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q475918" start="2399" end="2413" title="bounding pulse" label="bounding pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759415" start="2424" end="2438" title="pulse pressure" label="pulse pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="2451" end="2465" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="2478" end="2495" title="systolic pressure" label="systolic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497481" start="2498" end="2509" title="Failure to thrive" label="poor growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192120" start="2525" end="2533" title="cyanosis" label="cyanosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759415" start="2755" end="2769" title="pulse pressure" label="pulse pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698533" start="2863" end="2876" title="stroke volume" label="stroke volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q572695" start="2970" end="2981" title="Eisenmenger&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Eisenmenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475848" start="3187" end="3198" title="risk factor" label="risk factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="3211" end="3224" title="Preterm birth" label="Preterm birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724539" start="3227" end="3254" title="Congenital rubella syndrome" label="Congenital rubella syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q744962" start="3257" end="3282" title="Chromosomal abnormalities" label="Chromosomal abnormalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="3290" end="3303" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="3307" end="3325" title="Genetic conditions" label="Genetic conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508669" start="3334" end="3354" title="Loeys–Dietz syndrome" label="Loeys–Dietz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975353" start="3402" end="3428" title="Wiedemann–Steiner syndrome" label="Wiedemann–Steiner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023604" start="3434" end="3449" title="CHARGE syndrome" label="CHARGE syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002116" start="3453" end="3484" title="Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder" label="Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755504" start="3534" end="3556" title="Non-invasive technique" label="noninvasive techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q216933" start="3558" end="3574" title="Echocardiography" label="Echocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="3585" end="3595" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577488" start="3657" end="3664" title="Doppler ultrasonography" label="Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="3715" end="3734" title="Electrocardiography" label="Electrocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="3751" end="3760" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="3785" end="3795" title="electricity" label="electrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="3922" end="3927" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514888" start="4223" end="4241" title="Cardiac Silhouette" label="cardiac silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q409231" start="4355" end="4367" title="indomethacin" label="indomethacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q961326" start="4747" end="4767" title="Oliguria" label="kidney complications"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="4827" end="4835" title="surgery" label="surgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="4945" end="4955" title="outpatient" label="outpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="5190" end="5198" title="thrombus" label="thrombus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787217" start="5232" end="5249" title="Franz Freudenthal" label="Franz Freudenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459028" start="5298" end="5305" title="nitinol" label="nitinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q416554" start="5497" end="5513" title="prostaglandin E2" label="prostaglandin E2"/>
<link wikidata="Q409231" start="5613" end="5625" title="indomethacin" label="indomethacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186969" start="5647" end="5656" title="ibuprofen" label="ibuprofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="5929" end="5948" title="acute kidney injury" label="acute kidney injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859678" start="5974" end="5999" title="Necrotizing enterocolitis" label="necrotising enterocolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57055" start="6139" end="6150" title="paracetamol" label="paracetamol"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="6216" end="6237" title="network meta-analysis" label="network meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q409231" start="6994" end="7005" title="indometacin" label="indometacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758730" start="7202" end="7236" title="transposition of the great vessels" label="transposition of the great vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q579348" start="7252" end="7263" title="alprostadil" label="alprostadil"/>
<link wikidata="Q579348" start="7267" end="7272" title="Prostaglandin E1" label="PGE-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677976" start="7449" end="7464" title="Acyanotic heart defect" label="acyanotic heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186829" start="7490" end="7504" title="Cyanotic heart defect" label="cyanotic heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q572695" start="7514" end="7541" title="Eisenmenger&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Eisenmenger&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128595" start="7543" end="7565" title="Pulmonary hypertension" label="Pulmonary hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="7638" end="7648" title="Organ transplantation" label="transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058597" start="7681" end="7708" title="intraventricular hemorrhage" label="intraventricular hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343982" start="7723" end="7742" title="Robert Edward Gross" label="Robert Edward Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000479" start="7845" end="7876" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital Boston" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18911981" start="8078" end="8101" title="George Alexander Gibson" label="George Alexander Gibson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567591" wikidata="Q261554" url="?curid=567591" title="Pier Angelo Manzolli">
<text>Pier Angelo Manzolli was a name used for the author of the book &quot;Zodiacus Vitae&quot;, who is believed to be the Neapolitan poet Marcello Stellato, in Latin Marcellus Palingenius Stellatus (born ca. 1500 - died in Cesena before 1551).

The persona of Pier Angelo Manzolli was created by Jacopo Facciolati in the eighteenth-century.

==Writing==

&quot;Zodiacus vitae&quot; is a Latin poem divided into 12 books, one for each sign of the zodiac, published at Basel in 1537 and 1543 (3rd edition), but first published in Venice in 1536, and dedicated to Ercole II d&#x27;Este, duke of Ferrara. The didactic poem addresses the subject of human happiness in connection with scientific knowledge, and combines metaphysical speculation with satirical attacks on ecclesiastical hypocrisy, and especially on the Popes and Martin Luther.

It was translated into several languages, but fell under the ban of the Inquisition on the ground of its rationalizing tendencies. In 1551. After Stellato&#x27;s death, the Catholic Church burned his heretical bones and Pope Paul IV placed his book in the first Index Librorum Prohibitorum, (&quot;Index of Prohibited Books&quot;), in 1559.

===Influence in England===
As a Christian humanist poet, he features strongly in the grammar-school education of 16th century England, translations including that of 1565 by Barnabe Googe. His specific influence on William Shakespeare has been noted especially in the Seven ages of man speech from &quot;As You Like It&quot;.

==See also==
==References==

==Further reading==
* F. Watson, &quot;The Zodiacus Vitae&quot; (nd)
* C. B. Garrigus, &quot;A Study of the Parallels Between Shakespeare and Palingenius&quot; (Illinois 1938)
* Peter Nahon, «De Marcelli Palingenii Stellati carmine, anno 1534 vulgato, quod &#x27;Zodiacus vitæ&#x27; inscribitur», &quot;Melissa, Folia perenni Latinitati dicata&quot; 210, 2019, 11-14.

==External links==
* Marcellus Palingenius Stellatus, &quot;Zodiacus Vitae&quot;

* Marcellus Palingenius Stellatus, &quot;Zodiacus Vitae&quot; Book 11, &quot;Aquarius&quot;
* Essay in Latin about the &quot;Zodiacus Vitae&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q261554" start="0" end="20" title="Pier Angelo Manzolli" label="Pier Angelo Manzolli"/>
<link wikidata="Q124706429" start="70" end="84" title="Zodiacus Vitae" label="Zodiacus Vitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q261554" start="134" end="151" title="Pier Angelo Manzolli" label="Marcello Stellato"/>
<link wikidata="Q261554" start="162" end="193" title="Pier Angelo Manzolli" label="Marcellus Palingenius Stellatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662" start="219" end="225" title="Cesena" label="Cesena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157640" start="292" end="309" title="Jacopo Facciolati" label="Jacopo Facciolati"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="463" end="468" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="524" end="530" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348702" start="557" end="578" title="Ercole II d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Ercole II d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532877" start="580" end="595" title="duke of Ferrara" label="duke of Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="809" end="813" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="819" end="832" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="907" end="918" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q101430" start="1055" end="1067" title="Pope Paul IV" label="Pope Paul IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="1097" end="1124" title="Index Librorum Prohibitorum" label="Index Librorum Prohibitorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q734076" start="1351" end="1364" title="Barnabe Googe" label="Barnabe Googe"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1392" end="1411" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263351" start="1445" end="1462" title="Seven ages of man" label="Seven ages of man"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="1481" end="1495" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567594" wikidata="Q14709772" url="?curid=567594" title="Mount Marty University">
<text>Mount Marty University is a private Benedictine university in Yankton, South Dakota.

==Campus==
Mount Marty University is in Yankton, South Dakota, a town of 15,000 people. Located on the bluffs of the Missouri River, the 80-acre campus has a mix of modern and historic buildings. The university also has locations in Watertown and Sioux Falls.

==Athletics==
The Mount Marty athletic teams are called the Lancers. The university is a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing in the Great Plains Athletic Conference (GPAC) since the 2000–01 academic year. The Lancers previously competed in the defunct South Dakota Intercollegiate Conference (SDIC) from 1995–96 to 1999–2000.

Mount Marty competes in 22 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men&#x27;s sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, soccer, tennis and track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor); while women&#x27;s sports include basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, softball, tennis, track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball; and co-ed sports include archery, competitive cheer, competitive dance and shotgun sports.

The primary athletic rival for the Lancers is the Dakota Wesleyan University Tigers.

==References==
==External links==
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14709772" start="0" end="22" title="Mount Marty University" label="Mount Marty University"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="28" end="35" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="36" end="47" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q989288" start="62" end="83" title="Yankton, South Dakota" label="Yankton, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q989288" start="126" end="147" title="Yankton, South Dakota" label="Yankton, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="203" end="217" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065503" start="319" end="328" title="Watertown, South Dakota" label="Watertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q131335" start="333" end="344" title="Sioux Falls, South Dakota" label="Sioux Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="450" end="499" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599768" start="535" end="567" title="Great Plains Athletic Conference" label="Great Plains Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566971" start="655" end="694" title="South Dakota Intercollegiate Conference" label="South Dakota Intercollegiate Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210062" start="1217" end="1243" title="Dakota Wesleyan University" label="Dakota Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210062" start="1244" end="1250" title="Dakota Wesleyan Tigers" label="Tigers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567596" wikidata="Q1390963" url="?curid=567596" title="Marthinus van Schalkwyk">
<text>Marthinus Christoffel Johannes van Schalkwyk (born 10 November 1959) is a South African politician, academic, and lawyer, who serves as High Commissioner to Australia. He previously served as MP and Minister of Tourism in the Cabinet of South Africa. Formerly Premier of the Western Cape and Leader of the Opposition in the Parliament of South Africa, he was the leader of the New National Party from its inception on 8 September 1997 until its dissolution on 9 April 2005. He was appointed Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism in the Thabo Mbeki administration after merging his party with the ruling African National Congress (ANC), despite the poor performance of the former in the 2004 General Election.

==Early life and career==
Van Schalkwyk matriculated from Pietersburg High School in 1977. He was a national serviceman in the South African Defence Force (SADF) from 1978 to 1979 and later attended the Rand Afrikaans University, where he earned a Masters of Arts in political science and a B Proc. (a junior legal degree). As a prominent student leader of whites in the 1980s, he was a founding member and chairman of Jeugkrag (Afrikaans for Youth Power), an organisation purportedly opposed to the Afrikaner establishment, but which was secretly funded by military intelligence. Later, he lectured Political Science at Rand Afrikaans University (RAU) and Stellenbosch University.

==Political career==
His political career began during the late apartheid years at the Rand Afrikaans University as chairman of the Student Representative Council (SRC), the Afrikaanse Studentebond (ASB), and later of the Ruiterwag, the youth wing of the Broederbond.

Van Schalkwyk succeeded Frederik Willem de Klerk as leader of the National Party in 1996, and reorganised it on 8 September 1997 as the New National Party in a bid to distance the party from its apartheid past. He remained the NNP&#x27;s leader until its dissolution on 9 April 2005. He also served as Premier of the Western Cape and Leader of the Opposition in the Parliament of South Africa.

Informally, he was referred to by detractors as &quot;kortbroek&quot; (lit. &quot;shorts&quot;), a name he earned because of his boyish appearance and lack of political experience when compared to his predecessor, Frederik Willem de Klerk. He was one of the few National Party politicians who remained active in politics after the party&#x27;s decline.

In August 2004 it was announced that Van Schalkwyk would become a member of the ANC, and that the NNP would be disbanded in 2005 or 2006 at the latest. This decision was finalized on 9 April 2005, when the party&#x27;s federal committee overwhelmingly endorsed its regional committees&#x27; recommendation to disband the party as soon as municipal election results were finalised.

===Environmental Affairs and Tourism work===
On 29 April 2004 Van Schalkwyk was appointed by President Thabo Mbeki as Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism for South Africa. He held the position until May 2009, when a new Ministry of Water and Environmental Affairs was created and he became Minister of Tourism.

Van Schalkwyk became President of the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment (AMCEN) in June 2008, when South Africa assumed the presidency of AMCEN at the beginning of its 12th Session.

In March 2010, he was nominated by South African President Jacob Zuma to succeed Yvo de Boer as the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The vote did not go his way and on 17 May 2010 de Boer was succeeded by Costa Rican diplomat Christiana Figueres who had been involved with the Center for Sustainable Development in the Americas since the early 1990s.

In its annual review of ministerial performance for 2013 the &quot;Mail &amp; Guardian&quot; gave van Schalkwyk a C grade, concluding that &quot;With inadequate political credentials, Marthinus van Schalkwyk has justified his stay in Cabinet long after the demise of his New National Party by actually doing his work. Tourism figures have improved year by year and his department has consistently tried to innovate to attract more visitors ... Van Schalkwyk may not return after elections, but under him tourism has grown into a long-pants department.&quot;

==Ambassador==
Van Schalkwyk served as South Africa&#x27;s ambassador to Greece (2015–2019). In April 2019, Marthinus van Schalkwyk transferred from Athens to Australia for the next four years as High Commissioner (Ambassador).

==Personal life==
Van Schalkwyk is married to Suzette Minama Labuschagne and has a son, Christiaan, and a daughter, Maryke.

== References ==
==External links==
* Announcement of Van Schalkwyk&#x27;s cross-over to the ANC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1390963" start="0" end="44" title="Marthinus van Schalkwyk" label="Marthinus Christoffel Johannes van Schalkwyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997324" start="260" end="287" title="Premier of the Western Cape" label="Premier of the Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962025" start="292" end="316" title="Leader of the Opposition (South Africa)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185780" start="324" end="350" title="Parliament of South Africa" label="Parliament of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751732" start="377" end="395" title="New National Party (South Africa)" label="New National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866418" start="491" end="536" title="Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism" label="Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="611" end="636" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464556" start="694" end="715" title="2004 South African general election" label="2004 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779935" start="845" end="872" title="South African Defence Force" label="South African Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285622" start="921" end="946" title="Rand Afrikaans University" label="Rand Afrikaans University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058978" start="1137" end="1145" title="Jeugkrag" label="Jeugkrag"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="1147" end="1156" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="1218" end="1227" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285622" start="1339" end="1364" title="Rand Afrikaans University" label="Rand Afrikaans University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066492" start="1375" end="1398" title="Stellenbosch University" label="Stellenbosch University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="1465" end="1474" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285622" start="1488" end="1513" title="Rand Afrikaans University" label="Rand Afrikaans University"/>
<link wikidata="Q385832" start="1656" end="1667" title="Broederbond" label="Broederbond"/>
<link wikidata="Q151813" start="1694" end="1718" title="F. W. de Klerk" label="Frederik Willem de Klerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="1736" end="1750" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751732" start="1806" end="1824" title="New National Party (South Africa)" label="New National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997324" start="1972" end="1999" title="Premier of the Western Cape" label="Premier of the Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962025" start="2004" end="2028" title="Leader of the Opposition (South Africa)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185780" start="2036" end="2062" title="Parliament of South Africa" label="Parliament of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151813" start="2279" end="2303" title="Frederik Willem de Klerk" label="Frederik Willem de Klerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q101547" start="2904" end="2915" title="Thabo Mbeki" label="Thabo Mbeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260304" start="2919" end="2964" title="South African Ministry of Environmental Affairs and Tourism" label="Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866418" start="3031" end="3074" title="Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs" label="Ministry of Water and Environmental Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981747" start="3101" end="3120" title="Minister of Tourism (South Africa)" label="Minister of Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3161" end="3210" title="African Ministerial Conference on the Environment" label="African Ministerial Conference on the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q57282" start="3381" end="3391" title="Jacob Zuma" label="Jacob Zuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q730741" start="3403" end="3414" title="Yvo de Boer" label="Yvo de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="3449" end="3502" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q518828" start="3597" end="3616" title="Christiana Figueres" label="Christiana Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509944" start="3790" end="3809" title="Mail &amp;amp; Guardian" label="Mail &amp;amp; Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567598" wikidata="Q7842888" url="?curid=567598" title="Trinity Lutheran College (Washington)">
<text>Trinity Lutheran College was a private Christian liberal arts college in Everett, Washington, USA. It offered bachelor&#x27;s degrees, associate degrees and 1-year certificates. The college ceased instruction in 2016.

==History==
Lutheran Bible Institute of Seattle (LBI) was founded in 1944 as an extension of the Lutheran Bible Institute based in Minneapolis and became independent in 1959. The college initially provided a biblical studies education and enrichment courses and, in the 1970s, began to add bachelor&#x27;s degree programs in biblical studies, global missions, Christian education and youth ministry.

LBI initially operated from Gethsemane Lutheran Church in downtown Seattle. Growing enrollment led to a move to a new campus on Seattle&#x27;s Greenwood Avenue in 1949. In 1979, after a decade of sustained enrollment growth, the college purchased the former Providence Heights College campus in Issaquah, Washington, from the Sisters of Providence, with staff and students moving to the new campus mid-school year. Shortly thereafter, LBI sold a significant portion of the unused property on the south side of the school to a developer. LBI played a key role in the development of this property, transforming it into a thriving retirement community presently known as Providence Point in honor of the previous school.

In 1982, LBI became regionally accredited by the Northwest Association of Schools and Colleges (now Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities). LBI changed its name to Trinity Lutheran College in 1999 to reflect its status as an accredited four-year college. Trinity began to add new majors, including music and worship, early childhood education, business management, psychology and communications. Enrollment began to decline in the 1990s and, faced with financial uncertainty, the college decided to sell the Providence Heights campus and to relocate again, moving to downtown Everett, in fall 2008.

The campus center in Everett was located at 2802 Wetmore Avenue, at the corner of California Street and Wetmore Avenue. It had six floors devoted to classrooms, administrative offices, faculty offices, the library, a student store and a commons area. A chapel and additional classroom space was added in 2014. The center had a parking garage connected via a skywalk. Student housing was provided in a nearby apartment complex and the YMCA, adjacent to the campus center, was available for student recreation use.

=== 2016 closure ===
On January 12, 2016, chair of the college&#x27;s board of directors, Rev. Dr. Kevin Bates, published an open letter expressing a plan to end operation of the college. Academic instruction ceased on May 7, 2016, with more than 70 students receiving degrees at the final commencement ceremony. After the closure, the campus center was sold to Funko as its new corporate headquarters.

The college&#x27;s supporting organization, the Trinity Education Foundation, still exists, providing scholarship support to students attending private Christian colleges in the Pacific Northwest.

==Athletics==
The Trinity Lutheran athletic teams were called the Eagles. The college was a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing as an NAIA Independent within the Association of Independent Institutions (AII) under associate/provisional status from 2014–15 to 2015–16. It was also a member of the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA), primarily competing as an independent in the West Region of the Division I level.

Trinity Lutheran competed in ten intercollegiate varsity sports. Men&#x27;s sports included cross country, golf, soccer, swimming and track and field. Women&#x27;s sports included cross country, golf, soccer, swimming and track and field. Other sports included men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s tennis.

==References==
==External links==
* Trinity Education Foundation website
* Official athletics website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7842888" start="0" end="24" title="Trinity Lutheran College (Washington)" label="Trinity Lutheran College"/>
<link wikidata="Q392599" start="73" end="92" title="Everett, Washington" label="Everett, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="110" end="133" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degrees" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="687" end="694" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40251" start="915" end="935" title="Issaquah, Washington" label="Issaquah, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060001" start="1388" end="1433" title="Northwest Association of Schools and Colleges" label="Northwest Association of Schools and Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509271" start="2827" end="2832" title="Funko" label="Funko"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="3173" end="3222" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952247" start="3257" end="3273" title="NAIA independent schools" label="NAIA Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971483" start="3419" end="3466" title="National Christian College Athletic Association" label="National Christian College Athletic Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567599" wikidata="Q422303" url="?curid=567599" title="Ed Schultz">
<text>Edward Andrew Schultz (January 27, 1954 – July 5, 2018) was an American television and radio host, political commentator, news anchor and sports broadcaster.

He was the host of &quot;The Ed Show&quot;, a weekday news talk program on MSNBC from 2009 to 2015, and &quot;The Ed Schultz Show&quot;, a talk radio show, nationally syndicated by Dial Global from 2004 to 2014. The radio show ended on May 23, 2014, and was replaced by a one-hour podcast, &quot;Ed Schultz News and Commentary&quot;, which ran from 2015 until his death. Schultz also hosted a daily primetime weekday show, &quot;News with Ed Schultz&quot;, on RT America TV channel based in Washington, D.C., that is part of the RT network.

==Early life==
Schultz was born in Norfolk, Virginia, and grew up in the Larchmont area near Old Dominion University, the son of George Schultz, an aeronautical engineer, and Mary Schultz, an English teacher. He attended Larchmont Elementary School, Blair Junior High, and graduated in 1972 from Maury High School in Norfolk.

He moved to Minnesota to play football on a scholarship from Minnesota State University Moorhead. He made All-American and became the NAIA passing leader in 1977 and signed as a free agent with the Oakland Raiders. In 1979, Schultz tried out for the Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the Canadian Football League.

==Broadcasting career==

===Sportscasting===
After his football career, he worked as a sportscaster in Fargo, North Dakota, for two local stations, first KTHI-TV (now KVLY-TV) then on WDAY-TV beginning 1983. Schultz anchored nightly sports broadcasts at WDAY-TV and starting in 1982 did radio play-by-play of North Dakota State University (NDSU) football games. Management asked Schultz to take some time off after an incident in which Schultz exited the broadcast booth to look for a North Dakota State fan who threw a bottle of Southern Comfort through the booth window.

Schultz, who was touted as the &quot;Voice of the Bison&quot; for many years at WDAY, left in 1996 and began broadcasting for KFGO in Fargo, doing play-by-play work on University of North Dakota (UND) Fighting Hawks football broadcasts beginning in 1998. Schultz left as UND play-by-play man in 2003 to focus on his national radio show.

===Talk radio===

In 1992, Schultz became a conservative political talk show host on WDAY. In 1996, Schultz moved to KFGO. Schultz&#x27;s &quot;News and Views&quot; radio show quickly grew into a regional broadcast stretching from South Dakota to Minnesota. His political views leaned towards the right during the early years, and Schultz told the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; that he &quot;lined up with the Republicans because they were anti-tax and I wanted to make a lot of money.&quot; His political views became more liberal after he visited a Salvation Army cafeteria in 1998 and later took his radio show on the road riding in a 38-foot motorhome. Throughout the tour, Schultz visited families in rural North Dakota and described his tour as &quot;the on-the-job experience that have changed my thinking as to where we&#x27;re going as a country.&quot;

Schultz pondered a run as a Republican for the United States House of Representatives against Democratic Representative Earl Pomeroy in 1994, but decided against it after visiting with state Republican leaders.

In 2005, Schultz began a nationally syndicated radio show with a liberal-leaning perspective; the expansion was funded by the New York-based nonprofit called Democracy Radio. &quot;The Ed Schultz Show&quot; was broadcast from the Fargo, North Dakota, studios of KFGO via the Jones Radio Networks to over 100 radio stations (). The show was syndicated by Dial Global, and could be heard nationwide on Sirius Satellite Radio&#x27;s &quot;SIRIUS Left&quot; channel, and XM Satellite Radio&#x27;s America Left channel. The program was also heard on Armed Forces Radio. Schultz&#x27;s radio show moved to New York City in May 2009, a relocation brought on by his new television show at MSNBC.

Schultz interviewed guests and often featured Norman Goldman as &quot;Senior Legal Analyst&quot; when issues of law were discussed. Goldman was a frequent substitute host because he maintained high ratings for Schultz&#x27;s show. Goldman&#x27;s popularity made it a natural step for him to host his own national talk show. Norman Goldman, a Los Angeles lawyer, describes himself as &quot;fiercely independent&quot; and continues to acknowledge Schultz&#x27;s mentoring.

According to a 2008 survey done by &quot;Talkers&quot; magazine, Schultz ranked #17 nationally, with a weekly audience of more than 3 million listeners. On November 30, 2006, Schultz announced he was moving to the &quot;prime real estate&quot; time slot from noon to 3 p.m. Eastern Time, to compete directly with Rush Limbaugh, whose show is broadcast in that time slot.

During his show on May 24, 2011, Schultz called Laura Ingraham both a &quot;right-wing slut&quot; and a &quot;talk slut.&quot; Feminist organizations, including the Women&#x27;s Media Center, called for his suspension. The following day he issued an apology by saying he &quot;used vile and inappropriate language when talking about talk show host Laura Ingraham. I am deeply sorry, and I apologize. It was wrong, uncalled for and I recognize the severity of what I said. I apologize to you, Laura, and ask for your forgiveness.&quot; He offered an indefinite self-suspension without pay. Ingraham accepted his apology: &quot;Ed Schultz said something about me on his show that was not all that nice, to say the least. It was pretty crude. He apologized, and I accept his apology. It seemed heartfelt, it seemed like he really wished he hadn&#x27;t said it and I accept that apology.&quot; MSNBC issued a statement saying that it had accepted Schultz&#x27;s offer to take one week of unpaid leave over the matter.

Schultz ended his radio show on May 23, 2014. He stated on MSNBC, &quot;This change will give me more flexibility to be on the road, to do the kind of shows I want to do here for The Ed Show here on MSNBC. This is on me, you know. I just don&#x27;t want to do a three-hour talk show anymore.&quot;

===&quot;The Ed Show&quot;===
On April 1, 2009, MSNBC announced the launch of &quot;The Ed Show&quot;, anchored by Schultz. The program replaced the 6 p.m. show &quot;1600 Pennsylvania Avenue&quot; with David Shuster, who moved to the 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. slot. &quot;The Ed Show&quot; debuted at 6 p.m. on Monday, April 6, 2009. At the close of 2010, Schultz made &quot;The Nation&quot;″s Progressive Honor Roll as the Most Valuable TV Voice and was deemed the &quot;most populist of MSNBC&#x27;s hosts&quot;.

After Keith Olbermann left MSNBC, &quot;The Ed Show&quot; moved to the 10 p.m. ET time slot on January 24, 2011, while The Last Word with Lawrence O&#x27;Donnell moved to Olbermann&#x27;s old time slot.

On August 15, 2011, Schultz used an edited video clip of Texas Governor Rick Perry at a rally talking about the national debt crisis. Governor Perry said &quot;getting America back to work is the most important issue that faces this country, being able to pay off $14.5 trillion or $16 trillion worth of debt. That big black cloud that hangs over America, that debt that is so monstrous.&quot; The audio of the clip was cut off after &quot;America&quot;, so Schultz&#x27;s audience did not hear &quot;that debt that is so monstrous&quot;. Governor Perry refers to the debt before and after the &quot;big black cloud&quot; statement. Schultz said, &quot;That black cloud Perry is talking about is President Barack Obama.&quot; The following day on his TV show Schultz apologized for taking Governor Perry out of context. &quot;We did not present the full context of those statements and we should have ... No doubt about it, it was a mistake and we regret the error ... we should not have included it in our coverage.&quot;

On October 19, 2011, NBC announced that effective October 24, 2011, &quot;The Ed Show&quot; would be moving to the 8 p.m. Eastern slot, with &quot;The Last Word with Lawrence O&#x27;Donnell&quot; returning to the 10 p.m. slot. On March 9, 2012, &quot;Politico&quot; reported that Schultz had received nearly $200,000 in speaking fees and advertisement charges from labor unions without publicly disclosing this income, a potential conflict of interest for his television show, which is billed as a news program.

In April 2011, NBC News producer and sound engineer Michael Queen sued Schultz, claiming Schultz should have compensated him for helping him get a TV show on MSNBC. Schultz argued there was no such agreement with Queen, and countersued Queen. On April 30, 2012, Washington federal district court Judge Beryl A. Howell issued a summary judgment that neither party owed anything to the other party. On April 4, 2014, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit overturned part of that judgment, saying that Queen&#x27;s claim of breach of partnership duties presented a &quot;genuine issue of material fact&quot; that deserved to be heard by a jury. At trial, Schultz won.

Schultz left his nightly 8 p.m. ET show to host a twice-a-week MSNBC show on weekends from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m. ET, beginning April 2013. The 8 p.m. weekdays time slot was taken over on April 1, 2013, with &quot;All In with Chris Hayes&quot;. Effective August 26, 2013, &quot;The Ed Show&quot; moved back to weekdays at 5 p.m. ET.

On July 30, 2015, MSNBC President Phil Griffin announced that the series had been cancelled in an effort to transition to news reporting. The program aired its final episode on July 31, 2015, without Schultz being present.

=== Allegations of political bias at MSNBC and subsequent firing ===
In an interview with &quot;National Review&quot;″s Jamie Weinstein. since redacted on their website, Schultz stated that he had prepared a report on Bernie Sanders&#x27; presidential candidate announcement at his home, but five minutes before the broadcast was due to air, he was angrily told by then-president of MSNBC Phil Griffin that &quot;you&#x27;re not covering this&quot; and &quot;you&#x27;re not covering Bernie Sanders&quot;. Schultz stated that he objected to the prohibition because he felt the topic of a presidential candidate announcement was relevant, but was told not to cover the announcement, and that he would be covering press conferences in Texas and Baltimore which had already been outlined, which Schultz referred to as &quot;totally meaningless&quot;.

===&quot;Ed Schultz News and Commentary&quot;===
After cancellation on MSNBC, Schultz did a half-hour podcast every weekday commenting on news and issues. His platform was much more mobile and able to take his show to the streets among those people whom he supported in the labor movement.

===&quot;News with Ed Schultz&quot;===
On January 14, 2016, Ed Schultz announced he would start hosting &quot;News with Ed Schultz&quot; on RT America, with the debut show occurring 11 days later. According to &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, in his new position with the Russian Federation-sponsored network he reversed several previously held positions; for example, he expressed newfound praise for Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin.

==Political views==
In the late 1990s, Schultz stated that a series of events changed his political views from the right of the political spectrum to left of the spectrum. One event was his mother&#x27;s battle with Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, which began a long, slow decline of her mental health. Schultz found it frustrating trying to get her the services that she needed. Another was that he met, and eventually married, a psychiatric nurse named Wendy, who ran a homeless shelter in Fargo, North Dakota. He attributed much of his political change to her. Although he had criticized the homeless on his show, he said in his book that she helped to humanize them and he reportedly found that some of the people he had insulted were veterans, unable to get the psychiatric or medical services that might help them. He says that was the moment he began to look at poverty differently.

He became a Democrat in 2000, marking the formal turn in his politics from conservative to liberal. He began to hold events to raise money for people in the heartland who were going through tough times. Schultz considered running for the Democratic-NPL party nomination for governor of North Dakota against incumbent Republican John Hoeven in 2004, but decided to continue his more lucrative career in radio. Schultz subsequently declared himself a &quot;lefty&quot; and centered a large portion of his radio show on the &quot;plight of working Americans&quot;. He stated that he and his sons were gun owners, although he supported some gun control measures. Regarding abortion, he was quoted as stating: &quot;Now, as far as abortion is concerned, in my heart I&#x27;m a Christian. I&#x27;m against it. But we&#x27;re livin&#x27; in a country where the majority rule and I&#x27;m not, as a talk show host, overturning &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;.&quot;

In the 2016 presidential election, Schultz endorsed U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders for President of the United States.

==Personal life and death==
Schultz was married twice, first to Maureen Zimmerman, in a marriage that ended in divorce, and then to Wendy Noack in 1998. He had a son and five stepchildren.

Schultz died at his home in Washington on July 5, 2018, aged 64. He had a history of heart problems.

==Bibliography==
* &quot;Straight Talk from the Heartland: Tough Talk, Common Sense, and Hope from a Former Conservative&quot; (2004); 
* &quot;Killer Politics: How Big Money and Bad Politics Are Destroying the Great American Middle Class&quot; (2010); 

==See also==
* Progressive talk radio

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* &quot;The Ed Schultz Show&quot; at wegoted.com (radio)
* &quot;The Ed Show&quot; on MSNBC
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q422303" start="0" end="21" title="Ed Schultz" label="Edward Andrew Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="99" end="120" title="Pundit" label="political commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731540" start="184" end="195" title="The Ed Show" label="The Ed Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="234" end="239" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992261" start="269" end="288" title="The Ed Schultz Show" label="The Ed Schultz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="298" end="308" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="326" end="336" title="Broadcast syndication#Radio syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270455" start="340" end="351" title="Westwood One" label="Dial Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545861" start="619" end="629" title="RT America" label="RT America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22868" start="688" end="698" title="RT (TV network)" label="RT network"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="736" end="753" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="794" end="817" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790513" start="997" end="1014" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury High School" label="Maury High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="1040" end="1049" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="1058" end="1066" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868559" start="1089" end="1124" title="Minnesota State University Moorhead" label="Minnesota State University Moorhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="1162" end="1166" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870124" start="1226" end="1241" title="Oakland Raiders" label="Oakland Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117549" start="1278" end="1299" title="Winnipeg Blue Bombers" label="Winnipeg Blue Bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="1307" end="1331" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="1437" end="1456" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340111" start="1501" end="1508" title="KVLY-TV" label="KVLY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948278" start="1518" end="1525" title="WDAY-TV" label="WDAY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000624" start="1643" end="1672" title="North Dakota State University" label="North Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055045" start="1680" end="1688" title="North Dakota State Bison football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q585992" start="1864" end="1880" title="Southern Comfort" label="Southern Comfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718548" start="2034" end="2038" title="KFGO (AM)" label="KFGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q968559" start="2076" end="2102" title="University of North Dakota" label="University of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895961" start="2109" end="2132" title="North Dakota Fighting Hawks football" label="Fighting Hawks football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948279" start="2331" end="2335" title="WDAY (AM)" label="WDAY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718548" start="2363" end="2367" title="KFGO (AM)" label="KFGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019474" start="2390" end="2404" title="News and Views (radio)" label="News and Views"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="2477" end="2489" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="2493" end="2502" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="2600" end="2617" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2656" end="2667" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="2797" end="2811" title="The Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553228" start="2892" end="2901" title="motorhome" label="motorhome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3156" end="3194" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3203" end="3213" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277145" start="3229" end="3241" title="Earl Pomeroy" label="Earl Pomeroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255503" start="3479" end="3494" title="Democracy Radio" label="Democracy Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992261" start="3502" end="3521" title="The Ed Schultz Show" label="The Ed Schultz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="3551" end="3570" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275291" start="3596" end="3616" title="Jones Radio Networks" label="Jones Radio Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q996079" start="3721" end="3743" title="Sirius Satellite Radio" label="Sirius Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390461" start="3757" end="3768" title="SIRIUS Left" label="SIRIUS Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q492058" start="3788" end="3806" title="XM Satellite Radio" label="XM Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530410" start="3814" end="3826" title="SiriusXM Progress" label="America Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q464570" start="3866" end="3884" title="American Forces Network" label="Armed Forces Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="4002" end="4007" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052277" start="4056" end="4070" title="Norman Goldman" label="Norman Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="4756" end="4768" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q319072" start="4795" end="4808" title="Rush Limbaugh" label="Rush Limbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q266863" start="4902" end="4916" title="Laura Ingraham" label="Laura Ingraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031000" start="5019" end="5044" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Media Center" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Media Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="6216" end="6221" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731540" start="6252" end="6263" title="The Ed Show" label="The Ed Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551091" start="6335" end="6359" title="1600 Pennsylvania Avenue (TV series)" label="1600 Pennsylvania Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176645" start="6371" end="6384" title="David Shuster" label="David Shuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="6535" end="6545" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q463229" start="6682" end="6697" title="Keith Olbermann" label="Keith Olbermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="6755" end="6757" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="ET"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746206" start="6795" end="6837" title="The Last Word with Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="The Last Word with Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q215057" start="6952" end="6962" title="Rick Perry" label="Rick Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7586" end="7598" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746206" start="8051" end="8093" title="The Last Word with Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="The Last Word with Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="8679" end="8712" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="Washington federal district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896059" start="8719" end="8734" title="Beryl A. Howell" label="Beryl A. Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="8836" end="8903" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002546" start="9325" end="9348" title="All In with Chris Hayes" label="All In with Chris Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="9765" end="9780" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="9887" end="9901" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693884" start="10058" end="10070" title="Phil Griffin" label="Phil Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545861" start="10949" end="10959" title="RT America" label="RT America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11211" end="11223" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="11228" end="11242" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="11356" end="11391" title="Right-wing politics" label="the right of the political spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="11395" end="11415" title="Left-wing politics" label="left of the spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="11461" end="11485" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q772298" start="11711" end="11727" title="homeless shelter" label="homeless shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="11731" end="11750" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="12205" end="12217" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="12221" end="12228" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055001" start="12368" end="12382" title="North Dakota Democratic-Nonpartisan League Party" label="Democratic-NPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773741" start="12404" end="12428" title="governor of North Dakota" label="governor of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q374762" start="12458" end="12469" title="John Hoeven" label="John Hoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055079" start="12473" end="12477" title="North Dakota gubernatorial election, 2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034963" start="12667" end="12684" title="Working class in the United States" label="working Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="12767" end="12778" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="13055" end="13066" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="13088" end="13114" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="13146" end="13160" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248875" start="13760" end="13782" title="Progressive talk radio" label="Progressive talk radio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567600" wikidata="Q33868" url="?curid=567600" title="Meitei language">
<text>Meitei (; ) also known as Manipuri , is a Tibeto-Burman language of northeast India. It is the official language and the lingua franca of Manipur and an additional official language in four districts of Assam. It is one of the constitutionally scheduled official languages of the Indian Republic. Meitei is the most widely-spoken Tibeto-Burman language of India and the third most widely spoken language of northeast India after Assamese and Bengali.
There are  million Meitei native speakers in India according to the 2011 census,  million of whom are found in the state of Manipur, where they represent the majority of its population. There are smaller communities in neighbouring Indian states, such as Assam (), Tripura (), Nagaland (), and elsewhere in the country (). The language is also spoken by smaller groups in neighbouring Myanmar and Bangladesh.

Meitei and Gujarati jointly hold the third place among the fastest growing languages of India, following Hindi and Kashmiri.

Meitei is not endangered: its status has been assessed as safe by &quot;Ethnologue&quot; (where it is assigned to EGIDS level 2 &quot;provincial language&quot;). However, it is considered vulnerable by UNESCO.

The Manipuri language is associated with the Ningthouja dynasty (Mangangs), the Khuman dynasty, the Moirangs, the Angoms, the Luwangs, the Chengleis (Sarang-Leishangthems), and the Khaba-Nganbas. Each had their respective distinct dialects and were politically independent from one another. Later, all of them fell under the dominion of the Ningthouja dynasty, changing their status of being independent &quot;ethnicities&quot; into those of &quot;clans&quot; of the collective Meitei community. The Ningthouja dialect was predominant, and received heavy influences from the speech forms of the other groups.

Meitei is one of the advanced literary languages recognised by Sahitya Akademi, India&#x27;s National Academy of Letters.

== Classification ==
Meitei belongs to the Tibeto-Burman branch of the Sino-Tibetan languages.

During the 19th and 20th centuries, different linguists tried to assign Meitei to various sub-groups. Early classifier George Abraham Grierson (1903–1924) put it in Kuki-Chin, Vegelin and Voegelin (1965) in Kuki-Chin-Naga, and Benedict (1972) in Kuki-Naga. Robbins Burling has suggested that Meitei belongs to none those groups. Current academic consensus agrees with James Matisoff in placing Manipuri in its own subdivision of the Kamarupan group—a geographic rather than a genetic grouping. However, some still consider Meitei to be a member of the Kuki-Chin-Naga branch.

== History ==

The Meitei language has existed for at least 2000 years.
According to linguist Suniti Kumar Chatterjee, the ancient Meitei literature dates back to 1500 to 2000 years before present.

=== First Millennium CE ===
The earliest known Meitei language compositions is the ritual song &quot;Ougri&quot; (), which was used in religious and coronation ceremonies of Kangleipak. It may have existed before the Common Era. Numit Kappa , a religious epic that tells the tale of how the night was divided from the day, was also composed in the first century.

&quot;Poireiton Khunthok&quot; is a 3rd-century narrative work describing the establishment of a colony in Kangleipak by a group of immigrants led by Poireiton, the younger brother of the god of the underworld.
The &quot;Yumbanlol&quot;, a copper plate manuscript was composed in the 6th century or 7th century CE for the royal family of Kangleipak. It is a rare work of dharmashastra, covering sexuality, the relationships between husbands and wives, and instructions on how to run a household.

The &quot;Khencho&quot; (), an early Meitei work of poetry was composed by the beginning of the 7th century CE. Although it is obscure and unintelligible to present-day Meiteis, it is still recited as part of the Lai Haraoba festival.

One of the best-preserved early Meitei language epigraphic records is a copper plate inscription dating to the reign of King Khongtekcha (). During the same time period, Akoijam Tombi composed the &quot;Panthoibi Khonggul&quot; (), an account of the romantic adventures of the deified Meitei princess Panthoibi.

=== Second Millennium CE ===
In 1100 CE, a written constitution, , was finalised by King Loiyumba () of Kangleipak. It was a codification of the proto-constitution drafted by King Naophangba in 429 CE.

Before 1675 CE, the Meitei language experienced no significant influence from any other languages. Beginning in the late 17th century, Hindu influence on Meitei culture increased, and the Meitei language experienced some influences from other languages, on its phonology, morphology (linguistics), syntax and semantics. At the same time, the Hinduised King Pamheiba ordered that the Meitei script be replaced by the Bengali-Assamese script.

In 1725 CE, Pamheiba wrote Parikshit, possibly the first piece of Meitei-language Hindu literature, based on the story of the eponymous king Parikshit of the Mahabharata.

== Geographical distribution ==

The majority of Meitei speakers, about 1.5 million live in the Indian state of Manupur. Meitei is the official language of the Government of Manipur as well as its lingua franca. 
There are nearly 170,000 Meitei-speakers in Assam, mainly in the Barak Valley, where it is the third most commonly-used language after Bengali and Hindi. Manipuri is also spoken by about 9500 people in Nagaland, in communities such as Dimapur, Kohima, Peren and Phek. Meitei is a second language for various Naga and Kuki-Chin ethnic groups.
There are around 15,000 Meitei speakers in Bangladesh mainly are in the districts of Sylhet, Moulvibazar, Sunamganj and Habiganj in the Sylhet Division of Bangladesh. In the past, there was a Meitei speaking population in Dhaka, Mymensingh and Comilla also. Manipuri is used as a second language by the Bishnupriya Manipuri people.

Myanmar has a significant Meitei speaking population in the states of Kachin and Shan and the regions of Yangon, Sagaing, and Ayeyarwady, among others.

== Name ==
According to the Ethnologue, the alternative names of Meitei language are &quot;Kathe, Kathi, Manipuri, Meetei, Meeteilon, Meiteilon, Meiteiron, Meithe, Meithei, Menipuri, Mitei, Mithe, Ponna&quot;.

The name &quot;Meitei&quot; or its alternate spelling &quot;Meithei&quot; is preferred by many native speakers of Meitei over &quot;Manipuri.&quot; The term is derived from the Meitei word for the language &quot;Meitheirón&quot; (&quot;Meithei&quot; + &quot;-lon&quot; &#x27;language&#x27;, pronounced ). &quot;Meithei&quot; may be a compound from &quot;mí&quot; &#x27;man&#x27; + &quot;they&quot; &#x27;separate&#x27;. This term is used by most Western linguistic scholarship. Meitei scholars use the term &quot;Meit(h)ei&quot; when writing in English and the term &quot;Meitheirón&quot; when writing in Meitei. Chelliah (2015: 89) notes that the &quot;Meitei&quot; spelling has replaced the earlier &quot;Meithei&quot; spelling.

The language (and people) is also referred to by the loconym &quot;Manipuri.&quot; The term is derived from the name of the state of Manipur. &quot;Manipuri&quot; is the official name of the language for the Indian government and is used by government institutions and non-Meitei authors. The term &quot;Manipuri&quot; is also used to refer to the different languages of Manipur and to the people. Additionally, &quot;Manipuri,&quot; being a loconym, can refer to anything pertaining to the Manipur state.

Speakers of Meitei language are known as &quot;Kathe&quot; by the Burmese people, &quot;Moglie&quot; or &quot;Mekhlee&quot; by the people of Cachar, Assam (Dimasas and Assamese) and &quot;Cassay&quot; by the Shan people and the other peoples living in the east of the Ningthee River (or Khyendwen River). &quot;Ponna&quot; is the Burmese term used to refer to the Meiteis living inside Burma.

== Dialects ==
The Meitei language exhibits a degree of regional variation; however, in recent years the broadening of communication, as well as intermarriage, has caused the dialectal differences to become relatively insignificant. The only exceptions to this occurrence are the speech differences of the dialects found in Tripura, Bangladesh and Myanmar. The exact number of dialects of Meitei is unknown.

The three main dialects of Meitei are: Meitei proper, Loi and Pangal. Differences between these dialects are primarily characterised by the extensions of new sounds and tonal shifts. Meitei proper is considered to be the standard variety—and is viewed as more dynamic than the other two dialects. The brief table below compares some words in these three dialects:
Devi (2002) compares the Imphal, Andro, Koutruk, and Kakching dialects of Meitei.

== Status ==
Meitei is the sole official language of the Government of Manipur, and has been an official language of India since 1992.

Meitei language was the court language of the historic Manipur Kingdom, and before it merged into the Indian Republic. The Sahitya Akademi, India&#x27;s National Academy of Letters, recognised Meitei as one of the major advanced Indian literary languages in 1972, long before it became an official language in 1992.
In 1950, the Government of India did not include Meitei in its list of 14 official languages. A language movement, spearheaded by organisations including the Manipuri Sahitya Parishad and the All Manipur Students&#x27; Union demanded that Meitei be made an official language for more than 40 years, until Meitei was finally added to the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India in 1992.

Meitei became an associate official language of Assam in 2024, following several years of effort by the Meitei associate official language movement to protect the identity, history, culture and tradition of Manipuris in Assam.

The Meitei language is one of the 13 official languages of the India used to administer police, armed services, and civil service recruitment exams.

The Press Information Bureau of the Indian Ministry of Information and Broadcasting publishes in 14 languages, including Meitei.

== Education ==
Meitei is a language of instruction in all in the educational institutions in Manipur. It is one of the 40 instructional languages offered by the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), controlled and managed by the Ministry of Education. Meitei is taught as a subject up to the post-graduate level in Indian universities, including Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi University, Gauhati University, and the University of North Bengal. Indira Gandhi National Open University teaches Meitei to undergraduates.

=== Assam ===
Meitei language instruction has been offered in the lower primary schools of Assam since 1956. The Board of Secondary Education, Assam offers secondary education in Manipuri. The Assam Higher Secondary Education Council of Assam offers both Meitei-language schooling and instruction in Meitei as a second language.

Since 2020, the Assam Government has made an annual grant of to the Manipuri Sahitya Parishad (Manipuri Language Council). It also invested in the creation of a corpus for the development of the Meitei language.

The Department of Manipuri of Assam University offers education up to the Ph.D. level in Meitei language.

=== Tripura ===
Since 1998, the Government of Tripura has offered Meitei language as a &quot;first language&quot; subject at primary level in 24 schools throughout the state.

In December 2021, Tripura University proposed to the Indian Ministry of Education and the University Grants Council (UGC), regarding the introduction of diploma courses in Meitei, along with international languages like Japanese, Korean and Nepali.

== Phonology ==
The exact classification of the Meitei language within Sino-Tibetan remains unclear. It has lexical resemblances to Kuki and Tangkhul.

=== Tone ===
The Meitei language is a tonal language. There is a controversy over whether there are two or three tones.

=== Segments ===
Meitei distinguishes the following phonemes:

Consonants
Vowels
Note: the central vowel /ɐ/ is transcribed as &lt;ə&gt; in recent linguistic work on Meitei. However, phonetically it is never [ə], but more usually [ɐ]. It is assimilated to a following approximant: /ɐw/ = [ow], /ɐj/ = [ej].

=== Phonological processes ===
A velar deletion is noted to occur on the suffix -lək when following a syllable ending with a /k/ phoneme.

Meitei has a dissimilatory process similar to Grassmann&#x27;s law found in Ancient Greek and Sanskrit, though occurring on the second aspirate. Here, an aspirated consonant is deaspirated if preceded by an aspirated consonant (including ) in the previous syllable. The deaspirated consonants are then voiced between sonorants.

== Writing systems ==

=== Meitei script ===
The Meitei script () is one of the official scripts of the Indian Republic. Meitei mayek is also known as Kanglei script or kok sam lai script , after its first three letters. Its earliest known appearance is on 6th century coins. It was used until the 18th century, when it was replaced by the Bengali script, and then revived in again massively in the 20th. In 2021, the use of Meetei Mayek to write Manipuri was officially adopted by the Government of Manipur, alongside Bengali script.

The Roman alphabet has been used in medium for teaching basic Meitei as a second language teaching by the Board of Secondary Education, Manipur. More recently, the Board has issued a directive that no more Manipuri textbooks using the Latin alphabet be published. Meitei language editions of the Bible in Roman script are very commonly used by the Christians in Manipur.

The Naoriya Phulo script is a constructed script, invented by Laininghan Naoriya Phulo (1888–1941). It shares many similarities with Devanagari and Bengali script. It was championed by Apokpa Marup, but never widely adopted.

== Grammar ==
Sentences in the Meitei language use the subject–object–verb word order (SOV). For example, in the sentence &quot;Ei chak chai&quot; (ꯑꯩ ꯆꯥꯛ ꯆꯥꯢ), which translates to &quot;I eat rice&quot;, the gloss is &quot;ei&quot; (I), &quot;chak&quot; (rice), &quot;chai&quot; (eat).

=== Nouns ===
Nouns and pronouns are marked for number in Meitei. The plural is indicated by the suffixes -khoi (for personal pronouns and human proper nouns) and -sing (for all other nouns). Verbs associated with the pluralised nouns are unaffected. Examples are demonstrated below:

When adjectives are used to be more clear, Meitei utilises separate words and does not add a suffix to the noun. Examples are show in the chart below:
=== Compound verbs ===
Compound verbs are created by combining root verbs each ending with aspect markers. While the variety of suffixes is high, all compound verbs utilise one of two:
Aspect markers appear as suffixes that clarify verb tense and appear at the end of the compound verb. Overall, the formula to construct a compound verb becomes [root verb] + [suffix] + [aspect marker]:

Compound verbs can also be formed utilising both compound suffixes as well, allowing utterances such as &quot;pithokningle&quot; meaning &quot;want to give out&quot;.

== Number words ==

== Literature ==
The &quot;Khamba Thoibi Sheireng&quot;, a poem of 39,000 verses composed by Hijam Anganghal Singh and first published in 1940 () is regarded as the national epic of the Manipuris. It is a classical Meitei language epic poem based on the ancient romantic adventure tale of Khamba and Thoibi of Moirang. It is regarded as the greatest of all Meitei epic poems.

The Meitei classical language movement seeks to gain recognition for Meitei as one of the Classical Languages of India.

== Annual events ==
Various annual events are organised to promote, protect and develop Meitei language, in the sovereign states of India and Bangladesh in particular as well as in other parts of the world in general.

*Manipuri language day () is observed annually on 20 August, commemorating the day in 1992 when Manipuri was made one of the official languages of India.
*Manipuri poetry day (), is an annual literary event that promotes Meitei language poetry and the traditions of Meitei literature. Events are held in Manipur and in and by Meitei-speakers in Northeast India and West Bengal.
*The Manipuri Language Festival () is an annual cultural event that aims to protect and develop of the Meitei language, script and culture in Bangladesh.

== Software ==

In 2021, Rudali Huidrom, a Manipuri researcher of the EBMT/NLP laboratory, Waseda University, Japan, created a text corpus named &quot;EM Corpus&quot; (shortened form of &quot;Emalon Manipuri Corpus&quot;). It is the first comparable text to text corpus built for Meitei language (mni) and English language (eng) pair from sentences. The writing system used for Meitei language in this corpus is Bengali script. It was crawled and collected from &quot;thesangaiexpress.com&quot; – the news website of &quot;The Sangai Express&quot;, a daily newspaper of Manipur from August 2020 to 2021. In version 1, she created the monolingual data, having 1,034,715 Meitei language sentences and 846,796 English language sentences. In version 2, she created the monolingual data, having 1,880,035 Meitei language sentences and 1,450,053 English language sentences.

EM-ALBERT is the first ALBERT model available for Meitei language. EM-FT is also FastText word embedding available for Meitei language. These resources were created by Rudali Huidrom and are now available at free of cost at the European Language Resources Association catalogue (ELRA catalogue) under CC-BY-NC-4.0 licence.

On 11 May 2022, Google Translate added Meitei-language (under the name &quot;Meiteilon (Manipuri)&quot;) during its addition of 24 new languages to the translation tool. The writing system used for Meitei language in this tool is Meitei script.

== Sample text ==
The following is a sample text in Modern Meitei of the Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (by the United Nations):

== See also ==

* Meitei language in India
** Meitei language in Assam
** Meitei language in Tripura
* Meitei language in Bangladesh
* Meitei language in Myanmar
* Languages of India
* List of languages by number of native speakers in India
* List of Meitei poets
* Meitei inscriptions
* Meitei literature
* Meitei Language Day
* List of epics in Meitei language
* List of Sahitya Akademi Award winners for Meitei
* List of Sahitya Akademi Translation Prize winners for Meitei
* List of Yuva Puraskar winners for Meitei
* List of Bal Sahitya Puraskar winners for Meitei
* Vikaspedia

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 1. &quot;A Short History of Kangleipak (Manipur) Part-I&quot;, by Chingtamlen, 2005
* 2. &quot;A Short History of Kangleipak (Manipur) Part-II&quot;, by Chingtamlen, 2007
* 3. &quot;A Short History of Kangleipak (Manipur) Part-III&quot;, by Chingtamlen, 2008
* 4. &quot;The Meetei and the Bishnupriya&quot;, by Chingtamlen, 2008

=== Culture ===
* Brara, N. Vijaylakshmi. (1998). &quot;Politics, society, and cosmology in India&#x27;s North East&quot;. Delphi: Oxford University Press.
* Budha, W. (1992). &quot;Indigenous games of the Meiteis&quot;. Manipur: Wangkeimayum Publications.
* Kshetrimayum, Otojit. (2014). &quot;Ritual, Politics and Power in North East India: Contexualising the Lai Haraoba of Manipur&quot;. Delhi: Ruby Press &amp; Co.
* Singh, M. Kirti. (1988). &quot;Religion and culture of Manipur&quot;. Delhi: Manas Publications.
* Singh, M. Kirti. (1993). &quot;Folk culture of Manipur&quot;. Delhi: Manas Publications.
* Singh, Saikhom Gopal. (2014). &quot;The Meeteis of Manipur: A Study in Human Geography&quot;. Delhi: Ruby Press &amp; Co.

=== Language ===
* Bhat, D. N. S.; &amp; Ningomba, S. (1997). &quot;Manipuri grammar&quot;. Munich: Lincom Europa.
* Chelliah, Shobhana L. (1990). Experiencer subjects in Manipuri. In V. M. Manindra &amp; K. P. Mohanan (Eds.), &quot;Experiencer subjects in South Asian languages&quot; (pp. 195–211). Stanford: The Center for the Study of Language and Information.
* Chelliah, Shobhana L. (1992). Tone in Manipuri. In K. L. Adams &amp; T. J. Hudak (Eds.), &quot;Papers from the first annual meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society 1991&quot; (pp. 65–85). Tempe, AZ: Arizona State University.
* Chelliah, Shobhana L. (1992). Bracketing paradoxes in Manipuri. In M. Aronoff (Ed.), &quot;Morphology now&quot; (pp. 33–47). Albany: State University of New York Press.
* Chelliah, Shobhana L. (1994). Morphological change and fast speech phenomena in the Manipuri verb. In K. L. Adams &amp; T. J. Hudak (Eds.), &quot;Papers from the second annual meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society 1992&quot; (pp. 121–134). Tempe, AZ: Arizona State University.
* Chelliah, Shobhana L. (1997). &quot;A grammar of Meitei&quot;. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. .
* Chelliah, Shobhana L. (2002). Early Meitei manuscripts. In C. I. Beckwith (Ed.), &quot;Medieval Tibeto-Burman languages: PIATS 2000: Tibetan studies: Proceedings of the ninth seminar of the International Association of Tibetan Studies, Leiden 2000&quot; (pp. 59–71). Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
* Chelliah, Shobhana L. (2002). A glossary of 39 basic words in archaic and modern Meitei. In C. I. Beckwith (Ed.), &quot;Medieval Tibeto-Burman languages: PIATS 2000: Tibetan studies: Proceedings of the ninth seminar of the International Association of Tibetan Studies, Leiden 2000&quot; (pp. 189–190). Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
* 
* Singh, Ningthoukhongjam Khelchandra. (1964). &quot;Manipuri to Manipuri &amp; English dictionary&quot;.

== External links ==



* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="0" end="6" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="26" end="34" title="Meitei language" label="Manipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="42" end="64" title="Tibeto-Burman language" label="Tibeto-Burman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="68" end="83" title="northeast India" label="northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="121" end="134" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="138" end="145" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="203" end="208" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q272756" start="227" end="295" title="scheduled languages of India" label="constitutionally scheduled official languages of the Indian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="330" end="352" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q29401" start="429" end="437" title="Assamese language" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="442" end="449" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474606" start="470" end="530" title="States of India by Meitei speakers" label="Meitei native speakers in India according to the 2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="575" end="582" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="706" end="711" title="#Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="716" end="723" title="#Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="728" end="736" title="#Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="836" end="843" title="#Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906158" start="848" end="858" title="Meitei language in Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="872" end="880" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="936" end="954" title="languages of India" label="languages of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="966" end="971" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33552" start="976" end="984" title="Kashmiri language" label="Kashmiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="1001" end="1011" title="Language endangerment" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="1059" end="1069" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q21082247" start="1101" end="1106" title="EGIDS" label="EGIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="1175" end="1185" title="vulnerable language" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375059" start="1243" end="1261" title="Ningthouja dynasty" label="Ningthouja dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753119" start="1263" end="1270" title="Mangang" label="Mangang"/>
<link wikidata="Q107668026" start="1278" end="1292" title="Khuman kingdom" label="Khuman dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388196" start="1298" end="1305" title="Ancient Moirang" label="Moirang"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753137" start="1312" end="1317" title="Angom" label="Angom"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753130" start="1324" end="1330" title="Luwang" label="Luwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753146" start="1337" end="1346" title="Salai Leishangthem" label="Chengleis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753146" start="1348" end="1367" title="Sarang-Leishangthem" label="Sarang-Leishangthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786380" start="1379" end="1391" title="Khaba-Nganba" label="Khaba-Nganba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375059" start="1539" end="1557" title="Ningthouja dynasty" label="Ningthouja dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q930821" start="1676" end="1692" title="Meitei community" label="Meitei community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349399" start="1871" end="1886" title="Sahitya Akademi" label="Sahitya Akademi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="1974" end="1987" title="Tibeto-Burman" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="2002" end="2014" title="Sino-Tibetan" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095378" start="2146" end="2169" title="George Abraham Grierson" label="George Abraham Grierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q832413" start="2192" end="2201" title="Kuki-Chin" label="Kuki-Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434302" start="2284" end="2299" title="Robbins Burling" label="Robbins Burling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106273" start="2395" end="2409" title="James Matisoff" label="James Matisoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521245" start="2579" end="2600" title="Kuki-Chin-Naga languages" label="Kuki-Chin-Naga branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385894" start="2697" end="2720" title="Suniti Kumar Chatterjee" label="Suniti Kumar Chatterjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q122577366" start="2726" end="2751" title="ancient Meitei literature" label="ancient Meitei literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="2785" end="2799" title="before present" label="before present"/>
<link wikidata="Q107669200" start="2903" end="2908" title="Ougri" label="Ougri"/>
<link wikidata="Q106369135" start="2976" end="2986" title="Kangleipak" label="Kangleipak"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="3019" end="3029" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q73902818" start="3031" end="3042" title="Numit Kappa" label="Numit Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q107669314" start="3172" end="3190" title="Poireiton Khunthok" label="Poireiton Khunthok"/>
<link wikidata="Q107325375" start="3316" end="3325" title="Poireiton" label="Poireiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056043" start="3406" end="3429" title="Indian copper plate inscriptions" label="copper plate manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076046" start="3537" end="3550" title="dharmashastra" label="dharmashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473598" start="3876" end="3887" title="Lai Haraoba" label="Lai Haraoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056043" start="3971" end="3995" title="Indian copper plate inscriptions" label="copper plate inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q107669229" start="4102" end="4120" title="Panthoibi Khonggul" label="Panthoibi Khonggul"/>
<link wikidata="Q580995" start="4176" end="4183" title="deification" label="deified"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792080" start="4200" end="4209" title="Panthoibi" label="Panthoibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q100724235" start="4301" end="4309" title="Loiyumba" label="Loiyumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q106369135" start="4316" end="4326" title="Kangleipak" label="Kangleipak"/>
<link wikidata="Q108086031" start="4392" end="4402" title="Naophangba" label="Naophangba"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="4676" end="4685" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="4687" end="4711" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="4713" end="4719" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="4724" end="4733" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032996" start="4772" end="4780" title="Pamheiba" label="Pamheiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981413" start="4798" end="4811" title="Meitei script" label="Meitei script"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438487" start="4831" end="4854" title="Bengali-Assamese script" label="Bengali-Assamese script"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4884" end="4893" title="Meitei translations and literary adaptations of the Mahabharata#History" label="Parikshit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194040" start="4939" end="4955" title="Hindu literature" label="Hindu literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046277" start="4998" end="5007" title="Parikshit" label="Parikshit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="5015" end="5026" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589244" start="5189" end="5210" title="Government of Manipur" label="Government of Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="5226" end="5239" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581002" start="5307" end="5319" title="Barak Valley" label="Barak Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q867111" start="5477" end="5484" title="Dimapur" label="Dimapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q234056" start="5486" end="5492" title="Kohima" label="Kohima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899774" start="5494" end="5499" title="Peren, Nagaland" label="Peren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726376" start="5504" end="5508" title="Phek" label="Phek"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="5522" end="5537" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130145" start="5550" end="5554" title="Naga people" label="Naga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070372" start="5559" end="5568" title="Kuki-Chin-Mizo people" label="Kuki-Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906158" start="5608" end="5637" title="Meitei language in Bangladesh" label="Meitei speakers in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093352" start="5669" end="5675" title="Sylhet District" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q281435" start="5677" end="5688" title="Moulvibazar District" label="Moulvibazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093388" start="5690" end="5699" title="Sunamganj District" label="Sunamganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438974" start="5704" end="5712" title="Habiganj District" label="Habiganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q459732" start="5720" end="5735" title="Sylhet Division" label="Sylhet Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="5806" end="5811" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006303" start="5813" end="5823" title="Mymensingh" label="Mymensingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006296" start="5828" end="5835" title="Comilla" label="Comilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918368" start="5887" end="5914" title="Bishnupriya Manipuri people" label="Bishnupriya Manipuri people"/>
<link wikidata="Q140646" start="5987" end="5993" title="Kachin state" label="Kachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q456847" start="5998" end="6002" title="Shan state" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q856781" start="6022" end="6028" title="Yangon Region" label="Yangon"/>
<link wikidata="Q847289" start="6030" end="6037" title="Sagaing Region" label="Sagaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47047" start="6043" end="6053" title="Ayeyarwady Region" label="Ayeyarwady"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="6098" end="6108" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="7146" end="7153" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7221" end="7226" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="7371" end="7391" title="languages of Manipur" label="languages of Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999452" start="7586" end="7600" title="Burmese people" label="Burmese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q42209" start="7661" end="7667" title="Cachar" label="Cachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277171" start="7676" end="7683" title="Dimasa people" label="Dimasas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287940" start="7688" end="7696" title="Assamese people" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="7728" end="7739" title="Shan people" label="Shan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q870069" start="7788" end="7802" title="Ningthee River" label="Ningthee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q930821" start="7884" end="7891" title="Meitei people" label="Meiteis"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="7906" end="7911" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="8089" end="8096" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="8544" end="8560" title="standard language" label="standard variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q208097" start="8712" end="8718" title="Imphal" label="Imphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924564" start="8720" end="8725" title="Andro, Imphal East" label="Andro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466061" start="8740" end="8748" title="Kakching" label="Kakching"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="8802" end="8819" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589244" start="8827" end="8848" title="Government of Manipur" label="Government of Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q889030" start="8961" end="8976" title="Manipur Kingdom" label="Manipur Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349399" start="9029" end="9044" title="Sahitya Akademi" label="Sahitya Akademi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="9235" end="9254" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9318" end="9335" title="Meitei language movement#Scheduled language movement" label="language movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q116987102" start="9380" end="9405" title="Manipuri Sahitya Parishad" label="Manipuri Sahitya Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12414903" start="9559" end="9603" title="Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India" label="Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="9662" end="9667" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q113860037" start="9718" end="9761" title="Meitei associate official language movement" label="Meitei associate official language movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241619" start="9996" end="10020" title="Press Information Bureau" label="Press Information Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294412" start="10035" end="10075" title="Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (India)" label="Ministry of Information and Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347350" start="10284" end="10320" title="Central Board of Secondary Education" label="Central Board of Secondary Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294642" start="10359" end="10380" title="Ministry of Education (India)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147063" start="10476" end="10503" title="Jawaharlal Nehru University" label="Jawaharlal Nehru University"/>
<link wikidata="Q665105" start="10505" end="10521" title="Delhi University" label="Delhi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4475791" start="10523" end="10541" title="Gauhati University" label="Gauhati University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342183" start="10551" end="10577" title="University of North Bengal" label="University of North Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028659" start="10579" end="10617" title="Indira Gandhi National Open University" label="Indira Gandhi National Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931371" start="10766" end="10801" title="Board of Secondary Education, Assam" label="Board of Secondary Education, Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834668" start="10846" end="10886" title="Assam Higher Secondary Education Council" label="Assam Higher Secondary Education Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112582" start="10999" end="11015" title="Assam Government" label="Assam Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q116987102" start="11051" end="11076" title="Manipuri Sahitya Parishad" label="Manipuri Sahitya Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q122699522" start="11200" end="11222" title="Department of Manipuri, Assam University" label="Department of Manipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q738991" start="11226" end="11242" title="Assam University" label="Assam University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589323" start="11335" end="11356" title="Government of Tripura" label="Government of Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454069" start="11497" end="11515" title="Tripura University" label="Tripura University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294642" start="11539" end="11560" title="Ministry of Education (India)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345459" start="11569" end="11600" title="University Grants Commission (India)" label="University Grants Council (UGC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="11800" end="11812" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583558" start="11861" end="11865" title="Kuki language" label="Kuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682992" start="11870" end="11878" title="Tangkhul language" label="Tangkhul"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="11919" end="11933" title="tonal language" label="tonal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="12054" end="12062" title="phonemes" label="phonemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q755669" start="12462" end="12475" title="dissimilatory" label="dissimilatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q730485" start="12495" end="12515" title="Grassmann&amp;#x27;s law" label="Grassmann&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="12543" end="12551" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981413" start="12827" end="12840" title="Meitei script" label="Meitei script"/>
<link wikidata="Q116736856" start="12858" end="12897" title="official scripts of the Indian Republic" label="official scripts of the Indian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438487" start="13118" end="13132" title="Bengali script" label="Bengali script"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589244" start="13264" end="13285" title="Government of Manipur" label="Government of Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="13610" end="13615" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110541" start="13662" end="13672" title="Christianity in Manipur" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q116495786" start="13690" end="13710" title="Naoriya Phulo script" label="Naoriya Phulo script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191702" start="13716" end="13734" title="constructed script" label="constructed script"/>
<link wikidata="Q38592" start="13819" end="13829" title="Devanagari" label="Devanagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780215" start="13871" end="13883" title="Apokpa Marup" label="Apokpa Marup"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="13967" end="13997" title="subject–object–verb word order" label="subject–object–verb word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158688" start="15239" end="15261" title="Khamba Thoibi Sheireng" label="Khamba Thoibi Sheireng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521512" start="15377" end="15390" title="national epic" label="national epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q930821" start="15398" end="15407" title="Manipuris" label="Manipuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="15443" end="15452" title="epic poem" label="epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q73903327" start="15501" end="15518" title="Khamba and Thoibi" label="Khamba and Thoibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625382" start="15522" end="15529" title="Moirang" label="Moirang"/>
<link wikidata="Q113758439" start="15593" end="15627" title="Meitei classical language movement" label="Meitei classical language movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275530" start="15679" end="15707" title="Classical Languages of India" label="Classical Languages of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q113485231" start="15930" end="15951" title="Manipuri language day" label="Manipuri language day"/>
<link wikidata="Q272756" start="16054" end="16081" title="official languages of India" label="official languages of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q117286540" start="16084" end="16103" title="Manipuri poetry day" label="Manipuri poetry day"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978685" start="16195" end="16212" title="Meitei literature" label="Meitei literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="16233" end="16240" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="16274" end="16289" title="Northeast India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="16294" end="16305" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305763" start="16312" end="16338" title="Manipuri Language Festival" label="Manipuri Language Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q107668713" start="16438" end="16445" title="Meitei culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="16449" end="16459" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q274486" start="16553" end="16570" title="Waseda University" label="Waseda University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="16572" end="16577" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="16589" end="16600" title="text corpus" label="text corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="16712" end="16731" title="text corpus" label="text to text corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438487" start="16874" end="16888" title="Bengali script" label="Bengali script"/>
<link wikidata="Q114714062" start="16985" end="17003" title="The Sangai Express" label="The Sangai Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="17032" end="17039" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q29124045" start="17412" end="17420" title="FastText" label="FastText"/>
<link wikidata="Q135622" start="17671" end="17687" title="Google Translate" label="Google Translate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981413" start="17885" end="17898" title="Meitei script" label="Meitei script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="17991" end="18028" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="18037" end="18051" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474606" start="18073" end="18097" title="Meitei language in India" label="Meitei language in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q125961198" start="18101" end="18125" title="Meitei language in Assam" label="Meitei language in Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q126186837" start="18129" end="18155" title="Meitei language in Tripura" label="Meitei language in Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906158" start="18158" end="18187" title="Meitei language in Bangladesh" label="Meitei language in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q130367190" start="18190" end="18216" title="Meitei language in Myanmar" label="Meitei language in Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="18219" end="18237" title="Languages of India" label="Languages of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110903" start="18240" end="18295" title="List of languages by number of native speakers in India" label="List of languages by number of native speakers in India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18298" end="18318" title="List of Indian poets#Manipuri" label="List of Meitei poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784825" start="18321" end="18340" title="Meitei inscriptions" label="Meitei inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978685" start="18343" end="18360" title="Meitei literature" label="Meitei literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q113485231" start="18363" end="18382" title="Meitei Language Day" label="Meitei Language Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779520" start="18385" end="18417" title="List of epics in Meitei language" label="List of epics in Meitei language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596241" start="18420" end="18468" title="List of Sahitya Akademi Award winners for Meitei" label="List of Sahitya Akademi Award winners for Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q112943781" start="18471" end="18531" title="List of Sahitya Akademi Translation Prize winners for Meitei" label="List of Sahitya Akademi Translation Prize winners for Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518810" start="18534" end="18574" title="List of Yuva Puraskar winners for Meitei" label="List of Yuva Puraskar winners for Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q120068739" start="18577" end="18624" title="List of Bal Sahitya Puraskar winners for Meitei" label="List of Bal Sahitya Puraskar winners for Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844866" start="18627" end="18637" title="Vikaspedia" label="Vikaspedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="19157" end="19180" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349745" start="19878" end="19899" title="Shobhana Chelliah" label="Chelliah, Shobhana L."/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="20337" end="20361" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050071" start="20498" end="20532" title="State University of New York Press" label="State University of New York Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567604" wikidata="Q12041073" url="?curid=567604" title="Northwest Indian College">
<text>Northwest Indian College (Xwlemi Elh&gt;Tal&gt;Nexw Squl) is a public tribal land-grant community college in Bellingham, Washington, United States. It was established by the Lummi Nation and is the only accredited tribal college or university serving reservation communities of Washington, Oregon, and Idaho.

==History==

NWIC was created in response to the higher education needs of American Indians, particularly geographically isolated populations that have no other means accessing education beyond the high school level.

The institution began in 1973 as the Lummi Indian School of Aquaculture, which was established to provide local technicians for employment in Indian-owned and operated fish and shellfish hatcheries in the United States and Canada. In 1983, the Lummi Nation chartered the Lummi Community College to fulfill the need for a more comprehensive post-secondary education for tribal members.

The Lummi Community College campaigned for accreditation by the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities in 1988. The commission affirmed accreditation in 1993, and Lummi Community College became Northwest Indian College. One year later, the college was designated a land-grant college alongside 31 other tribal colleges.

Years of program expansion and dedication resulted in the college gaining accreditation by the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities as a four-year, baccalaureate degree-granting institution, effective September 2008.

NWIC&#x27;s president since 2012 is Justin Guillory (Nez Perce Tribe), from the Nez Perce Indian Reservation in Lapwai, Idaho.

==Academics==

NWIC offers Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Science, Associate of Arts and Sciences, Associate of Science (Transfer), Associate of Applied Science (Transfer), and Associate of Technical Arts degrees. As of 2011, it was one of seven tribal colleges in the U.S. to offer a degree related to tribal administration.

The college is an open enrollment school, meaning no SAT or ACT scores are needed to apply.

==Campus==

Northwest Indian College is an accredited four-year college located on the Lummi Indian Reservation in Washington state, near the city of Bellingham. In addition the NWIC&#x27;s main campus in Lummi, the college has six sites located in Swinomish, Tulalip, Port Gamble S&#x27;Klallam, Muckleshoot, Nisqually, and Nez Perce.

==Partnerships==
NWIC is a member of the American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC), which is a community of tribe- and federal-chartered institutions working to strengthen tribal nations and make a lasting difference in the lives of American Indians and Alaska Natives.

Scholarships are available through the American Indian College Fund (AICF) and the NWIC Foundation.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12041073" start="0" end="24" title="Northwest Indian College" label="Northwest Indian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="63" end="69" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840326" start="70" end="76" title="Tribal colleges and universities" label="tribal"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="77" end="87" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="88" end="105" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q430267" start="109" end="131" title="Bellingham, Washington" label="Bellingham, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808217" start="174" end="186" title="Lummi Nation" label="Lummi Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840326" start="214" end="242" title="tribal colleges and universities" label="tribal college or university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="278" end="288" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="290" end="296" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="302" end="307" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="588" end="599" title="Aquaculture" label="Aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060001" start="978" end="1027" title="Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities" label="Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="1190" end="1208" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="1530" end="1545" title="Nez Perce Tribe" label="Nez Perce Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="1557" end="1585" title="Nez Perce Indian Reservation" label="Nez Perce Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518002" start="1589" end="1602" title="Lapwai, Idaho" label="Lapwai, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096312" start="1949" end="1964" title="open admissions" label="open enrollment"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="1984" end="1987" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="1991" end="1994" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136674" start="2273" end="2282" title="Swinomish Reservation" label="Swinomish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516298" start="2284" end="2291" title="Tulalip" label="Tulalip"/>
<link wikidata="Q106395898" start="2293" end="2319" title="Port Gamble S&amp;#x27;Klallam" label="Port Gamble S&amp;#x27;Klallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q289226" start="2321" end="2332" title="Muckleshoot" label="Muckleshoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515857" start="2334" end="2343" title="Nisqually Reservation" label="Nisqually"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="2349" end="2358" title="Nez Perce Indian Reservation" label="Nez Perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744098" start="2402" end="2445" title="American Indian Higher Education Consortium" label="American Indian Higher Education Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744091" start="2681" end="2709" title="American Indian College Fund" label="American Indian College Fund"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567607" wikidata="Q8380" url="?curid=567607" title="Oboe d'amore">
<text>The ; (), less commonly (), is a double reed woodwind musical instrument in the oboe family. Slightly larger than the oboe, it has a less assertive and a more tranquil and serene tone, and is considered the mezzo-soprano of the oboe family, between the oboe (soprano) and the cor anglais, or English horn, (alto). It is a transposing instrument, sounding a minor third lower than it is notated, i.e. in A, so it can also be known as a Mezzo-Soprano Oboe. The bell (called ) is pear-shaped and the instrument uses a crook or bocal, similar to but shorter than that of the cor anglais.

== Invention and use ==
The oboe d&#x27;amore was invented in the eighteenth century and was first used by Christoph Graupner in his cantata (1717). Johann Sebastian Bach wrote many pieces—a concerto, many of his cantatas, and the movement of his Mass in B minor—for the instrument. Georg Philipp Telemann also frequently employed the oboe d&#x27;amore.

Its popularity waning in the late eighteenth century, the oboe d&#x27;amore fell into disuse for about 100 years until composers such as Richard Strauss (&quot;Symphonia Domestica&quot;, where the instrument represents the child), Claude Debussy (&quot;Gigues&quot;, where the oboe d&#x27;amore has a long solo passage), Maurice Ravel, Frederick Delius, and others began using it once again in the early years of the twentieth century. It can be heard in Toru Takemitsu&#x27;s (1984), but its most famous modern usage is, perhaps, in Ravel&#x27;s &quot;Boléro&quot; (1928), where the oboe d&#x27;amore follows the E-flat clarinet to recommence the main theme for the second time. Gustav Mahler employed the instrument once, in (1901), one of his five &quot;Rückert-Lieder&quot;. In his orchestration of Mussorgsky&#x27;s &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot;, Vladimir Ashkenazy uses the oboe d&#x27;amore to highlight the plaintive solo of the movement.

In the twentieth century, it was used extensively by Philip Glass in his opera &quot;Akhnaten&quot; (1983) to complement the countertenor register of the titular character.

David Stock&#x27;s concerto &quot;Oborama&quot; features oboe d&#x27;amore as a soloist alongside cor anglais, musette, bass oboe, and oboe (with the oboe player using an oboe d&#x27;amore in the third movement)

== Modern instruments ==
Modern makers of oboes d&#x27;amore include Howarth of London (instruments in African blackwood or cocobolo wood), F. Lorée in Paris (instruments in African blackwood or violetwood) and others such as French makers , Fossati and Marigaux, Italian maker Bulgheroni (who offer instruments in grenadilla, violetwood, cocobolo, rosewood, palisander, and cocus wood), Japanese maker Joseph and German makers Püchner, Mönnig and Ludwig Franck. New instruments cost approximately £8,250 at 2016 prices (roughly $11,885 US), comparable to the cost of a new cor anglais. This cost, coupled with the limited call for the instrument, leads many oboists not to possess their own oboe d&#x27;amore, but to rent one when their work dictates the need. For the same reason, however, second-hand oboes d&#x27;amore surface from time to time with very little wear, demonstrating they were well loved (and yet with very little reduction in price over a new instrument).

==References==
== External links ==
*, Gonzalo X. Ruiz, Concerto in A major for Oboe, BWV 1055R
* List of Compositions Featuring the Oboe d&#x27;amore on IMSLP page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29811838" start="33" end="44" title="double reed" label="double reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="45" end="53" title="Woodwind instrument" label="woodwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="54" end="72" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="80" end="84" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186506" start="207" end="220" title="mezzo-soprano" label="mezzo-soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="259" end="266" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q185041" start="276" end="287" title="cor anglais" label="cor anglais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983813" start="307" end="311" title="alto" label="alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q217306" start="322" end="344" title="transposing instrument" label="transposing instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711875" start="357" end="368" title="minor third" label="minor third"/>
<link wikidata="Q8380" start="435" end="453" title="Oboe d&amp;#x27;amore" label="Mezzo-Soprano Oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q173453" start="459" end="463" title="Bell (wind instrument)" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q472731" start="515" end="529" title="bocal" label="crook or bocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185041" start="571" end="582" title="cor anglais" label="cor anglais"/>
<link wikidata="Q115067" start="692" end="710" title="Christoph Graupner" label="Christoph Graupner"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="718" end="725" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="734" end="755" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q929848" start="816" end="824" title="Movement (music)" label="movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q310549" start="832" end="847" title="Mass in B minor" label="Mass in B minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q75854" start="868" end="890" title="Georg Philipp Telemann" label="Georg Philipp Telemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="1077" end="1092" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q846689" start="1100" end="1119" title="Symphonia Domestica" label="Symphonia Domestica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="1171" end="1185" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1193" end="1199" title="Images pour orchestre#I. Gigues (1909–1912)" label="Gigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="1261" end="1274" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312698" start="1276" end="1292" title="Frederick Delius" label="Frederick Delius"/>
<link wikidata="Q155467" start="1395" end="1409" title="Toru Takemitsu" label="Toru Takemitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q327331" start="1493" end="1499" title="Boléro" label="Boléro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366388" start="1554" end="1569" title="E-flat clarinet" label="E-flat clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="1620" end="1633" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032459" start="1697" end="1711" title="Rückert-Lieder" label="Rückert-Lieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="1726" end="1739" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="1743" end="1753" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q724981" start="1767" end="1792" title="Pictures at an Exhibition" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q157785" start="1800" end="1818" title="Vladimir Ashkenazy" label="Vladimir Ashkenazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189729" start="1949" end="1961" title="Philip Glass" label="Philip Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="1981" end="1989" title="Akhnaten" label="Akhnaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q223166" start="2021" end="2033" title="countertenor" label="countertenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726611" start="2070" end="2081" title="David Stock" label="David Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q602719" start="2181" end="2188" title="Piccolo oboe" label="musette"/>
<link wikidata="Q808215" start="2190" end="2199" title="bass oboe" label="bass oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921393" start="2352" end="2369" title="Howarth of London" label="Howarth of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q83170" start="2386" end="2403" title="African blackwood" label="African blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105430" start="2407" end="2415" title="cocobolo" label="cocobolo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2423" end="2431" title="F. Lorée" label="F. Lorée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705553" start="2478" end="2488" title="Dalbergia cearensis" label="violetwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459734" start="2537" end="2545" title="Marigaux" label="Marigaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q122421" start="2632" end="2640" title="rosewood" label="rosewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q10741417" start="2658" end="2668" title="cocus wood" label="cocus wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="2781" end="2782" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q18978022" start="3299" end="3314" title="Gonzalo X. Ruiz" label="Gonzalo X. Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q51098158" start="3316" end="3355" title="Harpsichord Concerto in A major, BWV 1055" label="Concerto in A major for Oboe, BWV 1055R"/>
<link wikidata="Q523660" start="3414" end="3419" title="IMSLP" label="IMSLP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567608" wikidata="Q5876930" url="?curid=567608" title="Hog-dog rodeo">
<text>Hog-dog rodeo or hog-dogging, is a spectator event that simulates wild or feral boar hunting with dogs. It requires specially trained and bred &quot;hog dogs&quot; that are used to bay and sometimes catch a hog or boar. In most cases, bay dogs psychologically control the pig and no physical contact occurs. In some cases, however, such as Uncle Earl&#x27;s Hog Dog Trials, along with bay dog events, catch dog events have been included in the past. In these, specially bred and equipped dogs caught and held the hog by the ears before the animals were quickly separated by a person who hog-tied the pig.

==Typical match==
In a typical match, a hog is released into a pen followed by one or two bay dogs that attempt to control or subdue it by baying: barking and confronting the hog until it stops. The dogs most commonly used are Catahoula and Black Mouth Curs or specially bred mixes. Judges for these contests deduct points for improper behavior such as biting the hog or failing to bark, and award points for proper behaviors such as coming close to the front of the hog and maintaining steady eye contact with it.

==Catch dog events==
These main bayings events have sometimes been augmented with catch competitions, where &quot;catch dogs&quot; bit and held the hogs&#x27; ears to maintain control, and then a human lifted the pig by rear legs and turned onto a side and hog-tied the pig. The event was timed, and the quickest time won. The dogs were outfitted with Kevlar chest and neck armor.

==Fees, wagering, and prizes==
Spectators are generally charged an entrance fee. In some events, spectators bet on which dog will have the best time. Dog owners pay an entry fee, which may be divided among the owners of the winning dogs and the operator of the rodeo. In others, the winning dogs get a certificate and no cash prizes are involved.

==Piglet chase==
Some hog-dog rodeos feature a piglet chase for kids. A muzzled feral piglet is released into an area filled with children, who try to catch the piglet. The child who manages to catch the piglet wins a prize.

==Background==
Hog-dogging developed from the training and hunting of specialized boar-hunting dogs. The populations of wild hogs may be maintained and even supplemented to ensure that an adequate supply of animals to hunt (but only on small isolated hunting style ranches in parts of Texas, where for one reason or another, boars do not thrive in large numbers). Recreational hunting is predominantly orchestrated on an ad-hoc basis while effective pest control operations are well thought out and planned. The hunts are often expensive, labour intensive, and ineffective. The tools recreational hunters use: guns, bows and knives are inefficient as they are used as a test of skill and competence, not for eradication. For comparison, a study of recreational pig hunting activities from a six-year period (from 2006-2012) in Australia produced just over 11,000 pigs while a large-scale operation by authorities saw nearly 10,000 pigs killed in just 3 weeks. The control of the wild hog population is important because wild hogs are not an indigenous species and dominate and destroy the environment that all species depend upon.

Typically, a hunter with one or two dogs bays, or corners the hog and a catch dog catches (or catch dogs catch) the hog and the hunter comes in behind the dog(s), throws the hog down, and ties it. The development of this training into a competitive spectator event is often mistakenly believed to have first taken place in Winnfield, Louisiana at an event known as Uncle Earl&#x27;s Hog Dog Trials. The trials were first organized in 1995 as part of the celebration of former governor and well-known hog hunter Earl K. Long&#x27;s 100th birthday. In these trials, a group of five judges scores the dogs&#x27; skill at baying the hog (cornering it and causing it to stand still). Events are classed by the age of the dog and the number of dogs attempting the bay. This sport had been going on for decades before the Uncle Earl&#x27;s annual meet legitimized and made the sport a state-recognized event. Injuries are rare in these trials as the dogs are restrained from seriously hurting the hundred pound boars and the dogs always wear protective Kevlar vests or collars if they will be coming into physical contact with any pig. Any bay dog that catches in a bay trial is disqualified.

==Legal status==
In the United States, the states of Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, and South Carolina have laws against animal fighting and baiting that prohibit hog-dogging. The state of Louisiana outlawed hog-dog rodeos in 2004.

==See also==

* Boar hunting

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5876930" start="0" end="13" title="Hog-dog rodeo" label="Hog-dog rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876930" start="17" end="28" title="Hog-dog rodeo" label="hog-dogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627899" start="80" end="92" title="boar hunting" label="boar hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288261" start="181" end="184" title="baying" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="207" end="210" title="Hog (swine)" label="hog"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="214" end="218" title="Eurasian wild boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882732" start="340" end="372" title="Uncle Earl&amp;#x27;s Hog Dog Trials" label="Uncle Earl&amp;#x27;s Hog Dog Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051697" start="401" end="410" title="catch dog" label="catch dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365233" start="587" end="594" title="hog-tie" label="hog-tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874180" start="696" end="703" title="bay dog" label="bay dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11294205" start="833" end="842" title="Catahoula Cur" label="Catahoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q38556" start="847" end="862" title="Black Mouth Cur" label="Black Mouth Cur"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="1474" end="1480" title="Kevlar" label="Kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193251" start="1899" end="1911" title="Pig scramble" label="piglet chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369301" start="1924" end="1931" title="Muzzle (device)" label="muzzled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627899" start="2160" end="2172" title="Boar hunting" label="boar-hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944471" start="3533" end="3553" title="Winnfield, Louisiana" label="Winnfield, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q888586" start="3721" end="3740" title="Earl Long" label="Earl K. Long&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874180" start="4343" end="4350" title="bay dog" label="bay dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="4613" end="4622" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627899" start="4673" end="4685" title="Boar hunting" label="Boar hunting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567609" wikidata="Q467047" url="?curid=567609" title="Tom Clarke (Irish republican)">
<text>Thomas James Clarke (; 11 March 1858 – 3 May 1916) was an Irish republican and a leader of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. Clarke was arguably the person most responsible for the 1916 Easter Rising. A proponent of armed struggle against British rule in Ireland for most of his life, Clarke spent 15 years in English prisons prior to his role in the Easter Rising and was executed by firing squad after it was defeated.

==Early life==

Clarke was born at Hurst Castle near Milford-on-Sea in England, to Irish parents, Mary Palmer and James Clarke, who was a sergeant in the British Army. He had one brother, Joseph. In 1865, after spending some years in South Africa, Sgt. Clarke was transferred to Dungannon, County Tyrone, and it was there that he grew up.

==Irish Republican Brotherhood==
In 1878, at the age of 20, he joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) following the visit to Dungannon by John Daly, and by 1880 he was centre (head) of the local IRB circle. In August that year, after a member of the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) had shot and killed a man during riots between the Orange Order and the Ancient Order of Hibernians in Dungannon, Clarke and other IRB members attacked some RIC men in Irish Street. They were driven back, however, and Clarke, fearing arrest, fled to the United States.

===Participation in Fenian dynamite campaign and 15 years imprisonment===

In 1883, Clarke was sent to London, under the alias of &quot;Henry Wilson&quot;, to take part in the Fenian dynamite campaign advocated by Jeremiah O&#x27;Donovan Rossa, one of the IRB leaders exiled in the United States. British authorities were already following those involved, aided by informants, and Clarke was arrested in possession of dynamite, along with three others. He was trialed and sentenced to penal servitude for life on 28 May 1883 at London&#x27;s Old Bailey. He subsequently served 15 years in Pentonville and other British prisons. In 1896, he was one of only five remaining Fenian prisoners in British jails and a series of public meetings in Ireland called for their release. At one meeting, John Redmond MP, leader of the Parnellite Irish National League, said of him: &quot;Wilson is a man of whom no words of praise could be too high. I have learned in my many visits to Portland for five years to love, honour and respect Henry Wilson. I have seen day after day how his brave spirit was keeping him alive ... I have seen year after year the fading away of his physical strength&quot;.

===Relocating to America===
Following his release in 1898, Clarke returned to Ireland where he was met by a number of welcome home parties in Dublin and Dungannon, and Limerick offered him the freedom of the city, which he accepted. Clarke stayed with the family of the Mayor of Limerick at the time, the republican John Daly, with whom Clarke had previously been imprisoned. It was during this time that Clarke was introduced to Kathleen Daly, John&#x27;s niece. Tom Clarke and Kathleen would subsequently begin a relationship.

Despite his well-wishers, Clarke found it difficult to gain employment in Ireland following his return and would make the decision in 1900 to emigrate to Brooklyn in the United States. In 1901, he married Kathleen, 21 years his junior. The Irish nationalist John MacBride served as Clarke&#x27;s best man. In New York, Clarke worked for the Irish nationalist organisation Clan na Gael under its leader, John Devoy. In September 1903 Clarke helped Clan na Gael launch their own newspaper, &quot;The Gaelic American&quot;, with Clarke serving as an assistant editor to Devoy. On 2 November 1905, Clarke became a naturalised American citizen.

After Clarke fell into ill health in late 1905, he gave up his job at the Gaelic American and moved with his wife to a farm in Manorville, New York, and bought another 30 acres there in 1907.

===Return to Ireland, political activism===
Reasoning that he needed to be in Ireland to continue his Fenianism, Clarke returned to Ireland in November 1907, where he opened up a tobacconist shop in Dublin while immersing himself back into the IRB which was undergoing a substantial rejuvenation under the guidance of younger men such as Bulmer Hobson and Denis McCullough. Clarke developed a very close kinship with Hobson, who along with Seán Mac Diarmada, became his protégé. The younger, more radical members of the IRB lauded Clarke for his militancy, and with their support, Clarke was quickly promoted to the Supreme Council of the IRB and made treasurer. It was alongside Hobson and Mac Diarmada that Clarke would establish the republican journal &quot;Irish Freedom&quot; in 1910.

In order for the IRB to extend its influence, it was also in 1910 that Clarke helped set up a front organisation called the Wolfe Tone Clubs Committee, which allowed members of the IRB to gather without overtly declaring their presence. In 1911 Clarke organised a gathering of Irish Republicans at the graveside of Wolfe Tone in Bodenstown Graveyard, County Kildare to counterprotest the royal visit of George V to Dublin. It was also during this time that Clarke displayed a large banner in his shop reading &quot;Damn your concessions, England, we want our country!&quot;.

It was also during this late 1900s/early 1910s period that Clarke joined both the Gaelic League (despite speaking little to no Irish) and Sinn Féin. In usual IRB fashion, Clarke joined both with infiltration in mind, hoping he would be able to take internal control and sway the election of officers. The primary figure in Sinn Féin, Arthur Griffith, was impressed with Clarke and asked Clarke to stand as a Sinn Féin candidate in local elections for Dublin Corporation. Clarke, however, stated he had no interest in electoral politics, telling Griffith &quot;none of that for me&quot;. Clarke felt that Sinn Féin, which at that time advocated for a form of home rule rather than outright Irish Independence, was &quot;all right as far as it goes, but it doesn&#x27;t go far enough&quot;.

Clarke supported the striking members of the Irish Transport and General Workers&#x27; Union during the 1913 Dublin Lockout and refused to sell copies of the &quot;Irish Independent&quot;, a newspaper owned by union-busting industrialist and press baron William Martin Murphy, at his tobacco shop. He was also involved in collections in support of the workers. However, he was critical of Irish trade unions&#x27; dependence on their English counterparts and regarded the Labour movement as a minor secondary struggle when compared to that for Irish Independence.

Clarke was a supporter of the Irish Women&#x27;s Franchise League and supported the clause of the 1916 Proclamation guaranteeing equal opportunities for women.

In the summer of 1913 Clarke once again organised a gathering of republicans at Bodenstown. In that year Clarke invited a young man, Paidraig Pearse, to give the oration. By November of that year, Clarke had brought Pearse into the IRB, despite some reservations by other members of the IRB who feared that Pearse was politically unreliably and too personally ambitious.

== Irish Volunteers ==

When the Irish Volunteers were formed in 1913, Clarke did not publicly take part, fearing that as a felon and well-known Irish nationalist, he would lend discredit to the Volunteers. Nevertheless, with Mac Diarmada, Hobson, Pearse and other IRB members such as Éamonn Ceannt taking important roles in the Volunteers, it was clear that the IRB would have substantial, if not total, control of the organisation. This proved largely to be the case until June 1913, when the leader of the Irish Parliamentary Party, John Redmond, demanded that the Provisional Committee accept 25 additional members of the Party&#x27;s choosing, which would give the IPP loyalists a majority stake. Though most of the hard-liners, including Clarke, stood against this, Redmond&#x27;s decree was accepted, partially due to the support given by Hobson. Clarke never forgave Hobson for this, calling it &quot;a treasonous act&quot; and dubbing Hobson a &quot;Castle Spy&quot;.

On 24 September 1914, with World War I having just begun, it was Clarke and Mac Diarmada who instigated an internal coup of the Irish Volunteers which saw anti-Redmonites seize control of the Volunteers&#x27; HQ in Dublin and issue a manifesto which rejected Redmond&#x27;s leadership. This precipitated a split in the Volunteers. Although the vast majority sided with Redmond, those who opposed Redmond kept the name &quot;Irish Volunteers&quot;. From then on, the Irish Volunteers would be in near-total IRB control, much to Clarke&#x27;s delight. Redmond&#x27;s followers, now called the National Volunteers, would go on to serve as part of the British army in the war, while the Irish Volunteers would remain home in Ireland. It was out of this situation that Clarke saw an opportunity to organise a militant uprising in Ireland.

== Planning the uprising ==
Following Clarke&#x27;s falling out with Hobson, Mac Diarmada and Clarke became almost inseparable. The two of them, as secretary and treasurer, respectively, &quot;de facto&quot; ran the IRB, although it was still under the nominal head of other men: James Deakin and later McCullough. In 1915 Clarke and Mac Diarmada established the Military Committee of the IRB to plan what later became the Easter Rising. The members were Pearse, Ceannt and Joseph Plunkett, with Clarke and Mac Diarmada adding themselves shortly thereafter.

When the old Fenian Jeremiah O&#x27;Donovan Rossa died in 1915, Clarke used his funeral (and Pearse&#x27;s graveside oration) to mobilise the Volunteers and heighten expectation of imminent action.

In late 1915, Clarke used his connections with Clan na Gael back in New York City to arrange for German weapons to be shipped into Ireland to coincide with the planned uprising. It was during this period that Clarke became frantic, keen to plan out and organise every aspect of the rising. Clarke feared a repeat of the 1867 Fenian Rising which ended in disaster due to, amongst other reasons, poor planning and preparation. In January 1916, Clarke was accidentally shot in the right arm by IRB member Sean McGarry, who mishandled a weapon. Clarke was never able to regain use of the arm.

It was also in January 1916 when an agreement was reached between the IRB and the leading Marxist James Connolly and his Irish Citizen Army. Connolly was added to the IRB Military committee, with Thomas MacDonagh also added at the last minute in April. These seven men would later become the signatories of the Proclamation of the Republic, with Clarke as the first signatory. The IRB feared that Connolly and his much smaller ICA organisation (when compared to the Volunteers) would pre-empt an IRB uprising with one of their own and bring down the British authorities upon Ireland. Their response was to absorb Connolly and the ICA into their plans.

Although Clarke avoided publicity and attention by nature, his activities did not go unnoticed by Dublin Castle, the centre of British intelligence in Ireland. Dublin Metropolitan Police detectives correctly realised that Clarke was the primary mover behind a planned republican revolution in Ireland and began to heavily monitor his activities. DMP detectives rented a shop directly across from his Parnell Street shop in order to directly observe his comings and goings, and were planning to arrest him just days before the Easter Rising launched in late April 1916.

In one of the final meetings before the Easter Rising went ahead, a gathering of the military council discussed the Proclamation of the Irish Republic; it was decided amongst them that Clarke&#x27;s signature should be the first amongst them on the document, owing to the sentiment that &quot;he had done more than anyone else to bring about the rising&quot;.

== Easter Rising ==

There was immediate confusion at the onset of the Easter Rising when Eoin MacNeill, nominally the head of the Irish Volunteers, issued orders in the &quot;Sunday Independent&quot; for Volunteers not to gather. Clarke was livid and denounced MacNeill as a traitor, but resolved to push ahead regardless.

Clarke was located at headquarters in the General Post Office (GPO) during the events of Easter Week, where rebel forces were largely composed of Irish Citizen Army members under the command of Connolly. Though he held no formal military rank, Clarke was recognised by the garrison as one of the commanders and was active throughout the week. After Connolly was badly wounded on 27 April, Clarke took an active role in command. It has been said that Clarke indeed would have been the declared President and Commander-in-chief, but he refused any military rank and such honours; these were given to Pearse, who was more well-known and respected on a national level following the O&#x27;Rossa Donovan speech. Kathleen Clarke later claimed that her husband, and not Pearse, was first president of the Irish Republic. At the time of planning, the Clarkes were living in a house on Richmond Avenue, Fairview.

Late in the week, the GPO had to be evacuated due to a fire. The leaders gathered in a house in Moore Street to decide how to proceed. Clarke was the only leader amongst them who wished to keep fighting. With a nearly unanimous vote having been taken, Pearse ordered the rebels to surrender on 29 April. Clarke broke down into tears. Clarke wrote on the wall of the house, &quot;We had to evacuate the GPO. The boys put up a grand fight, and that fight will save the soul of Ireland.&quot;

==Execution==
Clarke was arrested by the British after the surrender. He and the other commanders were taken to the Rotunda where he was stripped of his clothing in front of the other prisoners. Following the search, Clarke was greatly distressed when the DMP was able to produce a file accurately documenting the majority of his life, including his early life, his time in prison, his time in America and his activities for the IRB since returning to Ireland. He was later held in Kilmainham Gaol and he was court-martialled on 2 May 1916. Clarke made no statements in his defence. Clarke was executed by firing squad, along with Pearse and MacDonagh, on 3 May 1916. Before his execution, Clarke was able to speak with his wife Kathleen. He told her he was glad to be facing execution as he dreaded the thought of returning to prison. Summarising his thoughts about the future, he told Kathleen that &quot;between this and freedom Ireland will go through hell, but she will never lie down again until she has attained full freedom&quot;, before asking her to convey a message to the Irish people:

==Legacy==

The historian James Quinn has opined that Clarke was &quot;probably the most single-minded of all the 1916 leaders&quot;. Quinn states that despite his frail physical appearance and aversion to public speaking, Clarke can be described as the fiercest, most tenacious and most zealous of all the Easter Rising leaders.

After her husband&#x27;s execution, Kathleen Clarke was elected a TD in the Second Dáil, notably speaking against the Anglo-Irish Treaty.
* The Thomas Clarke Tower block of flats in Ballymun Flats was named after him. The top floor was used as a short-stay hotel before its demolition in April 2008.
* Dundalk railway station was given the name &quot;Clarke&quot; on 10 April 1966 in commemoration of Clarke&#x27;s role in the 1916 Rising.
* The Tom Clarke Bridge is a tolled bridge across the River Liffey in Dublin. The bridge, officially named after Clarke, is popularly referred to as the East-Link Bridge.
* He also featured on postage stamps in 1966.
* Dungannon Thomas Clarkes, a successful GAA Club and Gaelic football team in Clarke&#x27;s hometown in County Tyrone are also named after him.
* Dungannon has a 1916 Society named in his honour, Cumann Thomáis ui Chléirigh.
* Clarke Square in Collins Barracks
* He was portrayed by Lalor Roddy in the 2016 miniseries Rebellion, a dramatic retelling of the events and aftermath of the 1916 Rising.

==Gallery==
==Works==
* &quot;Glimpses of an Irish Felon&#x27;s Prison Life&quot; (1922: The National Publications Committee, Cork)

==References==
*
*
*
* Moran, Sean Farrell, Patrick Pearse and the Politics of Redemption, Washington, Catholic University of America Press, 1994.

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q467047" start="0" end="19" title="Tom Clarke (Irish republican)" label="Thomas James Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="58" end="74" title="Irish republican" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062580" start="95" end="123" title="Irish Republican Brotherhood" label="Irish Republican Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="186" end="199" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="216" end="230" title="physical-force Irish republicanism" label="armed struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16767601" start="239" end="262" title="British rule in Ireland" label="British rule in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="373" end="381" title="Capital punishment" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="385" end="397" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q628622" start="457" end="469" title="Hurst Castle" label="Hurst Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857874" start="475" end="489" title="Milford-on-Sea" label="Milford-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="576" end="588" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="656" end="668" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025602" start="701" end="710" title="Dungannon" label="Dungannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="712" end="725" title="County Tyrone" label="County Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062580" start="836" end="864" title="Irish Republican Brotherhood" label="Irish Republican Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228465" start="907" end="916" title="John Daly (Fenian)" label="John Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549059" start="1019" end="1043" title="Royal Irish Constabulary" label="Royal Irish Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="1101" end="1113" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953767" start="1122" end="1149" title="Ancient Order of Hibernians" label="Ancient Order of Hibernians"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1423" end="1429" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443469" start="1496" end="1520" title="Fenian dynamite campaign" label="Fenian dynamite campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785569" start="1534" end="1563" title="Jeremiah O&amp;#x27;Donovan Rossa" label="Jeremiah O&amp;#x27;Donovan Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80728" start="1738" end="1746" title="dynamite" label="dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="1805" end="1820" title="penal servitude" label="penal servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194829" start="1862" end="1872" title="Old Bailey" label="Old Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504639" start="1909" end="1920" title="Pentonville (HM Prison)" label="Pentonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q225392" start="2110" end="2122" title="John Redmond" label="John Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="2123" end="2125" title="Member of Parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672869" start="2141" end="2151" title="Parnellite" label="Parnellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672869" start="2152" end="2173" title="Irish National League" label="Irish National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635248" start="2292" end="2300" title="Portland (HM Prison)" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228465" start="2824" end="2833" title="John Daly (Fenian)" label="John Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736270" start="2938" end="2951" title="Kathleen Clarke" label="Kathleen Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="3192" end="3200" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048468" start="3296" end="3309" title="John MacBride" label="John MacBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125628" start="3410" end="3422" title="Clan na Gael" label="Clan na Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842956" start="3441" end="3451" title="John Devoy" label="John Devoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516605" start="3532" end="3551" title="The Gaelic American" label="The Gaelic American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460208" start="3806" end="3826" title="Manorville, New York" label="Manorville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16406" start="4051" end="4062" title="tobacconist" label="tobacconist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="4071" end="4077" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321099" start="4210" end="4223" title="Bulmer Hobson" label="Bulmer Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257384" start="4228" end="4244" title="Denis McCullough" label="Denis McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320941" start="4312" end="4329" title="Seán Mac Diarmada" label="Seán Mac Diarmada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070776" start="4633" end="4646" title="Irish Freedom" label="Irish Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q437962" start="4978" end="4988" title="Wolfe Tone" label="Wolfe Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089963" start="4992" end="5012" title="Bodenstown Graveyard" label="Bodenstown Graveyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="5066" end="5074" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q875645" start="5321" end="5334" title="Gaelic League" label="Gaelic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="5377" end="5386" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q342765" start="5573" end="5588" title="Arthur Griffith" label="Arthur Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715770" start="5690" end="5708" title="Dublin Corporation" label="Dublin Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="5897" end="5906" title="home rule" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q476830" start="6074" end="6121" title="Irish Transport and General Workers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Irish Transport and General Workers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q448920" start="6138" end="6152" title="Dublin Lockout" label="Dublin Lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590833" start="6193" end="6210" title="Irish Independent" label="Irish Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456341" start="6239" end="6252" title="union-busting" label="union-busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q333298" start="6283" end="6304" title="William Martin Murphy" label="William Martin Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071361" start="6624" end="6659" title="Irish Women&amp;#x27;s Franchise League" label="Irish Women&amp;#x27;s Franchise League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198240" start="6692" end="6709" title="1916 Proclamation" label="1916 Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q274143" start="6888" end="6903" title="Paidraig Pearse" label="Paidraig Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074958" start="7160" end="7176" title="Irish Volunteers" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q965189" start="7412" end="7425" title="Éamonn Ceannt" label="Éamonn Ceannt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="7636" end="7661" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Irish Parliamentary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q225392" start="7663" end="7675" title="John Redmond" label="John Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8132" end="8143" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440743" start="9220" end="9232" title="Seamus Deakin" label="James Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q284156" start="9414" end="9429" title="Joseph Plunkett" label="Joseph Plunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785569" start="9519" end="9548" title="Jeremiah O&amp;#x27;Donovan Rossa" label="Jeremiah O&amp;#x27;Donovan Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068697" start="9592" end="9623" title="Ireland unfree shall never be at peace" label="Pearse&amp;#x27;s graveside oration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332396" start="10018" end="10036" title="Fenian Rising" label="1867 Fenian Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459563" start="10200" end="10212" title="Sean McGarry" label="Sean McGarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="10378" end="10385" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q213374" start="10386" end="10400" title="James Connolly" label="James Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190570" start="10409" end="10427" title="Irish Citizen Army" label="Irish Citizen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319082" start="10484" end="10500" title="Thomas MacDonagh" label="Thomas MacDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198240" start="10599" end="10627" title="Proclamation of the Irish Republic" label="Proclamation of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263099" start="11101" end="11127" title="Dublin Metropolitan Police" label="Dublin Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139322" start="11341" end="11355" title="Parnell Street" label="Parnell Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346298" start="11962" end="11975" title="Eoin MacNeill" label="Eoin MacNeill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776770" start="12048" end="12066" title="Sunday Independent (Ireland)" label="Sunday Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339254" start="12239" end="12258" title="General Post Office (Dublin)" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190570" start="12343" end="12361" title="Irish Citizen Army" label="Irish Citizen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q434921" start="13091" end="13099" title="Fairview, Dublin" label="Fairview"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908239" start="13198" end="13210" title="Moore Street" label="Moore Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443052" start="13709" end="13716" title="Rotunda Hospital" label="Rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049842" start="14075" end="14090" title="Kilmainham Gaol" label="Kilmainham Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="14102" end="14115" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="14199" end="14211" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="14677" end="14689" title="Irish people" label="Irish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443260" start="15099" end="15110" title="Second Dáil" label="Second Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="15141" end="15159" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080237" start="15205" end="15219" title="Ballymun Flats" label="Ballymun Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q664711" start="15325" end="15348" title="Dundalk railway station" label="Dundalk railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="15450" end="15461" title="1916 Rising" label="1916 Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q987447" start="15465" end="15486" title="East-Link (Dublin)" label="The Tom Clarke Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q208009" start="15517" end="15529" title="River Liffey" label="River Liffey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15644" end="15670" title="List of people on stamps of Ireland#1960s" label="featured on postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215388" start="15682" end="15706" title="Dungannon Thomas Clarkes" label="Dungannon Thomas Clarkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="15721" end="15724" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="15734" end="15749" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="15784" end="15797" title="County Tyrone" label="County Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147347" start="15924" end="15940" title="Collins Barracks" label="Collins Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q95846011" start="15963" end="15974" title="Lalor Roddy" label="Lalor Roddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22252026" start="15998" end="16007" title="Rebellion (miniseries)" label="Rebellion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567617" wikidata="Q1778394" url="?curid=567617" title="Save percentage">
<text>Save percentage (often known by such symbols as SV%, SVS%, SVP, PCT) is a statistic in various goal-scoring sports that track saves as a statistic.

In ice hockey and lacrosse and association football, it is a statistic that represents the percentage of shots on goal a goaltender stops. It is calculated by dividing the number of saves by the total number of shots on goal.

Although the statistic is a percentage, it is often given as a decimal in North America, in the same way as a batting average in baseball. Thus, .933 means a goaltender saved 93.3 percent of all shots they faced. In international ice hockey, such as the IIHF World Championships, a save percentage is expressed as a true percentage, such as 90.5%.

==See also==
*Goals against average, a statistic that represents the number of goals allowed per game by a goaltender

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1778394" start="0" end="15" title="Save percentage" label="Save percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778394" start="48" end="51" title="Save percentage" label="SV%"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778394" start="53" end="57" title="Save percentage" label="SVS%"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778394" start="59" end="62" title="Save percentage" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778394" start="64" end="67" title="Save percentage" label="PCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530" start="95" end="99" title="Goal (sports)" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305941" start="126" end="131" title="Save (goaltender)" label="saves"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="152" end="162" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="167" end="175" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="180" end="200" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949963" start="210" end="219" title="statistic" label="statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502414" start="254" end="267" title="shot on goal (ice hockey)" label="shots on goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="270" end="280" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="486" end="501" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="505" end="513" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604309" start="739" end="760" title="Goals against average" label="Goals against average"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567621" wikidata="Q253882" url="?curid=567621" title="Kyoko Fukada">
<text>is a Japanese actress and singer. She is represented by the agency Horipro. She won the award for Best Actress at the Yokohama Film Festival for &quot;Kamikaze Girls&quot;.

== Biography ==
Kyoko Fukada was born and raised in Tokyo, Japan, on 2 November 1982.

In 20 October 1996, she won the 21st Talent Scout Caravan Grand Prix Award as part of the &quot;Pure Girl Audition&quot; at the age of 13. She began her career as an actress in 1997 with her first appearance in the television series &quot;Sore ga Kotae da!&quot; as Kazune Mizuno. Fukada appeared in her first movie &quot;Ring 2&quot; as Kanae Sawaguchi in 1999 and in later in &quot;School Day of the Dead&quot;, released in 2000. She graduated from Horikoshi High School in 2001.

In 2002, she made an appearance in &quot;Dolls&quot; as Haruna. Fukada is also a J-pop singer and her debut single &quot;The Last Fruit&quot; led to her album &quot;Dear…&quot;, both released by Pony Canyon in 1999.

In 2021, it was announced that she had been diagnosed with adjustment disorder and would be taking a break from activities to focus on treatment. She said that she had been prone to falling ill since around spring of the previous year, and this month a doctor diagnosed her with &quot;adjustment disorder&quot;. The company stated, &quot;As a result, we will be prioritizing treatment for the time being and will be taking a break from work.&quot; Due to her hiatus, she will also be stepping down from her role in the drama series &quot;My Oshi no Oujisama,&quot; which she was scheduled to appear in from July 2021. She announced on her Instagram on September 2, 2021, that she had finished her hiatus and would be resuming her activities.

== Filmography ==

===Films===
===Television===
===Japanese dub===
== Discography ==

=== Singles ===

=== Albums ===

== Awards and nominations ==
* Japan Academy Prize
** Japan Academy Prize for Best Newcomer in &quot;Shisha no Gakuensai&quot; (2000)
** nominated – Japan Academy Prize for Outstanding Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in &quot;Shisha no Gakuensai&quot; (2000)
* Blue Ribbon Awards
** Blue Ribbon Awards for Best Supporting Actress in &quot;Yatterman&quot; (2009)
* Mainichi Film Awards
** Mainichi Film Award for Best Actress in &quot;Kamikaze Girls&quot; (2004)
* Tokyo Sports Film Awards
** Tokyo Sports Film Award for Best Actress in &quot;Kamikaze Girls&quot; (2004)
** Tokyo Sports Film Award for Best Supporting Actress in &quot;Yatterman&quot; (2009)
* Miscellaneous awards
** Golden Arrow Award for Most Promising Actress in &quot;Shinjuku Shōnen Tanteidan&quot; (1998)
** Élan d&#x27;or for Most Promising Actress in &quot;Kamisama, Mō Sukoshi Dake&quot; (1998)
** The Television Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in &quot;Kamisama, Mō Sukoshi Dake&quot; (1998)
** The Television Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in &quot;To Heart: Koishite Shinitai&quot; (1999)
** Nikkan Sports Film Award for Best Newcomer in &quot;Shisha no Gakuensai&quot; (2000)
** The Television Academy Award for Best Dresser in &quot;Fighting Girl&quot; (2001)
** The Television Academy Award for Best Dresser in &quot;Remote&quot; (2001)
** Yokohama Film Festival for Best Actress in &quot;Kamikaze Girls&quot; (2004)
** Yubari International Fantastic Film Festival for Max Factor Beauty Spirit (2005)
** The Television Academy Award for Best Actress in &quot;Hajimete Koi wo Shita Hi ni Yomu Hanashi&quot; (2019)

== References ==
== See also ==

== External links ==
* Kyoko Fukada&#x27;s official Profile at Horipro, Inc.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q872586" start="67" end="74" title="Horipro" label="Horipro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045869" start="118" end="140" title="Yokohama Film Festival" label="Yokohama Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191668" start="151" end="165" title="Kamikaze Girls" label="Kamikaze Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733969" start="583" end="589" title="Ring 2" label="Ring 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613747" start="712" end="733" title="Horikoshi High School" label="Horikoshi High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q260208" start="785" end="790" title="Dolls (2002 film)" label="Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578" start="825" end="830" title="J-pop" label="J-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q513712" start="939" end="950" title="Pony Canyon" label="Pony Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q317158" start="1246" end="1265" title="adjustment disorder" label="adjustment disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q194258" start="1854" end="1873" title="Japan Academy Prize (film award)" label="Japan Academy Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q194258" start="1877" end="1896" title="Japan Academy Prize (film award)" label="Japan Academy Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467106" start="1972" end="2051" title="Japan Academy Prize for Outstanding Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role" label="Japan Academy Prize for Outstanding Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186171" start="2096" end="2114" title="Blue Ribbon Awards" label="Blue Ribbon Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19833557" start="2118" end="2164" title="Blue Ribbon Awards for Best Supporting Actress" label="Blue Ribbon Awards for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092074" start="2174" end="2183" title="Yatterman" label="Yatterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340271" start="2199" end="2219" title="Mainichi Film Awards" label="Mainichi Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977394" start="2223" end="2259" title="Mainichi Film Award for Best Actress" label="Mainichi Film Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191668" start="2269" end="2283" title="Kamikaze Girls" label="Kamikaze Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813994" start="2299" end="2323" title="Tokyo Sports Film Awards" label="Tokyo Sports Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649980" start="2327" end="2367" title="Tokyo Sports Film Award for Best Actress" label="Tokyo Sports Film Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649986" start="2408" end="2459" title="Tokyo Sports Film Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Tokyo Sports Film Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354425" start="2518" end="2536" title="Golden Arrow Award" label="Golden Arrow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447904" start="3069" end="3082" title="Fighting Girl" label="Fighting Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544013" start="3154" end="3160" title="Remote (manga)" label="Remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045869" start="3177" end="3199" title="Yokohama Film Festival" label="Yokohama Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q901495" start="3257" end="3301" title="Yubari International Fantastic Film Festival" label="Yubari International Fantastic Film Festival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567625" wikidata="Q1339583" url="?curid=567625" title="Val-de-Grâce">
<text>The Val-de-Grâce (; Hôpital d&#x27;instruction des armées du Val-de-Grâce or HIA Val-de-Grâce) was a military hospital located at 74 boulevard de Port-Royal in the 5th arrondissement of Paris, France. It was closed as a hospital in 2016.

==History==
The church of the Val-de-Grâce was built by order of Queen Anne of Austria, wife of Louis XIII. After the birth of her son Louis XIV after 23 years of childless marriage, Anne showed her gratitude to the Virgin Mary by building a church on the land of a Benedictine convent. Louis XIV is said to have laid the cornerstone for the Val-de-Grâce in a ceremony that took place 1 April 1645, when he was seven years old.

The church of the Val-de-Grâce, designed by François Mansart and Jacques Lemercier, is considered by some as Paris&#x27;s best example of baroque architecture (curving lines, elaborate ornamentation, and harmony of different elements). Construction began in 1645 and was completed in 1667.

The Benedictine nuns provided medical care for injured revolutionaries during the French Revolution, and thus the church at Val-de-Grâce was spared much of the desecration and vandalism that plagued other, more famous Paris churches. Notre-Dame, by contrast, was looted and used as a warehouse, and Saint-Eustache was used as a barn). As a result, the church&#x27;s exquisite interior is one of the few unspoiled remnants of Paris&#x27;s pre-Revolution grandeur. Following the Revolution, the buildings were converted into a military hospital.

The original buildings serve only for offices and teaching facilities (École d&#x27;application du Service de santé des armées; the medical facilities are inside a large modern building to the east on the same grounds.

The replacement hospital was built in the 1970s and completed in 1979. It has a capacity of 350 beds, in various specialties. The hospital is accessible to military personnel in need of medical aid as well as to any person with health coverage under the French social security system. It is famous for being the place where the top officials of the French Republic generally receive treatment.

In the courtyard stands a statue of Dominique Jean Larrey sculpted by David d&#x27;Angers in 1843, who was Napoleon&#x27;s personal surgeon and an innovator in the concept of battlefield triage.

The old abbey alongside the church is now a museum of French army medicine. Tours of the museum and church are available for a small fee. As a military facility, the grounds are under military guard and tourists are escorted. Cameras are not permitted except for inside the church itself.

The last emperor of Vietnam, Bảo Đại, died at the modern Val-de-Grâce hospital on 30 July 1997, aged 83.

===People buried at Val-de-Grâce===
Val-de-Grâce was later the traditional burial place for members of the House of Orléans, a cadet branch of the House of Bourbon:

* Mademoiselle de Valois (1693–94), daughter of Philippe II, Duke of Orléans
* Louis, Duke of Orléans (1703–52)
* Margravine Auguste of Baden-Baden, duchesse d&#x27;Orléans (1704–26)
* Louise Marie, Mademoiselle (1726–28), daughter of Margravine Auguste who died in childbirth giving birth to Louise Marie
* Louis Philippe (1725–85), son of Louis
* Louise Henriette de Bourbon(1726–59), wife of the above
* Françoise Marie de Bourbon (1677–1749), only her heart was buried here

==Gallery==

==See also==
* French Defence Health service
* List of hospitals in France

==References==
==External links==
* Photos of the church interior</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1339583" start="4" end="16" title="Val-de-Grâce" label="Val-de-Grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339583" start="20" end="73" title="Val-de-Grâce" label="Hôpital d&amp;#x27;instruction des armées du Val-de-Grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339583" start="77" end="93" title="Val-de-Grâce" label="HIA Val-de-Grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387974" start="101" end="118" title="military hospital" label="military hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q238723" start="164" end="191" title="5th arrondissement of Paris" label="5th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601262" start="255" end="281" title="Val-de-Grâce (church)" label="church of the Val-de-Grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q151209" start="310" end="325" title="Anne of Austria" label="Anne of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="335" end="345" title="Louis XIII of France" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="374" end="383" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="505" end="516" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="517" end="524" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q313701" start="712" end="728" title="François Mansart" label="François Mansart"/>
<link wikidata="Q708858" start="733" end="750" title="Jacques Lemercier" label="Jacques Lemercier"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="806" end="826" title="baroque architecture" label="baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1041" end="1058" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111921" start="1119" end="1130" title="desecration" label="desecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="1193" end="1203" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338207" start="1258" end="1272" title="Saint-Eustache, Paris" label="Saint-Eustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="1985" end="2000" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2073" end="2088" title="French Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q468413" start="2155" end="2176" title="Dominique Jean Larrey" label="Dominique Jean Larrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q364498" start="2189" end="2208" title="David d&amp;#x27;Angers" label="David d&amp;#x27;Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2226" end="2234" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q780067" start="2306" end="2312" title="triage" label="triage"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="2323" end="2328" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="2625" end="2632" title="South Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q223771" start="2634" end="2641" title="Bảo Đại" label="Bảo Đại"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347533" start="2818" end="2834" title="House of Orléans" label="House of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="2858" end="2874" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155596" start="2925" end="2953" title="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q363992" start="2956" end="2978" title="Louis, Duke of Orléans (1703–1752)" label="Louis, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q292123" start="2991" end="3024" title="Margravine Auguste of Baden-Baden" label="Margravine Auguste of Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613347" start="3026" end="3049" title="list of consorts of Orléans" label="duchesse d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688844" start="3062" end="3074" title="Louise Marie d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Louise Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q348183" start="3185" end="3199" title="Louis Philippe I, Duke of Orléans" label="Louis Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q236552" start="3226" end="3253" title="Louise Henriette of Bourbon, Duchess of Orléans" label="Louise Henriette de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q237666" start="3284" end="3310" title="Françoise Marie de Bourbon" label="Françoise Marie de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657904" start="3384" end="3413" title="French Defence Health service" label="French Defence Health service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623587" start="3416" end="3443" title="List of hospitals in France" label="List of hospitals in France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567630" wikidata="Q782351" url="?curid=567630" title="Beetlejuice (TV series)">
<text>Beetlejuice is an animated television series that ran from September 9, 1989, to October 26, 1991, on ABC, and on Fox from September 9 to December 6, 1991. Loosely based on the 1988 American film of the same name, it was developed by its director, Tim Burton, who also served as an executive producer. The series follows Lydia Deetz and her friend Beetlejuice and their adventures in the &quot;mortal world&quot; and the Neitherworld, a supernatural realm inhabited by various monsters. Danny Elfman, who composed the theme for the film, also arranged it for the series.

==Plot==
The series follows the adventures of ghostly con-man Beetlejuice and his best friend Lydia in the Neitherworld and the &quot;mortal world&quot;, the New England town of Peaceful Pines. As in the film, Lydia could summon Beetlejuice from the Neitherworld or go there by calling his name three times. The series&#x27; humor relied heavily on sight gags, wordplay, and allusiveness. Many episodes, notably towards the end of the series&#x27; run, were parodies of movies, books, and TV shows. The episode &quot;Brides of Funkenstein&quot; was based on an idea submitted by a teenage girl who was a fan of the show.

==Characters==
===Main===
* Beetlejuice (voiced by Stephen Ouimette) is a ghost and the titular character, who is known throughout the Neitherworld as a prankster and was named after the star Betelgeuse. His personality is toned down in the series, and he is not as vulgar as he is in the film. Another difference from the film is that he is Lydia&#x27;s friend and is not antagonistic. He is the oldest son of Gnat and Bea Juice and the older brother of Donny Juice, all of whom are exclusive to the TV series (neither of the films mention Beetlejuice&#x27;s family). He possesses several powers, including shapeshifting, conjuring objects, and teleportation, with his transformations retaining the black and white stripes of his suit. He has used this power to disguise himself among humans, such as interacting with Lydia&#x27;s parents under the aliases &quot;Mr. Beetleman&quot; and &quot;Cousin BJ&quot; and attending Lydia&#x27;s school as a teenage girl around her age as &quot;Betty Juice&quot;. Due to what is described as his &quot;juice&quot;, his innate source of magic, when he says a figure of speech, he or his surroundings change to fit the pun. However, his powers can be reduced by various circumstances, such as when he is afraid or his head becomes separated from his body. Though many Neitherworld denizens have some magic, Beetlejuice&#x27;s power has earned him the title of &quot;The Ghost with the Most&quot;. Beetlejuice&#x27;s main pastime is pulling various pranks on the inhabitants of the Neitherworld and the &quot;mortal world&quot;, but his pranks on Lydia are done to tease her, not to cause harm, which shows that he cares for her. He also often comes up with get-rich-quick con schemes to get money, as he dreads having to get a job, and is unwilling to stop even when others tell him to. Despite his cynical and childish attitude, Beetlejuice can be insightful, as he often recites quotes of philosophical and humanitarian importance.
* Lydia Deetz (voiced by Alyson Court) is a goth girl who is in her preteens at the start of the series and later in her early teens, and is considered to be responsible and emotionally mature for her age. She loves all things &quot;strange and unusual&quot;, including horror and literary classics such as the works of gothic and horror writers, including Edgar Allan Poe and Stephen King. She is established as being a creative, yet eccentric, girl, who struggles to fit in with her classmates at Miss Shannon&#x27;s School for Girls, which she attends. This leads her to seek out reassurance with Beetlejuice and in the Neitherworld, where she is accepted and loved for who she is. She also has several talents, including photography, entomology, sewing, art, and working with machines, and feels strongly about environmental issues. Lydia is Beetlejuice&#x27;s best friend, and in &quot;Critter Sitters&quot;, it is shown that they have known each other for a year, as they are celebrating their first anniversary of friendship. Lydia can summon Beetlejuice or travel to the Neitherworld by calling his name three times. When visiting the Neitherworld, Lydia wears a red spider web poncho with black tights. Lydia looks up to Beetlejuice, and, in &quot;It&#x27;s a Wonderful Afterlife&quot;, it is shown that if she never met him, she would have been a social recluse and would not have had the confidence to stand up to Claire Brewster&#x27;s bullying, showing that Beetlejuice&#x27;s friendship and dedication to her is the source of her self-confidence.

===Supporting===
====Peaceful Pines inhabitants====
* Charles Deetz (voiced by Roger Dunn) is Lydia&#x27;s father, whose hobbies include ornithology and baseball. He is closer to Lydia than Delia is, as they share a love of baseball. He is often the victim of Beetlejuice&#x27;s pranks and mischief; despite this, Beetlejuice is quite fond of him, likely because he is one of the few people who always falls for his pranks.
* Delia Deetz (voiced by Elizabeth Hanna) is Charles&#x27; wife and Lydia&#x27;s stepmother, who tries to get her to give up her love for scary things and focus on normal interests. She is an eccentric, airheaded yuppie, who believes that she is a great cook and a great artist, when in reality it is not well received. However, her art is popular in the Neitherworld. Because of her eccentric nature, Delia is not easily frightened, unlike Charles; being a surrealistic artist, she believes that the frightening things she experiences are part of something else. 
* Percy is the Deetz family&#x27;s pet black cat, who is often a victim of Beetlejuice&#x27;s pranks.
* Bertha (voiced by Tara Charendoff) is Lydia&#x27;s friend at school, who shares her interest in things &quot;strange and unusual&quot;.
* Prudence (voiced by Paulina Gillis) is Lydia&#x27;s friend at school, who is shy and loves to read. 
* Claire Brewster (voiced by Tara Charendoff) is Lydia&#x27;s upperclass rival and Beetlejuice&#x27;s rival at school. As a result of being spoiled by her parents, Claire is vain, narcissistic, and believes that everything should go her way. She often clashes with Lydia, whom she hates. Claire would often become a victim of Beetlejuice&#x27;s shenanigans.

====Neitherworld inhabitants====
* Jacques LaLean (voiced by Charles Kerr) is a French skeleton bodybuilder and Beetlejuice&#x27;s neighbor. Despite being annoyed by his antics, they are friends despite Beetlejuice&#x27;s insistence that they are not. He dreams of becoming a great bodybuilder despite lacking muscles or a body; despite this, he previously won the Mr. Neitherworld bodybuilding title, defeating reigning champion Armhold Musclehugger. According to &quot;Highs-Ghoul Confidential&quot;, he and Ginger attended the same high school as Beetlejuice and went to the school prom together. 
* Ginger (voiced by Paulina Gillis) is a tap-dancing spider and Beetlejuice&#x27;s neighbor, who dreams of someday being a famous tap dancer. According to &quot;Highs-Ghoul Confidential&quot;, she and Jacques attended the same high school as Beetlejuice, where she was part of the cheerleading squad, and went to the school prom together.
* The Monster Across the Street (voiced by Len Carlson) is a tall, hairy monster from the West who lives across the street from Beetlejuice and is often annoyed by his antics. He resembles Gossamer from Looney Tunes.
** Poopsie (voiced by Len Carlson) - The pet dog of the Monster Across the Street.
* Doomie (vocal effects provided by Ron Rubin as Doomie, Colin Fox as Dragster of Doom) is Beetlejuice and Lydia&#x27;s sentient car, who is normally affable and friendly but, due to the abnormal brain Beetlejuice gave him during his construction, transforms into a werewolf-like monster called the Dragster of Doom in response to the presence of a Neitherworld dog or to anger, fear, or his passengers being in danger. Later in the series, he &quot;speaks&quot;, which is given as the sound of an engine turning over in ignition. Through Lydia translating his speech, other aspects of his character are revealed, such as his attempts to court Mayor Maynot&#x27;s convertible Pinky.
* Barry MeNot (voiced by Keith Knight) appears in the Neitherworld&#x27;s commercials to promote a product revolving around a plot point.
* Bea Juice (voiced by Susan Roman) is Beetlejuice&#x27;s mother.
* Nat Juice (voiced by Len Carlson) is Beetlejuice&#x27;s father, who wants him to get a job.
* Mayor Maynot (voiced by Len Carlson) is the Mayor of the Neitherworld who can be easily angered. While his original appearance in the first two seasons has him as a green-skinned short man, later seasons had him redesigned to being a tall mummified man.
** I. M. Smallhead is Mayor Maynot&#x27;s personal assistant who is loosely based on Harry the Hunter from the film.
* Judge Mental (voiced by Len Carlson) is the Neitherworld&#x27;s residential judge.
* Mr. Monitor (voiced by John Stocker) is a humanoid with four televisions for a head who runs the Neitherworld TV Network.
* Armhold Musclehugger (voiced by Keith Knight) is the former Mr. Neitherworld bodybuilding champion until Jacques dethroned him. As Mr. Neitherworld, he is extremely arrogant, but when he reappears in the episode &quot;Goody Two-Shoes&quot; he is more affable. He later begins working for Chester Slime as his right-hand man.
* Scuzzo and Fuzzo (voiced by Joseph Sherman and David Goldberg respectively) are troublemaking clowns and Beetlejuice&#x27;s rivals.
* The Sandworms are purple and green snake-like creatures that reside in the desert region of Sandwormland, which is below the Neitherworld (unlike in the film, where they live on a moon of Saturn). The worst offenders of the Neitherworld are often sent to Sandwormland so that the Sandworms can eat them which is why Beetlejuice and most of the Neitherworld are often terrified of Sandwormland.

==Episodes==

==Voice cast==

* Stephen Ouimette – Beetlejuice, Snugglejuice, Posijuice, Negajuice
* Alyson Court – Lydia Deetz
* Elizabeth Hanna – Delia Deetz, Miss Shannon
* Roger Dunn – Charles Deetz
* Harvey Atkin – Lipscum, Exorcist
* Tara Charendoff – Bertha, Claire Brewster, Little Miss Warden
* Len Carlson – The Monster Across the Street, Judge Mental, Barf Birfman, Mayor Maynot, Mr. Juice, Uncle Clyde, Messy Jesse, Foreman, Hopalong Casualty, Poopsie
* Paulina Gillis – Prudence, Ginger
* Keith Knight – Barry MeNot, Flubbo, Armhold Musclehugger, Chester Slime, Dr. Zigmund Void
* Ron Rubin – Germs Pondscum, Doombuggy
* Colin Fox – Dragster of Doom
* Keith Hampshire – Doomie
* Joseph Sherman – Scuzzo the Clown
* David Goldberg – Fuzzo the Clown
* Stuart Stone – Ramon
* Dan Hennessey – Jesse Germs, Captain Kidder, Bully the Crud
* Peggy Mahon – Mrs. Bugsley, Aunt May
* Susan Roman – Miss Shapen, Percy, Poopette, the Monstress Across the Street, Mrs. Juice
* Richard Binsley – Donnyjuice, Wyatt Burp
* Don Francks – Count Mein, Mr. Big
* Michael Stark – Fleagor
* Charles Kerr – Jacques
* Allan Stewart Coates – Ed
* John Stocker – Mr. Monitor, Bartholomew Batt
* Hadley Kay – Prince Vince
==Production==
Following the major critical and commercial success of the &quot;Beetlejuice&quot; film in early 1988, it led to an animated spin-off series being created by Warner Bros. Television. The production was provided by the Canadian Nelvana Ltd., The Geffen Film Company and Tim Burton, Inc. The series premiered on September 9, 1989, on ABC.

The animated series was a mega breakout hit for ABC in its initial seasons, and later became one of the first cartoon animated series to ever air on Fox&#x27;s weekday afternoons children&#x27;s lineup, though also remaining on ABC&#x27;s Saturday morning schedules, making it one of the first animated shows to air concurrently on two different U.S. broadcast networks.

The premise of the animated series differs in a number of ways from the original film in order to be acceptable for children. In the TV series, he and Lydia are best friends, Beetlejuice is made out to be more of a prankster, and Lydia is given a much quirkier, but positive demeanor. Lydia often travels to the &quot;Neitherworld&quot; (changed from &quot;Afterlife&quot;) to have adventures with Beetlejuice. These adventures could involve fun activities together, Lydia saving Beetlejuice from a bad situation, or scolding him for a money-making scam.

==Merchandise==
Much as with the original 1988 film, various merchandise was released for the &quot;Beetlejuice&quot; animated series in 1990. This included trading cards by Dart, a sticker album and sticker/activity book by Panini, a jigsaw puzzle by Golden, a coloring book, novels, a lunchbox and thermos set, Valentines, a party centerpiece by Party Creations, a PC game by Hi Tech Expressions, a Game Boy game by Rare, and six PVC figures available with Burger King Kids&#x27; Meals. Kenner, the company behind the film&#x27;s action figures, had begun developing figures for the animated series, but the project did not come to fruition (at least one prototype for that ill-fated collection has been showcased online).

===Home media===
Warner Bros. released most of the first season of the show on six video-cassettes by December 21, 1993. In September 2008, three episodes (&quot;A-Ha!&quot;, &quot;Skeletons in the Closet&quot;, and &quot;Spooky Boo-tique&quot;) were released as bonus features on the film&#x27;s 20th Anniversary Deluxe Edition DVD.

In 2012, Time Life (under Warner Home Video license) acquired the rights to the series and planned to release it on DVD for the following year. Shout! Factory released &quot;Beetlejuice – The Complete Series&quot; on DVD in Region 1 as an Amazon exclusive on May 28, 2013. They also released Season 1 on the same day to retail stores. Seasons 2 &amp; 3 were released on March 18, 2014. On June 25, 2024, Warner Bros. Home Entertainment (through Studio Distribution Services) re-issued the complete series on a DVD box set in Region 1. Around the same time, the series was made available as transactional video on demand purchases through streaming retailers including Amazon Prime Video and the iTunes Store.
==Awards==
Daytime Emmy Awards
* 1990 – Outstanding Animated Program (Won) (tied with &quot;The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh&quot;)

==See also==

* List of ghost films

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Beetlejuice&quot; at Don Markstein&#x27;s Toonopedia. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018.
* Press release detailing Toontopia TV which will feature &quot;Beetlejuice&quot;
* &quot;Beetlejuice&quot; at Retro Junk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="18" end="44" title="animated television series" label="animated television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="102" end="105" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="114" end="117" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q320384" start="177" end="212" title="Beetlejuice" label="1988 American film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="248" end="258" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193338" start="487" end="499" title="Danny Elfman" label="Danny Elfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="730" end="741" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191969" start="921" end="931" title="Visual gag" label="sight gags"/>
<link wikidata="Q998840" start="933" end="941" title="wordplay" label="wordplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q506667" start="947" end="959" title="allusiveness" label="allusiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="1030" end="1038" title="Parody" label="parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610158" start="1245" end="1261" title="Stephen Ouimette" label="Stephen Ouimette"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="1268" end="1273" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="1386" end="1396" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690215" start="2293" end="2309" title="figure of speech" label="figure of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840683" start="3192" end="3204" title="Alyson Court" label="Alyson Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="3524" end="3539" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="3544" end="3556" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q50013" start="3602" end="3611" title="Eccentricity (behavior)" label="eccentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="4866" end="4877" title="ornithology" label="ornithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="4882" end="4890" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051219" start="5178" end="5193" title="Elizabeth Hanna" label="Elizabeth Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q72879" start="5366" end="5372" title="yuppie" label="yuppie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029" start="5840" end="5855" title="Tara Strong" label="Tara Charendoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092688" start="5980" end="5994" title="Tabitha St. Germain" label="Paulina Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="6123" end="6133" title="upperclass" label="upperclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="7302" end="7320" title="Cheerleading" label="cheerleading squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358361" start="7403" end="7414" title="Len Carlson" label="Len Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940987" start="7696" end="7705" title="Ron Rubin (voice actor)" label="Ron Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q446762" start="7717" end="7726" title="Colin Fox (actor)" label="Colin Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="8324" end="8335" title="Convertible (car)" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384606" start="8368" end="8380" title="Keith Knight (actor)" label="Keith Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505597" start="8504" end="8515" title="Susan Roman" label="Susan Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="8687" end="8692" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096316" start="8939" end="8957" title="personal assistant" label="personal assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="9092" end="9097" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16117391" start="9124" end="9136" title="John Stocker (voice actor)" label="John Stocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="9646" end="9651" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="9874" end="9880" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610158" start="10113" end="10129" title="Stephen Ouimette" label="Stephen Ouimette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840683" start="10182" end="10194" title="Alyson Court" label="Alyson Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051219" start="10211" end="10226" title="Elizabeth Hanna" label="Elizabeth Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237338" start="10286" end="10298" title="Harvey Atkin" label="Harvey Atkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029" start="10321" end="10336" title="Tara Strong" label="Tara Charendoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358361" start="10385" end="10396" title="Len Carlson" label="Len Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092688" start="10547" end="10561" title="Tabitha St. Germain" label="Paulina Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384606" start="10583" end="10595" title="Keith Knight (actor)" label="Keith Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940987" start="10675" end="10684" title="Ron Rubin (voice actor)" label="Ron Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q446762" start="10715" end="10724" title="Colin Fox (actor)" label="Colin Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384444" start="10746" end="10761" title="Keith Hampshire" label="Keith Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500836" start="10844" end="10856" title="Stuart Stone" label="Stuart Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358294" start="10867" end="10880" title="Dan Hennessey" label="Dan Hennessey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505597" start="10968" end="10979" title="Susan Roman" label="Susan Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239152" start="11101" end="11112" title="Don Francks" label="Don Francks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16117391" start="11216" end="11228" title="John Stocker (voice actor)" label="John Stocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637976" start="11263" end="11273" title="Hadley Kay" label="Hadley Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q320384" start="11369" end="11380" title="Beetlejuice" label="Beetlejuice"/>
<link wikidata="Q428457" start="11531" end="11543" title="Nelvana Ltd." label="Nelvana Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q7736023" start="11545" end="11568" title="The Geffen Film Company" label="The Geffen Film Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="11636" end="11639" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="11791" end="11794" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q626178" start="11821" end="11843" title="Fox Kids" label="children&amp;#x27;s lineup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067203" start="12727" end="12740" title="trading cards" label="trading cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q21032630" start="12752" end="12765" title="sticker album" label="sticker album"/>
<link wikidata="Q15085475" start="12795" end="12801" title="Panini (stickers)" label="Panini"/>
<link wikidata="Q181008" start="12805" end="12818" title="jigsaw puzzle" label="jigsaw puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908540" start="12822" end="12828" title="Penguin Random House" label="Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="12937" end="12944" title="PC game" label="PC game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135129" start="12948" end="12967" title="Hi Tech Expressions" label="Hi Tech Expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274098" start="12971" end="12984" title="Beetlejuice (handheld video game)" label="Game Boy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q642707" start="12988" end="12992" title="Rare (company)" label="Rare"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="13002" end="13005" title="PVC" label="PVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="13029" end="13040" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404879" start="13041" end="13056" title="Kids&amp;#x27; meal" label="Kids&amp;#x27; Meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738830" start="13059" end="13065" title="Kenner" label="Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="13102" end="13115" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="13379" end="13393" title="VHS" label="video-cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806643" start="13640" end="13649" title="Time Life" label="Time Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="13657" end="13674" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="13870" end="13876" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="14035" end="14066" title="Warner Bros. Discovery Home Entertainment" label="Warner Bros. Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="14076" end="14104" title="Studio Distribution Services" label="Studio Distribution Services"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14221" end="14250" title="Video_on_demand#Transactional" label="transactional video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="14299" end="14317" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="14326" end="14338" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="14351" end="14369" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553591" start="14373" end="14377" title="17th Daytime Emmy Awards" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019369" start="14380" end="14408" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Children&amp;#x27;s Animated Program" label="Outstanding Animated Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470724" start="14432" end="14469" title="The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh" label="The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109823" start="14494" end="14513" title="List of ghost films" label="List of ghost films"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="14578" end="14609" title="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia" label="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567632" wikidata="Q391962" url="?curid=567632" title="Common Fisheries Policy">
<text>The Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) is the fisheries policy of the European Union (EU). It sets quotas for which member states are allowed to catch each type of fish, as well as encouraging the fishing industry by various market interventions. In 2004 it had a budget of €931 million, approximately 0.75% of the EU budget.

When it came into force in 2009, the Treaty of Lisbon formally enshrined fisheries conservation policy as one of the handful of &quot;exclusive competences&quot; reserved for the European Union, to be decided by Qualified Majority Voting. However, general fisheries policy remains a &quot;shared competence&quot; of the Union and its member states. Decisions are now made by the Council of the European Union, and the European Parliament acting together under the co-decision procedure.

The Common Fisheries Policy was created to manage fish stock for the European Union as a whole. Article 38 of the 1957 Treaty of Rome, which created the European Communities (now European Union), stated that the common market shall extend to agriculture and trade in agricultural products. Agricultural products in the treaty meaning the products of the soil, of stock-farming and of fisheries and products of first-stage processing directly related to these products. It did not make any other specific mention of fisheries or common fishing areas.

==Importance of fishing in Europe==
Fishing is a relatively minor economic activity within the EU. It contributes generally less than 1 per cent to gross national product. In 2007 the fisheries sector employed 141,110 fishermen. In 2007, 6.4 million tonnes of fish were caught by EU countries. The EU fleet has 97,000 vessels of varying sizes. Fish farming produced a further 1 million tonnes of fish and shellfish and employed another 85,000 people. The shortfall between fish catches and demand varies, but there is an EU trade deficit in processed fish products of €3 billion.
===Catching===
The combined EU fishing fleets land about 6 million tonnes of fish per year, of which about 700,000 tonnes are from UK waters. The UK&#x27;s share of the overall EU fishing catch in 2014 was 752,000 tonnes, the second largest catch of any country in the EU. This proportion is determined by the London Fisheries Convention of 1964 and by the EU&#x27;s Common Fisheries Policy.

In Fraserburgh, Scotland, the fishing industry creates 40% of employment and a similar figure in Peterhead. They are the EU&#x27;s largest fishing ports and home to the pelagic vessel fleet. It is often in areas where other employment opportunities are limited. For this reason, community funds have been made available to fishing as a means of encouraging regional development.

The market for fish and fish products has changed in recent years. Supermarkets are now the main buyers of fish and expect steady supplies. Fresh fish sales have fallen, but demand for processed fish and prepared meals has grown. Despite this, employment in fish processing has been falling, with 60% of fish consumed in the EU coming from elsewhere. This is partly due to improvements in the ability to transport fresh fish internationally. Competitiveness of the EU fishing industry has been affected by overcapacity and shortages of fish to catch.

===Aquaculture===
Fish farming is the fastest growing area of world food production. In 1995 it produced one-third of the world&#x27;s fish and shellfish by value. The main species in the EU are trout, salmon, mussels and oysters, but interest has been shown in sea bass, sea bream and turbot. Community support began in 1971 for inland fish farming, but was extended to other areas in the late 1970s. EU support covers similar areas to other land installations, but with additional concerns of technical and environmental problems caused by introducing major fish concentrations where farms are built. The industry suffers problems due to fluctuating demand for farmed fish.

==Mechanisms of the CFP==

The CFP currently has four components:
*Regulation of production, quality, grading, packaging and labelling
*Encouraging producer organisations intended to protect fishermen from sudden market changes
*Setting minimum fish prices and financing buying up of unsold fish
*Set rules for trade with non-EU countries

=== Fishing quotas and regulations ===

==== Adoption of rules at Union level ====
The CFP sets the &quot;total allowable catch&quot; (&quot;TAC&quot;) quotas for how much of each species can be caught in a certain ICES Statistical Area or groups of areas on a yearly or two-yearly basis. Each country is given a quota based upon the total available (Total Allowable Catch, TAC) and their traditional share (percentage). TACs are fixed annually by the Council of Ministers. They consider proposals drawn up by the European Commission, which consults its own scientific advisers (Scientific, Technical and Economic Committee of Fisheries, STECF). STECF generally provides its advice to the European Commission taking account of the work conducted by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) and other regional fisheries advisory intergovernmental organisations. The proposals are subsequently submitted to the relevant regional fisheries management organisations for consultations with non-EU fishing nations, and adjusted when necessary. The quotas are ultimately approved as binding by the Council of the EU, with each of the EU member states made responsible for policing its own quota as well as distributing it among the fishermen, using a variety of systems.

====Implementation at member state level====
The Basic Regulation sets the common principles for the EU management, under which each Member State can use different management approaches as licences, limited entry or individual fishing quota. Catches and landings must be recorded. Regulations cover the kind of fishing gear that may be used. Areas may be closed from fishing to allow stocks to recover.

A minimum size for catch led to fishermen dumping dead fish that were too small to land legally, so a minimum mesh size was introduced, which let small fish escape to replenish stocks. Choice of mesh is complicated, because mature fish of different species are naturally different sizes and require different nets.

===Producer organisations===

There are now more than 160 producer organisations (PO) in the EU. These are voluntary organisations set up by fishermen or fish farmers to assist in selling their product. Their members must include a minimum percentage of vessels in that sector, not discriminate in terms of nationality or location of their members within the EU, and must comply with other EU regulations. Organisations are required to develop plans to adjust fish catches to market demand. They may require non-members fishing in the same areas to follow the same restrictions as members.

They are empowered to take produce out of the market if prices fall below levels set by the Council of Ministers and receive compensation from the EU. Levels of compensation are set such that price falls as the amount of fish involved increases. Fish stocks may be stored and later returned to the market, or sold for animal feed. Buying-up of stocks must only be to cover occasional surpluses.

Tuna fishermen have a scheme where surplus stock is not bought up, but fishermen receive direct compensation if their income falls.

===Structural policy regarding fleet and onshore fishing industry===
In 1977 an aid programme was introduced to improve the fish processing industries, currently operating as the European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund. This includes such things as fish filleting, salting, drying, smoking, cooking, freezing and canning. It was intended to indirectly assist the catching industry. There has been an attempt to introduce new technologies to the sector, improve hygiene conditions, and also fund conversions of fish processing factories to other uses.

Each country is given a target for the size of its fleet. Funding is available to assist modernisation of boats and installations, but also to buy-out fishermen to reduce the fleet size. Money is available for advertising campaigns to encourage consumption of fish species that are not over-fished, or are unfamiliar to the public. Also, grants are available to assist the industry in improving product quality and managing quotas.

=== CFP regionalisation and devolution attempts ===
Due to growing demands to make the Common Fisheries Policy more decentralised (&quot;see #The CFP governance vs. the principle of subsidiarity section below&quot;), two regional groups of member states have been established through respective memoranda of understanding, one named BALTFISH which has included all the EU member states with a Baltic coast, while the other one, known as the Scheveningen Group, has been its North Sea counterpart. They are tasked with preparing drafts of quotas and regulations and submitting them for consideration to the EU institutions. These groups lack, however, any decision-making or enforcement powers essential for a regional fisheries management organisation, thus neither of them has been treated as such. These powers have remained exclusively at the hands of the European Union institutions.

===Funding instruments===

Fishing was initially funded under the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF). In 1977 an aid programme to improve the fish processing industries was established by the EU as a part of the EAGGF. Subsequently, the fisheries guidance (or structural) funding was split-off from EAGGF to form the separate Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance (FIFG) in 1993, while the fish market interventions have remained a task of the EAGGF and its successor, the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF). From 1994 to 1999 the budget for FIFG totalled 700 million ECU. Any grant from FIFG had to be accompanied by a minimum contribution from the national government. A grant to business must include a proportionate contribution from the business itself. Different rates of aid were applied to different regions. Subsequently, FIFG was renamed European Fisheries Fund in 2007, later transformed into the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF) in 2013, and ultimately into the current European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund (EMFAF) in 2021.

From 2007 to 2013, the Fund was allocated approximately 4.3 billion Euro to provide to the European fishing sector. The adoption of the EMFAF was not uncontested, in particular by environmental groups, as it includes the possibility to fund vessel modernisation and other measures, which might increase pressure on already overfished stocks.

===Enforcement and compliance===
 Enforcement is the responsibility of member states, but there is a community level inspection service to ensure that member states enforce the rules within their own country. Member states are also under an obligation to ensure that their vessels observe EU agreements when operating outside the EU. The regulations are also intended to harmonise penalties for breaking the regulations in different countries.

Enforcement involves managing quotas and implementing technical measures to preserve fish stocks. Inspectors may check fishing gear and inspect the register of fish caught. The type of fish caught is checked and compared to quotas of total permitted catch for a vessel. Checks may be made in port or at sea, and using aerial photography. Inspectors may also check fish processing factories to ensure that all fish is documented and can be traced to its source. EU inspectors check that hygiene and processing regulations in any country exporting to the EU are satisfactory and of an equal standard to controls within the EU.

Non-compliance remains a significant problem. In a number of EU fisheries, illegal fishing accounts for one-third to one-half of all catches.

==Relations with third countries and intergovernmental organisations==

The EU has become a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as well as the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement. EU has an exclusive mandate to represent its member states in the regional fisheries management organisations (RFMOs) other than the International Whaling Commission, except for the dependent territories of member states remaining outside of the EU, represented by the member states themselves, and has negotiated agreements to regain access to some of the fishing grounds in return for alternative trading rights. In contrast, the regional fisheries advisory bodies (RFABs) may be joined both by the EU and directly by its the members states.

External trade is now affected by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), regulated by the World Trade Organization (WTO).

===Baltic Sea and the Danish straits===
Prior to 2007, the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission (IBFC) established by the Gdańsk Convention in 1973, was the general regional fisheries management organisation for the Baltic Sea and the Danish straits, to which the EU was party until 1 January 2006. Following accession of all Baltic coastal states except Russia to the EU, the Baltic Sea has become almost entirely covered by the EU EEZ, except for two small patches belonging to Russian EEZ. Because of that, the Gdańsk Convention was terminated and the IBFC was dissolved on 1 January 2007, while its tasks have been taken over directly by the EU CFP, though they have been exercised in cooperation with Russia, as arranged in the &quot;Agreement between the European Community and the Government of the Russian Federation on cooperation in fisheries and the conservation of the living marine resources in the Baltic Sea&quot;. Thus, no general regional fishery management organisation is currently responsible for the Baltic Sea, managed thereafter by the EU in line with a bilateral EU-Russia general regional fishery management arrangement instead. Nevertheless, the sea has still remained managed by a tuna RMFO (ICCAT) and two further specialised RFMOs dedicated to salmon (NASCO) and whaling (IWC).

===North Sea, Irish Sea, Nordic Seas, Barents Sea, White Sea and remainder of North East Atlantic===
EU has participated in the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission, the general regional fisheries management organisation for the North Sea, the Irish Sea, the Nordic Seas, the Barents Sea, the White Sea and the remainder of North East Atlantic, except for the Baltic Sea and the Danish straits. In 1997 North Sea states and EU representatives agreed a joint approach to identifying risks to the marine environment. A precautionary approach was adopted to seek to prevent pollution before damage was caused to the environment. Studies are being undertaken to monitor stocks of all fish, not just commercially important species.

In February 2020, as soon as the Brexit occurred, Fisheries issue was raised, initially in Guernsey. After the first ban, a temporary &quot;régime d&#x27;autorisation&quot; has been set up to allow individual boats to fish in Guernsey. In May 2021, France threatened to cut off electricity to the British Channel Island of Jersey in a fight over post-Brexit fishing rights, as part of the 2021 Jersey dispute.

=== Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea ===
Most fishing in the Mediterranean Sea and the Black Sea has been confined to a 12-mile (22-km) strip considered territorial waters. The EU belongs to the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM), a general regional fisheries management organisation covering also the Black Sea.

=== Other (remote) general regional fisheries management organisations ===
The EU has also been a member of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the South East Atlantic Fisheries Organisation, the Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement, the South Pacific Regional Fisheries Management Organisation, and the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, some of them covering EU overseas territories.

=== Tuna and other specialised regional fisheries management organisations ===
The European Union has also been a member of:
* the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas making decisions also for the Mediterranean tuna. In 1994, conservation regulations were introduced banning certain fishing methods. In 1997 targets were set for tuna catches.
* the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, as their decisions are relevant to some of the EU overseas territories,
* the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization, making decisions also for the North Sea and the Baltic Sea salmon populations. The EU has been participating in almost all bodies of the organisation, except for the North American Commission.
* the International Whaling Commission

It has also been a member of the extended commission (≈ an associate member) of:
* the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna.

=== Regional fisheries advisory bodies ===
The EU cooperates closely with the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, the primary source of scientific advice guiding the CFP decisions, though it has not become an ICES member, in order to avoid a potential conflict of interest. ICES recommendations, despite their non-binding character, have been basis for practically all of the EU decisions regarding the CFP.

European Union has also been a member of further three regional fisheries advisory intergovernmental organisations:
* European Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Advisory Commission
* Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic
* Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission

==Criticism==
The Common Fisheries Policy has been argued by certain commentators to have had disastrous consequences for the environment. This view is contradicted by historical evidence revealing that fishing stocks have been in chronic decline over the last century as a result of intensive trawl fishing. According to scientific research published in 2010, the depletion of fishing stocks is a consequence of mismanagement long before the Common Fisheries Policy came into being, a statement illustrated by the fact that British catch rates have declined by 94% over the last 118 years. Nonetheless, the Common Fisheries Policy has continued the trend of ineffective fisheries management in European waters. Indeed, the Common Fisheries Policy has done little if anything to reverse the decline of European fish stocks.

The Common Fisheries Policy has been criticised by some fishermen who believe it is threatening their livelihoods.

EU quotas can mean that fish are thrown overboard after being caught. The quotas are enforced per species, but fishermen can only partly control what species they catch, so species with full quota get thrown. Yet as they are dead, this does not alleviate the problem as it was intended to.

The Common Fisheries Policy has been a major reason for countries with both substantial fish resources and small home markets, like Norway, Iceland, and Danish dependencies (Greenland and the Faroe Islands) and some other dependencies, to stay outside the European Union.

=== The CFP governance vs. the principle of subsidiarity===
A common criticism of the CFP is its centralised, top-down approach to management; although Member States are responsible for the policy&#x27;s implementation and enforcement, members have originally given the European Commission sole competence in the creation of proposals and the making of decisions. The commission is not exclusively responsible for the setting of total allowable catches. These are proposed by the commission but ultimately determined by the Council of [Fisheries] Ministers. Allocation of national catch quotas to Member States is on a pre-determined basis—the so-called relative stability—giving each member state pre-determined percentages of the available fishing opportunities. Although Member States hold some responsibilities, such as the distribution of quotas, it is argued that the EU retains too much authority over fisheries management. Furthermore, critics maintain that the organisation is ill-suited to the task of fisheries management as it lacks sufficient understanding of fisheries, and is too far removed from the realities of the industry to set accurate TACs and quotas. The command-and-control method characterised by the CFP is no longer deemed an effective form of fisheries management, and advocates of CFP reform consider a shift from traditional government to participatory third-order governance, incorporating the fisheries industry and Member States, to be vital to the success of the policy.

Consequently, it is suggested that the management of the CFP could be improved through the application of the theory of subsidiarity—the principle that political decisions should be handled at the lowest, least-centralised competent level. The subsidiarity principle was introduced into EU policies as part of the 1992 Maastricht Treaty; however, it does not apply to areas such as the CFP over which the Community retains exclusive competence. A partial devolution of authority, for example involving Member States in the decision-making process and delegating the day-to-day management of fisheries to industry-based organisations, could potentially facilitate the inclusion of industry concerns into the CFP, involving those directly affected by the policy in management decisions and creating to a CFP which encourages compliance and collaboration.

The call for application of the subsidiarity principle to the CFP lies within the argument for its decentralisation. De-centralisation featured prominently in discussions related to the 2002 CFP reform, but the reform itself actually increased centralisation within the CFP, removing the right of Member States to block quota proposals and increasing the EU&#x27;s role in enforcement. This increasing monopoly and disregard for the wishes of the fisheries industry led to alienation of stakeholders and resulted in reduced compliance. The failure of this increasingly centralised reform has proved to de-centralisation advocates that stakeholder participation in the governance process is crucial to the future success of fisheries governance.

However, some critics argue that applying the subsidiarity principle to the CFP may not improve the policy&#x27;s effectiveness, as it may lead to what de Vivero &quot;et al.&quot; term the &quot;participation paradox&quot;—the theory that the greater the number of actors involved in the decision-making process, the less significant the contribution made by each actor, and the smaller the participatory role played in the policy process. Greater devolution within CFP decision-making may therefore silence the voice of the fisheries industry as it competes with other state, private and civil actors to whom authority is also granted. Thus, although the subsidiarity principle can facilitate the government-to-governance transition advocated by many in relation to reform of the CFP, the participatory role of key stakeholders affected by the policy must be maximised to ensure the development of an effective and equitable Common Fisheries Policy.

The EU has recently introduced some elements of CFP devolution (&quot;see the #CFP regionalisation and devolution attempts section above&quot;).

==History==

===Origins===

The first rules were created in 1970. The original six Common Market members realised that four countries applying to join the Common Market at that time (Britain, Ireland, Denmark including Greenland, and Norway) would control the richest fishing grounds in the world. The original six therefore drew up Council Regulation 2141/70 giving all Members equal access to all fishing waters, even though the Treaty of Rome did not explicitly include fisheries in its agriculture chapter. This was adopted on the morning of 30 June 1970, a few hours before the applications to join were officially received. This ensured that the regulations became part of the acquis communautaire before the new members joined, obliging them to accept the regulation. In its accession negotiations, the UK at first refused to accept the rules but by the end of 1971 the UK gave way and signed the Accession Treaty on 22 January 1972, thereby bringing into the CFP joint management an estimated four fifths of all the fish off Western Europe. Norway decided not to join. Greenland left the EC in 1985, after having gained partial independence from Denmark in 1979.

When the fisheries policy was originally set up, the intention was to create a free trade area in fish and fish products with common rules. It was agreed that fishermen from any state should have access to all waters, except Irish fishermen that were refused access to fish any waters east of 4° West, thus closing the North Sea to them. An exception was made for the coastal strip, which was reserved for local fishermen who had traditionally fished those areas. A policy was created to assist modernisation of fishing vessels and on-shore installations.

===1970s and 80s===
In 1976 the EC extended its fishing waters from 12 nautical miles to 200 nautical miles ( to ) from the coast, in line with other international changes; however, fishing rights to fisheries outside the EU were significantly reduced when exclusive economic zones were defined in 1982. This required additional controls and the CFP as such was created in 1983. This now had four areas of activity: conservation of stocks, vessels and installations, market controls, and external agreements with other nations.

===1992===
It was determined that there had been over-investment in vessels, over-fishing and that numbers of fish landed were decreasing. The review identified a need to improve compliance with the regulations. This led to a tightening of regulations and better monitoring of individual vessels. A second review was planned for 2002.

===1995===
Although fishing could be managed by reducing the fleet size, available fish vary from year to year too much to make this sensible. So a permit system was introduced stating where and when boats are allowed to fish. Scientific studies were commissioned to better-determine available stocks and guide allocation of permits.

===2009===
In 2009, the EU Commission launched a wide-ranging debate on the way that EU fisheries are managed. It received input from EU citizens, organisations and EU-countries and published a report on the consultation.

In 2009, Iceland applied for European Union membership. The Common Fisheries Policy was not acceptable to Iceland, but the country hoped to negotiate a better deal. However, following a change in government Iceland withdrew their application.

===2013===
In February 2013 the European Parliament voted for reform of the Common Fisheries Policy, including measures to protect endangered stocks, and the ending of discards. The new CFP came into effect from 1 January 2014, though more talks with EU governments are involved. In presenting the reform package, the German Social Democrat MEP Ulrike Rodust stated: &quot;As of 2015 the principle of maximum sustainable yield shall apply ... Our objective is that depleted fish stocks recover by 2020. Not only nature will benefit, but also fishermen: bigger stocks produce higher yields.&quot; The 2013 reform led to a greater role for the European Parliament, involving the convening of a trilateral dialogue (or &quot;trilogue&quot;) between the European Council, European Commission and the Parliament, to work towards general agreement on reforming the CFP.

===2020===
The withdrawal of the UK from the EU affected the CFP, with the details determined by trade negotiations between the EU and the UK.

==See also==
*Fisheries Convention
*Common Agricultural Policy
*European Fisheries Control Agency
*Agriculture and Fisheries configuration of the Council
*European Commissioner for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries
*Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries
*European Parliament Committee on Fisheries
*European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund
* List of harvested aquatic animals by weight

==References==
==Further reading==
*Berg, Astrid (1999) &quot;Implementing and Enforcing European Fisheries Law.&quot; Martinus Nijhoff. 

==External links==
*Common Fisheries Policy
*OCEAN2012
*Fishsubsidy.org
*WWF
*EU financial report 2004
*Smart Investments – Promoting Sustainable Fishing Initiatives under the European Fisheries Fund, by Markus Knigge. Published in 2007 by the WWF – European Policy Office
*Costs of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing in EU Fisheries. Report by eftec (Economics for the Environment Consultancy Ltd), November 2008.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q391962" start="4" end="27" title="Common Fisheries Policy" label="Common Fisheries Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q391962" start="29" end="32" title="Common Fisheries Policy" label="CFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="41" end="50" title="fishery" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="65" end="79" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="111" end="124" title="Member state of the European Union" label="member states"/>
<link wikidata="Q635139" start="192" end="208" title="fishing industry" label="fishing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130259" start="310" end="319" title="Budget of the European Union" label="EU budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="359" end="375" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194384" start="534" end="559" title="Qualified Majority Voting" label="Qualified Majority Voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="701" end="730" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="740" end="759" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q944550" start="786" end="807" title="co-decision procedure" label="co-decision procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="929" end="943" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="963" end="983" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="989" end="1003" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="1705" end="1714" title="Fish farm" label="Fish farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="2072" end="2081" title="Exclusive economic zone" label="UK waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q31440053" start="2251" end="2286" title="Fisheries Convention" label="London Fisheries Convention of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q138873" start="2337" end="2348" title="Fraserburgh" label="Fraserburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016944" start="2431" end="2440" title="Peterhead" label="Peterhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="2503" end="2510" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290431" start="2972" end="2987" title="fish processing" label="fish processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613859" start="5036" end="5088" title="International Council for the Exploration of the Sea" label="International Council for the Exploration of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5106" end="5165" title="#Regional fisheries advisory intergovernmental organisations" label="regional fisheries advisory intergovernmental organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q119238838" start="5224" end="5266" title="regional fisheries management organisation" label="regional fisheries management organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248774" start="5977" end="5989" title="Minimum landing size" label="minimum size"/>
<link wikidata="Q9256325" start="7590" end="7639" title="European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund" label="European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8547" end="8600" title="#The CFP governance vs. the principle of subsidiarity" label="#The CFP governance vs. the principle of subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="9265" end="9273" title="Europe" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377659" start="9361" end="9410" title="European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund" label="European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377659" start="9797" end="9833" title="European Agricultural Guarantee Fund" label="European Agricultural Guarantee Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q9256325" start="10326" end="10375" title="European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund" label="European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="10717" end="10727" title="overfished" label="overfished"/>
<link wikidata="Q675637" start="11883" end="11898" title="illegal fishing" label="illegal fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="12056" end="12103" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620900" start="12119" end="12155" title="United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement" label="United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648299" start="12167" end="12184" title="exclusive mandate" label="exclusive mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q119238838" start="12223" end="12265" title="regional fisheries management organisation" label="regional fisheries management organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="12290" end="12322" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="12740" end="12778" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="12804" end="12828" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="13060" end="13070" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q816210" start="13079" end="13093" title="Danish straits" label="Danish straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q15106130" start="14280" end="14320" title="North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission" label="North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="14559" end="14568" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="14917" end="14923" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843767" start="14934" end="14949" title="Fish for finance" label="Fisheries issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="14975" end="14983" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="15189" end="15203" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="15207" end="15213" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q106727740" start="15273" end="15292" title="2021 Jersey dispute" label="2021 Jersey dispute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15489" end="15539" title="General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean" label="General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q580933" start="15743" end="15784" title="Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization" label="Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352119" start="15790" end="15858" title="Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources" label="Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492244" start="15864" end="15906" title="South East Atlantic Fisheries Organisation" label="South East Atlantic Fisheries Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641305" start="15912" end="15953" title="Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement" label="Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21663305" start="15959" end="16015" title="South Pacific Regional Fisheries Management Organisation" label="South Pacific Regional Fisheries Management Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565027" start="16025" end="16073" title="Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission" label="Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q840267" start="16254" end="16317" title="International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas" label="International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153044" start="16500" end="16539" title="Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission" label="Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12613354" start="16548" end="16576" title="Indian Ocean Tuna Commission" label="Indian Ocean Tuna Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053997" start="16656" end="16703" title="North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization" label="North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="16904" end="16936" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q22032253" start="17025" end="17081" title="Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna" label="Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613859" start="17162" end="17214" title="International Council for the Exploration of the Sea" label="International Council for the Exploration of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17629" end="17690" title="European Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Advisory Commission" label="European Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Advisory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17693" end="17743" title="Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic" label="Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17746" end="17789" title="Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission" label="Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q811598" start="18085" end="18098" title="Bottom trawling" label="trawl fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="19197" end="19206" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="19215" end="19228" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403633" start="19340" end="19352" title="Subsidiarity (European Union)" label="subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="19393" end="19404" title="Centralisation" label="centralised"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="19448" end="19461" title="Member state of the European Union" label="Member States"/>
<link wikidata="Q391962" start="19725" end="19748" title="Total Allowable Catch" label="total allowable catches"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="20475" end="20494" title="command-and-control" label="command-and-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553864" start="20692" end="20702" title="governance" label="governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q466938" start="20923" end="20935" title="subsidiarity" label="subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="21122" end="21139" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="21208" end="21217" title="European Economic Community" label="Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="21258" end="21268" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="21756" end="21772" title="decentralisation" label="decentralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852998" start="22144" end="22156" title="Stakeholder (corporate)" label="stakeholders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23434" end="23478" title="#CFP regionalisation and devolution attempts" label="#CFP regionalisation and devolution attempts"/>
<link wikidata="Q256414" start="24185" end="24205" title="acquis communautaire" label="acquis communautaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991237" start="24406" end="24422" title="Treaty of Accession 1972" label="Accession Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="24579" end="24588" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="25488" end="25511" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="25518" end="25525" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="defined"/>
<link wikidata="Q814931" start="26663" end="26708" title="Iceland–European Union relations" label="Iceland applied for European Union membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425223" start="27299" end="27324" title="maximum sustainable yield" label="maximum sustainable yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="27778" end="27810" title="Brexit" label="withdrawal of the UK from the EU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27811" end="27827" title="Impact of Brexit#Fisheries" label="affected the CFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q96777286" start="27860" end="27904" title="Trade negotiation between the UK and the EU" label="trade negotiations between the EU and the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q31440053" start="27921" end="27941" title="Fisheries Convention" label="Fisheries Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="27943" end="27969" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="Common Agricultural Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201372" start="27971" end="28004" title="European Fisheries Control Agency" label="European Fisheries Control Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132312" start="28006" end="28060" title="Agriculture and Fisheries Council" label="Agriculture and Fisheries configuration of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780199" start="28062" end="28118" title="European Commissioner for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries" label="European Commissioner for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280602" start="28120" end="28174" title="Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries" label="Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q174854" start="28176" end="28218" title="European Parliament Committee on Fisheries" label="European Parliament Committee on Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9256325" start="28220" end="28269" title="European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund" label="European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717843" start="28272" end="28315" title="List of harvested aquatic animals by weight" label="List of harvested aquatic animals by weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q889001" start="28436" end="28452" title="Martinus Nijhoff" label="Martinus Nijhoff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567633" wikidata="Q453199" url="?curid=567633" title="One-way">
<text>One-way or one way may refer to:

*One-way traffic, a street either facilitating only one-way traffic, or designed to direct vehicles to move in one direction
*One-way travel, a trip that does not return to its origin
==Music==
*One Way (American band), American R&amp;B-funk band popular from late 1970s through the 1980s
*One Way (South Korean band), South Korean R&amp;B/hip hop group managed by YJ Media

===Albums===
*&quot;One Way&quot; (Tamela Mann album), fourth studio album by American gospel singer Tamela Mann, released in 2016.
*&quot;One Way&quot; (Selwyn album), Australian R&amp;B singer Selwyn&#x27;s second album
*&quot;One Way&quot; (Turbo album), the tenth studio album by Polish heavy metal band Turbo
*&quot;One Way of Life&quot; - the Best of the Levellers

===Songs===
*&quot;One way&quot; (Sid song), 2009
*&quot;One Way&quot;, a song by Dierks Bentley from his 2018 album &quot;The Mountain&quot; (Dierks Bentley album)
*&quot;One Way&quot;, a single by The Levellers from their 1991 album &quot;Levelling the Land&quot;
*&quot;One Way&quot;, a song by Loona yyxy from their 2018 EP &quot;Beauty &amp; the Beat&quot; (EP)
*&quot;One Way&quot;, a song by Thelma Aoyama from her 2008 album &quot;Diary&quot; (Thelma Aoyama album)

==Other uses==
*&quot;One Way&quot; (2006 film), a film by Reto Salimbeni
*&quot;One Way&quot; (2022 film), an American action thriller
*&quot;One Way&quot; (documentary), a two part documentary series produced by Channel News Asia in 2022
*&quot;One-Way&quot; (novel) (French &quot;Un aller simple&quot;), a 1994 novel by French writer Didier Van Cauwelaert
*One-way function, a function that is easy to compute on every input, but hard to invert given the image of a random input
*One-way encryption, in computer science
*One-way mirror, a glass through which one can see only from one side
*One Way Sport, a sportswear brand
*Check valve, also a one-way valve
*Single-use, or disposable products

== See also ==
*
*One Way or Another (disambiguation)
*One-to-one (disambiguation)
*One-to-many (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q453199" start="0" end="7" title="One-way" label="One-way"/>
<link wikidata="Q453199" start="11" end="18" title="One-way" label="one way"/>
<link wikidata="Q786886" start="35" end="50" title="One-way traffic" label="One-way traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092356" start="160" end="174" title="One-way travel" label="One-way travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093343" start="229" end="252" title="One Way (American band)" label="One Way (American band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093345" start="324" end="351" title="One Way (South Korean band)" label="One Way (South Korean band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48731419" start="423" end="462" title="One Way (Tamela Mann album)" label="&amp;quot;One Way&amp;quot; (Tamela Mann album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391493" start="510" end="521" title="Tamela Mann" label="Tamela Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093344" start="542" end="576" title="One Way (Selwyn album)" label="&amp;quot;One Way&amp;quot; (Selwyn album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093346" start="632" end="665" title="One Way (Turbo album)" label="&amp;quot;One Way&amp;quot; (Turbo album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093365" start="730" end="745" title="One Way of Life" label="One Way of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q10852029" start="794" end="824" title="One way (Sid song)" label="&amp;quot;One way&amp;quot; (Sid song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635402" start="898" end="945" title="The Mountain (Dierks Bentley album)" label="&amp;quot;The Mountain&amp;quot; (Dierks Bentley album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535121" start="1022" end="1040" title="Levelling the Land" label="Levelling the Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q54833995" start="1109" end="1147" title="Beauty &amp;amp; the Beat (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Beauty &amp;amp; the Beat&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283976" start="1214" end="1253" title="Diary (Thelma Aoyama album)" label="&amp;quot;Diary&amp;quot; (Thelma Aoyama album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q670857" start="1271" end="1302" title="One Way (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;One Way&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773076" start="1330" end="1361" title="One Way (2022 film)" label="&amp;quot;One Way&amp;quot; (2022 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1392" end="1425" title="One Way (documentary)" label="&amp;quot;One Way&amp;quot; (documentary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40238" start="1469" end="1486" title="Channel News Asia" label="Channel News Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q739534" start="1496" end="1523" title="One-Way (novel)" label="&amp;quot;One-Way&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q720931" start="1615" end="1631" title="One-way function" label="One-way function"/>
<link wikidata="Q720931" start="1738" end="1756" title="One-way encryption" label="One-way encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309670" start="1779" end="1793" title="One-way mirror" label="One-way mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347664" start="1849" end="1862" title="One Way Sport" label="One Way Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q519336" start="1884" end="1895" title="Check valve" label="Check valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194058" start="1919" end="1929" title="Single-use" label="Single-use"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093367" start="1973" end="2008" title="One Way or Another (disambiguation)" label="One Way or Another (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q529641" start="2010" end="2037" title="One-to-one (disambiguation)" label="One-to-one (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092345" start="2039" end="2067" title="One-to-many (disambiguation)" label="One-to-many (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567634" wikidata="Q11458821" url="?curid=567634" title="Little people (mythology)">
<text>Little people have been part of the folklore of many cultures in human history, including Ireland, Greece, the Philippines, the Hawaiian Islands, New Zealand, Flores Island, Indonesia, and Native Americans.

==Native American folklore==
The Native peoples of North America told legends of a race of &quot;little people&quot; who lived in the woods near sandy hills and sometimes near rocks located along large bodies of water, such as the Great Lakes. Often described as &quot;hairy-faced dwarfs&quot; in stories, petroglyph illustrations show them with horns on their head and traveling in a group of 5 to 7 per canoe.

Other legends say the little people if seen by an adult human would beg them not to say anything of their existence and would reward those who kept their word by helping them and their family out in times of need. From tribe to tribe there are variations of what the little people&#x27;s mannerisms were like, and whether they were good or evil may be different.

One of the common beliefs is that the little people create distractions to cause mischief. They were believed to be gods by some. One North American Native tribe believed that they lived in nearby caves. The caves were never entered for fear of disturbing the little people.

Legends of physical remains of tiny people being found in various locations in the Western United States, particularly Montana and Wyoming, typically describe the remains as being found in caves with various details such as descriptions that they were &quot;perfectly formed&quot;, dwarf-size, etc. Often as an effort to &quot;enhance credibility&quot;, archaeologist Lawrence L. Loendorf notes that some tales make claims that &quot;the burials, of course, are always sent to a local university or to the Smithsonian for analysis, only to have both the specimens and research results disappear.&quot; Loendorf also suggests that the discovery of two mummies of anencephalic infants in the first half of the twentieth century with deformities that caused some people to believe they were adults has &quot;contributed to public belief in the existence of a group of tiny prehistoric people.&quot;

Lewis and Clark reported in their journals that Native Americans in the vicinity of Spirit Mound, South Dakota held a belief in little people who inhabited the mound. Clark wrote that the local Native Americans could not be persuaded to approach the mound, as they feared these tiny &quot;Deavals&quot; and considered them to be dangerous. Although members of Lewis and Clark&#x27;s party visited the mound, they did not encounter any unusual beings.

===Native American===
* Alux - Maya
* Canotila - Lakota
* Chaneque - Aztec
* Geow-lud-mo-sis-eg - Maliseet
* Jogah - Iroquois
* Mannegishi - Cree
* Memegwesi/Memegawensi/Memengweshii/Pa&#x27;iins - Anishinaabe
* Nimerigar - Shoshone
* Nirumbee or Awwakkulé - Crow
* Iyaaknasha&#x27; or Hattak Sawa&#x27; - Chickasaw
* Bohpuli or Kowi Anukʋsha - Choctaw
* Pukwudgie - Wampanoag
* Yehasuri - Catawba
* Yunwi Tsunsdi - Cherokee

The Native American little people have been said to reside in the Pryor Mountains of Montana and Wyoming. The Pryors are famous for their &quot;fairy rings&quot; and strange happenings. Some members of the Crow tribe consider the little people to be sacred ancestors and require leaving an offering for them upon entry to the area.

====Memegwaans====
Ojibwe myths also bring up a creature known as the Memegwaans, or Memegwaanswag (Plural), which seems to be different from the more common Little People variation of Memegwesi. According to Basil H. Johnston, a Memegwaans is a little person without definitive form which is terrified of adult humans. However, it seems to have a soft spot for children and will often approach in the guise of a child to any young person who seems upset, injured, scared or lonely and either protect them or keep them company until help arrives. If an adult sees one, they will often cower on the ground, screaming and crying hysterically before vanishing in the blink of an eye. They were also known as protectors of copper mines and were prayed to almost as patron saints of lost children. This is more specific and different from the Memegwesi, which is often simply described as a short, hairy man.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Daniels, Cora Linn and Stevens, C.M. &quot;Encyclopaedia of Superstitions, Folklore, and the Occult Sciences of the World.&quot; Milwaukee, Wisc.: J. H. Tewdai &amp; Sons, 1903.
* Frey, Rodney. &quot;The World of the Crow Indians: As Driftwood Lodges.&quot; Norman, Okla.: University of Oklahoma Press, 1993.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11458821" start="0" end="13" title="Little people (mythology)" label="Little people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="36" end="44" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="53" end="61" title="cultures" label="cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="65" end="78" title="human history" label="human history"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="90" end="97" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="99" end="105" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="111" end="122" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="128" end="134" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="146" end="157" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q148440" start="159" end="172" title="Flores" label="Flores Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="174" end="183" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="189" end="205" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="241" end="272" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native peoples of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="439" end="450" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="514" end="524" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q332970" start="1066" end="1074" title="mischief" label="mischief"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="1101" end="1105" title="gods" label="gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="1344" end="1365" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="1380" end="1387" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="1392" end="1399" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="1767" end="1778" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="1912" end="1919" title="mummy" label="mummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q529292" start="1923" end="1935" title="anencephalic" label="anencephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="2158" end="2173" title="Lewis and Clark" label="Lewis and Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577894" start="2242" end="2254" title="Spirit Mound Historic Prairie" label="Spirit Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737604" start="2634" end="2638" title="Alux" label="Alux"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="2641" end="2645" title="Maya peoples" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033458" start="2648" end="2656" title="Canotila" label="Canotila"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="2659" end="2665" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628701" start="2668" end="2676" title="Chaneque" label="Chaneque"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="2679" end="2684" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563033" start="2708" end="2716" title="Maliseet" label="Maliseet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6214679" start="2719" end="2724" title="Jogah" label="Jogah"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="2727" end="2735" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750793" start="2738" end="2748" title="Mannegishi" label="Mannegishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="2751" end="2755" title="Cree" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765315" start="2808" end="2819" title="Anishinaabe traditional beliefs" label="Anishinaabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454344" start="2822" end="2831" title="Nimerigar" label="Nimerigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="2834" end="2842" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651314" start="2845" end="2853" title="Little People of the Pryor Mountains" label="Nirumbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207611" start="2869" end="2873" title="Crow language" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="2916" end="2925" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="2955" end="2962" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410527" start="2965" end="2974" title="Pukwudgie" label="Pukwudgie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="2977" end="2986" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051231" start="2989" end="2997" title="Yehasuri" label="Yehasuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="3000" end="3007" title="Catawba people" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="3026" end="3034" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323101" start="3102" end="3117" title="Pryor Mountains" label="Pryor Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q843581" start="3180" end="3190" title="fairy ring" label="fairy ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="3388" end="3394" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q810033" start="3578" end="3595" title="Basil H. Johnston" label="Basil H. Johnston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567635" wikidata="Q1127840" url="?curid=567635" title="Jackknife">
<text>Jackknife may refer to:
* Pocketknife or jackknife, a compact, foldable knife
* Jackknife Bar, Portland, Oregon, U.S.
* Jackknifing, a type of crash with articulated vehicle combinations
==Film and television==
* &quot;Jacknife&quot;, a 1989 American film by David Jones
* &quot;Jack Knife&quot;, an episode of &quot;NCIS&quot;
* Jackknife, a character on &quot;Superjail!&quot;

==Athletics and sports==
* Jackknife (exercise), an abdominal exercise
* Jackknife, a kicking move involving 540-degree rotation
* Jackknife, a type of high dive
* Jackknife hold, a pinning move in professional wrestling

==Other uses==
* Jackknife (statistics), a resampling technique in statistics
* Jackknife clam, common name for several species of bivalve mollusc

== See also ==
* Jackknife Bascule Bridge, a bridge in Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada
* &quot;The Jack-Knife Man&quot;, a 1920 film</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1127840" start="0" end="9" title="Jackknife" label="Jackknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q390383" start="26" end="37" title="Pocketknife" label="Pocketknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610006" start="80" end="93" title="Jackknife Bar" label="Jackknife Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q937178" start="120" end="131" title="Jackknifing" label="Jackknifing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174601" start="219" end="227" title="Jacknife" label="Jacknife"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="311" end="327" title="NCIS (season 7)#ep153" label="&amp;quot;NCIS&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189984" start="362" end="372" title="Superjail!" label="Superjail!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116752" start="407" end="427" title="Jackknife (exercise)" label="Jackknife (exercise)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="466" end="508" title="540 kick#Multi-Kick Variants" label="kicking move involving 540-degree rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q98959563" start="532" end="541" title="high dive" label="high dive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="562" end="574" title="Pin (professional wrestling)#Jackknife hold" label="pinning move"/>
<link wikidata="Q847158" start="619" end="641" title="Jackknife (statistics)" label="Jackknife (statistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55644023" start="682" end="696" title="Jackknife clam" label="Jackknife clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14628973" start="767" end="791" title="Jackknife Bascule Bridge" label="Jackknife Bascule Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007016" start="842" end="860" title="The Jack-Knife Man" label="The Jack-Knife Man"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567643" wikidata="Q2583758" url="?curid=567643" title="Centre (ice hockey)">
<text>The centre (or center in American English) in ice hockey is a forward position of a player whose primary zone of play is the middle of the ice, away from the sideboards. Centres have more flexibility in their positioning and therefore often end up covering more ice surface than any other player. Centres are ideally strong, fast skaters who are able to backcheck quickly from deep in the opposing zone. Generally, centres are expected to be gifted passers more so than goal scorers, although there are exceptions - typically larger centres who position themselves directly in front of the net in order to score off rebounds. They are also expected to have exceptional &quot;ice vision&quot;, Hockey IQ, intelligence, and creativity. They also generally are the most defensively-oriented forwards on the ice, as they are expected to play the role of the third player in defense, after the defencemen. Centres usually play as part of a line of players that are substituted frequently to keep fresh and keep the game moving.

==Offensive zone play==
Centres are required to cover a good portion of the ice in all three zones. Where the centre tends to play in the offensive zone is usually a matter of coaching and personal preference. Centres are responsible for keeping the flow of the game moving, and generally handle, and pass the puck more than any other position player. Because of this, most good centres tend to score significantly more assists than goals because the play goes through them as they try to find open teammates. His or her responsibilities in the zone are analogous to the classic number 10 playmaker in soccer.

Because the range of offensive styles teams like to use, exactly how centres are used in the offensive zone is as varied as the players themselves. Generally the centre&#x27;s role on offence is to move the offence through himself, setting up other players, and providing support for puck battles. They roam around most areas of the ice in the zone and have a lot of freedom in decision making. They are also expected to constantly be in motion causing defenders to have a hard time tracking them.

===Zone entry===
The matter of bringing the puck in the zone generally is accomplished in two ways. The first involves the team&#x27;s best puck carrier (usually the centre) using their speed and quickness to cross the blue line with the puck and set up the offence. The second is colloquially called a &quot;dump in&quot;, in which an attacking player (almost always a defenceman or centre) shoots the puck from the neutral zone into either corner behind the opposing net in hopes that the onrushing wingers can beat the opposing defenders to it and gain control. The centre&#x27;s role here is to provide support for the wingers if they become engaged in a puck battle, and give the battling winger an option to try to move the puck to, or to try to scoop up loose pucks as they become available. Once the puck is freed the offence can then set up as normal.

===Behind the net===
When a centre&#x27;s winger is being attacked along the boards, the centre can take position behind the net to receive the pressured winger&#x27;s pass. Behind the net is a natural place for some centres to play. It is a very difficult position to defend because it forces the opposing defensemen to leave the front of the net. It also gives the centre a clear view of the ice and most importantly the slot area. From here the centre has clear passing lanes and minimizes the distance and difficulty of passes to nearly any part of the slot.

===In the slot===

Many centres use their mobility and freedom to take advantage of the slot area, the area in between the faceoff dots, about 5 to 15 feet from the goal. The slot area is notorious goal-scoring territory because of its proximity to the net and the difficulty the opposing team has in defending it. Many centres like this area because of its openness. Possessing the puck here gives the centre many different options, as well as a central position in the offensive play. From here the player can choose to shoot the puck on net, attempt to draw defenders away from the net by skating, or find open players closer to the goal cage.

Additionally, without the puck, the centre can choose to occupy this space looking for deflections of long shots or rebounds. Aside from some larger centres who focus on scoring off rebounds, centres rarely set up directly in front of the net itself because in case of a turnover, it is much harder to get back in position defensively.

===On the half boards===

Some centres will play the half boards. This position is especially important to a centre on some powerplay sets. Again it gives the centre a clear view of the ice surface and many different options. From here he may choose to pass back to a defenceman on the point, go down the boards to a winger behind the net, or drive the net itself hoping to draw defenders to him. The disadvantage of this position is that it is easily defended, and the centre generally does not have much time to survey the ice looking for an open teammate.

===On the powerplay===

Powerplay sets are also quite varied, so the centre&#x27;s role can range a lot. Many times though the centre will choose to operate in the slot area or on the half boards. The half board position here is made easier to play because the centre has more time to look over the ice surface, and is not pressured by the defenders as much. Again the centre&#x27;s role is to move the offence through himself/herself looking for passing lanes to open players or roving the slot area looking for deflections and rebounds.

==Neutral zone play==
===Attacking===
The centre&#x27;s role in the Neutral zone on the attacking side if he/she possesses the puck, is to bring the puck into the offensive zone by carrying or dumping the puck in. Although any player may carry the puck into the zone, centres are most often counted on because of their speed, quickness, and ability to stickhandle. If another player possesses the puck attacking into the zone, the centre&#x27;s job is to provide support if the puck carrier needs to pass to another player across the blue line. Once the zone has been gained the offence may proceed to set up as they see fit.

On dump ins, the centre&#x27;s role is to provide support to the wingers as they battle for possession in the corners, and hunt for loose pucks.

===Defending===

Many different strategies have been devised to defend the neutral zone. Often successfully defending the neutral zone leads to fewer opportunities for the opposing team to have offensive possessions.

Here the centre will mainly focus on skating and shadowing opposing puck carriers to try to force turnovers. They are responsible for the middle of the ice, and try to cut off long passing lanes to attacking players. If the defending team successfully does force a turnover, the centre is most often responsible for turning the direction of play around or receiving the first pass from a winger who has successfully forced a turnover.

====The neutral zone trap, pentagon trap, 1-2-2 trap, or zero-forecheck====

When playing the trap, the centre typically spearheads the defence by placing himself/herself in the middle of the ice between the red line and blue line in defensive position. This forces the puck carrier to either side board where the centre and puck side winger close him in, &quot;trapping&quot; him/her between the two defending players and the boards. Here the attacking player has very few options, and generally must retreat to a defenceman, whereupon the defending team can reset the trap. This tactic was pioneered by the New Jersey Devils in the late 1990s and has been used extensively in the NHL and all levels of hockey since.

====The left wing lock====

When employing the left wing lock strategy, the centre&#x27;s role is typically to shadow the puck carrier or provide token pressure in the opposing team&#x27;s zone to force them to try to pass the puck up ice into the lock. This is a much older strategy and is less commonly employed at elite levels, however it was most recently used extensively by the 2006 Carolina Hurricanes on their way to their first Stanley Cup.

==Defensive zone play==
Unlike their offensive responsibilities, the centre&#x27;s defensive responsibilities are relatively straightforward. Again the centre must be able to use their skating ability to cover vast portions of the ice, and is responsible for the greatest percentage of ice in their own zone than of any position.

===Defending the slot area===

The centre&#x27;s first and foremost responsibility is defending the slot area from opposing forwards. This is the most difficult area of the ice to defend because of its proximity to the net and its being situated in the middle of the ice. The centre is not only responsible for the opposing centre, but other forwards who venture into the slot as well. Like defencemen, centres are often relied upon to block long-distance shots while patrolling the slot. Because there are no boards in the slot area, it is difficult to play physically on opposing forwards so centres must be good at using their sticks to defend via poke checks, sweep checks, stick lifts, and other stickwork.

===Defending the perimeter===

The perimeter is an advantageous position for the defence, the boards act as an extra defender and the defending team often will try to enclose a puck carrier between the boards and two or more defenders to force turnovers. The centre&#x27;s general responsibility is to provide support to other players that engage opposing puck carriers in puck battles on the boards by giving the primary defender (normally a defenceman in the defensive zone) an outlet to move the puck to if he/she is able to win the puck from the offensive player, though the centre does on occasion participate in these puck battles if they must.

===Breaking out of the zone===

When the puck is turned over by the offensive team, the defence must be able to exit the zone fluidly. In a basic fundamental break-out, the puck is controlled by the defence behind the net who then passes up the boards to a forward. The centre curls at the strong side faceoff dot and begins to break out alongside the puck carrying winger. The winger, if undefended, may skate the puck out himself/herself, in which case the centre provides a passing option in the neutral zone, or if the winger is pressured, can make the break-out pass to the centre moving up the ice. Here the centre can carry the puck out of the zone on their own, or look for the weak side winger coming across centre ice.

A quick break is sometimes used to take advantage of the opponent&#x27;s sloppy transition game. In this set, the defenceman directly passes to the centre curling at the faceoff dot. The centre can then carry the puck out himself/herself or try to pass to the streaking weakside winger up the ice.

===On the penalty kill===

The penalty killing unit normally consists of two forwards and two defencemen. The centre&#x27;s role does not differ appreciably from any other forward, though they are almost always included on the penalty killing unit for the purpose of taking the faceoff. Depending on what formation the penalty kill uses, the centre along with the other forward on the ice will play high side defence, trying to cut off passing lanes in the slot. Secondarily, they pressure offensive players on the boards if they do not have clear possession.

== Back checking ==

The centre should always be prepared for a quick break-out pass by the opposing team. The centre is expected to play the deepest in the offensive zone but also the first of the forwards to backcheck. On the backcheck, the centre should take the first opposing player not covered (usually &quot;the third man back&quot;).

==Faceoffs==

It is generally the centre&#x27;s job to handle faceoffs for their team. Centres employ many different tactics to win faceoffs that take advantage their strength or swiftness.

Faceoff techniques and preferences vary widely from player to player depending on that player&#x27;s skill at taking faceoffs, speed, strength, and agility. Although faceoff techniques differ greatly, it is almost universal now that the centre reverses his lower hand and takes the faceoff on his backhand in order to gain more strength when pulling the puck.

Bigger, heavier, and stronger centres may prefer to use strength tactics such as tying up the opposing centre and winning the puck with his feet or overpowering the opponent by ripping the puck away using sheer strength. Smaller, quicker centres may employ swiftness tactics such as trying to contact the puck before his opponent has a chance to get his stick in the dot, or the slide technique where he allows his opponent access to the dot easily so he can slide his stick underneath and pull the puck back out.

Faceoffs are critical to a team&#x27;s success on offence or defence. To this end, centres that may be deficient in other areas, especially offensively, can still have value to a team if they are excellent faceoff takers. Faceoffs are often used as a measure of defensive effectiveness, and good faceoff takers play many minutes on the penalty kill and in late game lead situations where quickly gaining possession of the puck is of vital importance.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="4" end="10" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="15" end="21" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="25" end="41" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="46" end="56" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q543457" start="62" end="69" title="forward (ice hockey)" label="forward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105" end="117" title="Hockey rink#Zones" label="zone of play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="354" end="363" title="Checking (ice hockey)#Backchecking" label="backcheck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304909" start="889" end="899" title="defenceman" label="defencemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238500" start="935" end="939" title="line (ice hockey)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="1603" end="1632" title="Forward (association football)" label="number 10 playmaker in soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315928" start="4598" end="4609" title="half boards" label="half boards"/>
<link wikidata="Q192081" start="7681" end="7698" title="New Jersey Devils" label="New Jersey Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517007" start="7838" end="7852" title="left wing lock" label="left wing lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="8180" end="8199" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="8228" end="8239" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9224" end="9235" title="poke checks" label="poke checks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9237" end="9249" title="sweep checks" label="sweep checks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11598" end="11607" title="breakout (ice hockey)" label="break-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q793654" start="11738" end="11747" title="Checking (ice hockey)" label="backcheck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11847" end="11861" title="third man back" label="third man back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004645" start="11933" end="11940" title="faceoff" label="faceoff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567646" wikidata="Q7916128" url="?curid=567646" title="Varsity">
<text>Varsity may refer to:
==Institutions==
* University, a college or university sports team. 
* Varsity College (South Africa), a school

==Places==
*Varsity, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; a neighbourhood 
* Varsity Lakes, Queensland, Australia; a suburb of the Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia
*The Varsity (West Lafayette, Indiana), USA; an apartment building

==Business==
*The Varsity (restaurant), a drive-in restaurant in Atlanta, Georgia, US
*Varsity (pub chain), a UK pub chain

==Literature==
*&quot;Varsity&quot; (Cambridge), a student newspaper at Cambridge University
*&quot;Varsity&quot; (Cape Town), a student newspaper of the University of Cape Town
*&quot;The Varsity&quot; (newspaper), a student newspaper at the University of Toronto

==Music==
* Varsity (band), an indie rock band from Chicago 
* &quot;Varsity&quot; (alma mater song), the alma mater song of the University of Wisconsin-Madison
* &quot;Varsity&quot; (fight song), a 1911 fight song of the University of Michigan
* &quot;Varsity&quot;, a 2014 EP by ASTR
* Varsity (group), a South Korean boy group formed by CSO Entertainment in 2017

==Stage and screen==
* &quot;The Boys Presents: Varsity&quot;, a 2023 live-action adaptation of &quot;The Boys&quot; comic book series arc &quot;We Gotta Go Now&quot;
* &quot;Varsity&quot; (film), a lost 1928 American comedy silent film
*Varsity TV, a former teen-oriented television network

==Sports==
===University===
*Varsity team, the principal athletic teams representing a North American college or university, high school, or middle school
**Toronto Varsity Blues, varsity teams of the University of Toronto
***Varsity Arena, the Varsity Blues&#x27; hockey arena
***Varsity Stadium, the Varsity Blues&#x27; football stadium
*Varsity match, a sports fixture played between traditional rival universities
**List of British and Irish varsity matches
**Varsity (rowing regatta), a student rowing regatta in the Netherlands
**Varsity Sports (South Africa), university sports league
***Varsity Rugby, South African rugby union competitions
***Varsity Hockey (South Africa)
***Varsity Football (South Africa)
**Varsity Cup Championship, an American college rugby competition
===Other===
*Varsity FC, a Canadian soccer team

==Transport==
*&quot;Varsity&quot; (train), a passenger train of the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul &amp; Pacific Railroad, a.k.a., the &quot;Milwaukee Road&quot;
*Varsity Line, the railway line that formerly connected Oxford and Cambridge
*Vickers Varsity, a post-World War II military trainer aircraft based on the Vickers Viking

==Other uses==
*Operation Varsity, an airborne operation in World War II
*Varsity Scouting, a program of the Boy Scouts of America for older boys

==See also==

* Junior Varsity (disambiguation)
* 
* University (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7916128" start="0" end="7" title="Varsity" label="Varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="41" end="51" title="University" label="University"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212583" start="93" end="123" title="Varsity College (South Africa)" label="Varsity College (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874907" start="147" end="163" title="Varsity, Calgary" label="Varsity, Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916151" start="201" end="226" title="Varsity Lakes, Queensland" label="Varsity Lakes, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28124374" start="290" end="327" title="The Varsity (West Lafayette, Indiana)" label="The Varsity (West Lafayette, Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051345" start="371" end="395" title="The Varsity (restaurant)" label="The Varsity (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916133" start="444" end="463" title="Varsity (pub chain)" label="Varsity (pub chain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916129" start="497" end="528" title="Varsity (Cambridge)" label="&amp;quot;Varsity&amp;quot; (Cambridge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916132" start="575" end="606" title="Varsity (Cape Town)" label="&amp;quot;Varsity&amp;quot; (Cape Town)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772082" start="660" end="695" title="The Varsity (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;The Varsity&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453074" start="759" end="773" title="Varsity (band)" label="Varsity (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916135" start="810" end="847" title="Varsity (alma mater song)" label="&amp;quot;Varsity&amp;quot; (alma mater song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761261" start="910" end="942" title="Varsity (fight song)" label="&amp;quot;Varsity&amp;quot; (fight song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349525" start="1028" end="1032" title="ASTR (band)" label="ASTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700513" start="1035" end="1050" title="Varsity (group)" label="Varsity (group)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1143" end="1169" title="The Boys Presents: Varsity" label="The Boys Presents: Varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008838" start="1283" end="1309" title="Varsity (film)" label="&amp;quot;Varsity&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916162" start="1352" end="1362" title="Varsity TV" label="Varsity TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433767" start="1436" end="1448" title="Varsity team" label="Varsity team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826557" start="1564" end="1585" title="Toronto Varsity Blues" label="Toronto Varsity Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916136" start="1633" end="1646" title="Varsity Arena" label="Varsity Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554861" start="1688" end="1703" title="Varsity Stadium" label="Varsity Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916170" start="1827" end="1868" title="List of British and Irish varsity matches" label="List of British and Irish varsity matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809323" start="1871" end="1895" title="Varsity (rowing regatta)" label="Varsity (rowing regatta)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358331" start="1943" end="1972" title="Varsity Sports (South Africa)" label="Varsity Sports (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916157" start="2002" end="2015" title="Varsity Rugby" label="Varsity Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q110313040" start="2059" end="2088" title="Varsity Hockey (South Africa)" label="Varsity Hockey (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982064" start="2092" end="2123" title="Varsity Football (South Africa)" label="Varsity Football (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066645" start="2126" end="2150" title="Varsity Cup Championship" label="Varsity Cup Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q109975854" start="2203" end="2213" title="Varsity FC" label="Varsity FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358325" start="2254" end="2281" title="Varsity (train)" label="&amp;quot;Varsity&amp;quot; (train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916153" start="2401" end="2413" title="Varsity Line" label="Varsity Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752848" start="2478" end="2493" title="Vickers Varsity" label="Vickers Varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360624" start="2586" end="2603" title="Operation Varsity" label="Operation Varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970196" start="2644" end="2660" title="Varsity Scouting" label="Varsity Scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q88010540" start="2733" end="2764" title="Junior Varsity (disambiguation)" label="Junior Varsity (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786951" start="2770" end="2797" title="University (disambiguation)" label="University (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567648" wikidata="Q62051509" url="?curid=567648" title="Killing an Arab">
<text>&quot;Killing an Arab&quot; is the debut single by English rock band the Cure. It was recorded at the same time as their first album &quot;Three Imaginary Boys&quot; (1979), but not included on the album. However, it was included on the band&#x27;s first US album, &quot;Boys Don&#x27;t Cry&quot; (1980).

The song&#x27;s title and lyrics reference Albert Camus&#x27;s 1942 novella &quot;The Stranger&quot;. Because of the title, the song has drawn controversy for what critics have described as promoting violence against Arabs, which songwriter Robert Smith pinned on the public&#x27;s lack of knowledge regarding the novel. Shortly after its release, Smith said, &quot;It just happened that the main character in the book had actually killed an Arab, but it could have been a Scandinavian or an English bloke.&quot; In 2003, Smith acknowledged that, &quot;If I knew it before, I would have called it &#x27;Standing on the Beach&#x27;. It would have avoided many troubles.&quot;

==Lyrics and music==
Songwriter Robert Smith said the song &quot;was a short poetic attempt at condensing my impression of the key moments in the 1942 novel &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot; (&quot;The Stranger&quot;) by Albert Camus&quot;. The lyrics describe a shooting on a beach, in which the titular Arab is killed by the song&#x27;s narrator; in Camus&#x27; story the protagonist, Meursault, shoots an Arab on a beach, overwhelmed by his surroundings. Meursault is condemned for his honesty about his feelings and is considered an outsider (or &quot;stranger&quot;) because &quot;he refuses to lie&quot; and &quot;doesn&#x27;t play the game&quot;.

Upon release, &quot;Melody Maker&quot; compared the song to &quot;Hong Kong Garden&quot; by Siouxsie and the Banshees. Music critic Ian Birch wrote: &quot;As &#x27;Hong Kong Garden&#x27; used a simple Oriental-styled riff to striking effect, so &#x27;[Killing An] Arab&#x27; conjures up edginess through a Moorish-flavour guitar pattern&quot;.

This song lends two of its lines to the titles of one of the Cure&#x27;s compilation albums, &quot;Standing on a Beach&quot;, and to its CD/video counterpart &quot;Staring at the Sea&quot;.

==Controversy==
Since the song&#x27;s release, &quot;Killing an Arab&quot; has been controversial and viewed as promoting violence against Arabs. A 1978 &quot;NME&quot; article described the song&#x27;s title as &quot;at first glance irresponsibly racist,&quot; with Robert Smith responding, &quot;It’s not really racist, if you know what the song is about. It’s not a call to kill Arabs.&quot; This was echoed three decades later by a cover version by the Franco-Algerian band Speed Caravan. 

In the US, the Cure&#x27;s first compilation of singles, &quot;Standing on a Beach&quot; (1986), was packaged with a sticker advising against racist usage of the song after a student DJ on WPRB Princeton offended listeners by insensitively introducing the track prior to playing it on the radio in October 1986. Robert Smith and Elektra Records requested that radio stations discontinue airing the song and saw the sticker as a compromise to prevent having to pull the album from sale entirely. Smith said that the song was &quot;being used increasingly by certain reactionary factions of the media, most notably by some particularly brainless DJ&#x27;s, as a part of a wave of anti-Arab feeling currently existing in some parts of America.&quot; Chris Parry, who produced the song, said that &quot;if it was called &#x27;The Stranger&#x27;, we couldn&#x27;t have had this problem.&quot; Smith conceded in 2003 that he should have titled the song &quot;Standing on the Beach&quot; instead.

The song saw controversy again during the Persian Gulf War and following the September 11 attacks. The song was revived in 2005, when the band performed it at several European festivals. The lyrics, however, were changed from &quot;Killing an Arab&quot; to &quot;Kissing an Arab&quot;. Smith added a whole new opening verse when the band performed it at the Royal Albert Hall, London, on 1 April 2006 as &quot;Killing Another&quot;. The &quot;killing another&quot; lyric was also used during the 2007–2008 4Tour. The band performed the song as &quot;Killing an Ahab&quot; with lyrics inspired by Herman Melville on 2011&#x27;s Reflections Tour. During the band&#x27;s 40th anniversary tour, the lyrics and title were changed back to &quot;Killing an Arab&quot;. The band performed the song as &quot;Killing Another&quot; to close out the final show on their tour in December 2022.

==Track listing==
7-inch single
#&quot;Killing an Arab&quot;
#&quot;10:15 Saturday Night&quot;

==Personnel==
* Michael Dempsey – bass guitar
* Robert Smith – guitar, vocals
* Lol Tolhurst – drums

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62051509" start="6" end="21" title="Killing an Arab" label="Killing an Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="69" end="77" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415138" start="139" end="159" title="Three Imaginary Boys" label="Three Imaginary Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931163" start="271" end="290" title="Boys Don&amp;#x27;t Cry (The Cure album)" label="Boys Don&amp;#x27;t Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="349" end="361" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163297" start="382" end="406" title="The Stranger (Camus novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Stranger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255828" start="449" end="460" title="controversy" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="547" end="559" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927398" start="806" end="811" title="bloke" label="bloke"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="1014" end="1026" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q163297" start="1145" end="1160" title="The Stranger (Camus novel)" label="L&amp;#x27;Étranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="1197" end="1209" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="1281" end="1285" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q58179319" start="1532" end="1540" title="stranger" label="stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="1651" end="1663" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894607" start="1697" end="1713" title="Hong Kong Garden (song)" label="Hong Kong Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="1723" end="1748" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="1832" end="1840" title="Oriental" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="1848" end="1852" title="riff" label="riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="1937" end="1944" title="Moorish" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951101" start="2075" end="2094" title="Standing on a Beach" label="Standing on a Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951101" start="2140" end="2158" title="Staring at the Sea" label="Staring at the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255828" start="2251" end="2264" title="controversial" label="controversial"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2326" end="2329" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="2415" end="2421" title="racist" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q110858728" start="2624" end="2639" title="Franco-Algerian" label="Franco-Algerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492930" start="2645" end="2658" title="Speed Caravan" label="Speed Caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951101" start="2725" end="2744" title="Standing on a Beach" label="Standing on a Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="2991" end="3006" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="3227" end="3238" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q574837" start="3340" end="3349" title="anti-Arab" label="anti-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q48889378" start="3409" end="3420" title="Chris Parry (producer)" label="Chris Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="3695" end="3711" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="3730" end="3750" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="4011" end="4028" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4030" end="4036" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="4159" end="4164" title="4Tour" label="4Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="4249" end="4264" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4603" end="4623" title="10:15 Saturday Night" label="10:15 Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083623" start="4647" end="4662" title="Michael Dempsey" label="Michael Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="4679" end="4691" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296195" start="4711" end="4723" title="Lol Tolhurst" label="Lol Tolhurst"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567649" wikidata="Q1172049" url="?curid=567649" title="Valerius Flaccus">
<text>Valerius Flaccus is the name of:

* Valerius Flaccus (poet) (died 1st century), Latin poet at the time of Vespasian
* a number of Roman political figures, including:
** Lucius Valerius Flaccus (consul 261 BC)
** Lucius Valerius Flaccus (consul 195 BC)
** Lucius Valerius Flaccus (princeps senatus 86 BC), consul 100 BC
** Gaius Valerius Flaccus (consul), a cousin of the preceding man
** Lucius Valerius Flaccus (suffect consul 86 BC), brother of the consul in 93 BC
** Lucius Valerius Flaccus (praetor 63 BC), son of Lucius Valerius Flaccus (suffect consul 86 BC)

==See also==
* Lucius Valerius Flaccus (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1172049" start="0" end="16" title="Valerius Flaccus" label="Valerius Flaccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316090" start="36" end="59" title="Valerius Flaccus (poet)" label="Valerius Flaccus (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159621" start="169" end="208" title="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (consul 261 BC)" label="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (consul 261 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q430264" start="212" end="251" title="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (consul 195 BC)" label="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (consul 195 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q707670" start="255" end="303" title="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (princeps senatus 86 BC)" label="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (princeps senatus 86 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q857131" start="322" end="353" title="Gaius Valerius Flaccus (consul)" label="Gaius Valerius Flaccus (consul)"/>
<link wikidata="Q267534" start="388" end="434" title="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (suffect consul 86 BC)" label="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (suffect consul 86 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q267534" start="518" end="564" title="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (suffect consul 86 BC)" label="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (suffect consul 86 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q225006" start="581" end="621" title="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (disambiguation)" label="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567655" wikidata="Q1433767" url="?curid=567655" title="Varsity team">
<text>A varsity team is the highest level sports team regularly representing a high school. Varsity teams compete against each other during a given athletic season. In the United States, a varsity team is one step above a school&#x27;s junior varsity (JV) team and composed of more experienced players. The term comes from a shortening of &quot;university&quot;, referring to the top-level team that would represent a university in matches against other universities, while lower-level squads were largely relegated to intramural events.

==North America==
In Canada and the United States, varsity teams are the principal athletic teams representing a university, college, technical school, high school, junior high school, or middle school. Such teams compete against similar teams at corresponding educational institutions. Groups of varsity sports teams are often organized into athletic conferences, which are groups of teams that regularly play each other during a given athletic season. In recognition of their high level of performance, athletes on varsity teams are often given varsity letters. They are in contrast to the institution&#x27;s club sports.

A major difference between varsity and club sports is the source for allocated funds. Varsity teams receive financial support, equipment, and facilities from college and university athletic department budgets. Universities often allocate club sport budgets through student life departments similar to other clubs on campus. Because club sports cost more than other clubs, many club student-athletes must pay to play and also engage in team fundraising efforts to pay for facilities time, equipment, and other team expenses. At various levels of collegiate sports, varsity student athletes are eligible for scholarships solely or partially based on athletic skills.

Varsity can be compared with the junior varsity (JV) and freshman levels, the former which is typically for less-experienced underclassmen, while the latter is exclusively for first-year students (ninth graders in high school). For many years, National Collegiate Athletic Association rules prohibited college freshmen from playing on varsity teams. Currently, JV and freshman players may be promoted to the varsity level by performing well. In contrast, intramural sports (IM sports), consists of teams within the same school (the word &quot;intramural&quot; means &quot;within the walls&quot;) and IM players rarely move to inter-collegiate teams.

==Elsewhere==
===United Kingdom and Ireland===
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, varsity teams compete in varsity matches, usually as part of a varsity competition - a sports tournament between rival universities. The term originally referred strictly to university-sponsored teams, and dates from the 1840s.

Examples of varsity competitions include the Boat Race and Roses, the largest varsity competition in Europe.

===Netherlands===
In the Netherlands, the Varsity is the oldest and most prestigious rowing race. It was held for the first time in 1878, and was started as a Dutch equivalent for the Boat Race between Oxford and Cambridge.

===South Africa===
== Junior varsity ==
In the United States, junior varsity (often called &quot;JV&quot;) players are the members of a team who are not the main players in a competition, usually at the high school level and formerly at the collegiate level. The main players comprise the varsity team. Although the intensity of the JV team may vary from place to place, most junior varsity teams consist of players who are in their freshman and sophomore years in school, though occasionally upperclassmen may play on JV teams. For this reason, junior varsity teams are also often called freshman/sophomore teams. Skilled freshmen and sophomores may compete at the varsity level.

=== Junior varsity players ===
Members of a junior varsity team are underclassmen determined by the coaching staff to have less experience or ability than those on the varsity roster. As such, junior varsity teams are used to prepare these athletes to compete at the varsity level. In other schools, the line between JV and varsity is arbitrary, with all players at a certain grade level at the varsity and all others below that grade level at JV.

Some teams require participation on a junior varsity team before being eligible to try out for a varsity team. These players can provide the varsity team with extra depth, with their service as back-up players. The NCAA previously prohibited true freshmen from playing varsity college football and basketball; as a result, numerous junior-varsity &quot;freshmen teams&quot; appeared on many major college campuses. The NCAA repealed this limitation in 1972; to the extent that junior varsity teams exist at the college level, many are classified as club squads.

Many sports teams have assistant coaches responsible for developing the talent of junior varsity players.

=== When they play ===
A coach may call on junior varsity players during a varsity game, such as when a varsity player is unable to play. 

A team will have many talented players, but the coach is unable to come up with a rotation that allows everyone to play. The decision of when to play junior varsity players in a one-sided game is often at the coach&#x27;s discretion. This depends on the coach&#x27;s strategy, the time remaining in the game, the point margin, and the game situation.

When the winning team is ahead by a substantial margin late in the game, the coaches of both the winning and losing teams may &quot;empty their benches&quot;—that is, they remove the varsity players and play the junior varsity players for the remainder of the game. The junior varsity players can impress coaches during this &quot;garbage time&quot; in hopes of gaining more playing time in subsequent games, while at the same time reducing the risk of serious injury by varsity players by resting them in a game whose outcome has been effectively decided.

Some games have rules which allow unlimited use of junior varsity players, such as basketball. Other sports have different ways of determining junior varsity participants. For instance, in high school wrestling, there can only be one wrestler competing for a team at a particular weight class in a given varsity match. The team&#x27;s representative is often determined by a &quot;challenge match,&quot; in which the top two wrestlers at that weight compete for the right to participate in the varsity match. The loser wrestles that night&#x27;s junior varsity match.

A similar format is used for golf, tennis, and badminton, with players who lose to varsity opponents participating in the junior varsity part of the meet.

=== Junior varsity games ===
Junior varsity games are specially-scheduled events in which junior varsity players play to gain skills and experience. These games may be played immediately before a varsity contest or another night. Records and statistics are kept for the junior varsity team, and some leagues offer a junior varsity championship. An assistant coach acts as the head coach for these games.

In states that use ratings systems to determine playoff participation, junior varsity games do not factor in and are played with considerably less hoopla than varsity games. Attendance is far less, and bands, cheerleaders, and media coverage are usually not present.

In some sports, such as tennis and golf, a junior varsity meet will take place simultaneously with the varsity event; however, the scores are separately tabulated. In track and field, a junior varsity heat of a particular event may take place either before or after the varsity heat.

An underclassman who plays on a junior varsity team one year is expected to gain enough experience to be one of the varsity players the next season. A team&#x27;s head coach will attend junior varsity games to evaluate skill and decide if a player is ready to play in the main part of a varsity game.

Junior varsity teams may or may not travel with or take the field/court with the varsity team, or in particularly well-organized hierarchies (especially in sports such as football) may alternate home and away schedules with the varsity squad to ensure at least one of the two teams plays at home each week. This is often dependent on the size of the varsity team, availability of transportation and policies invoked by either the coach, school or league. A JV can sometimes completely replace a varsity team in a game with little to no importance; the Missouri Turkey Day Game, for example, has a provision that if either of the two regular opponents is still in the midst of their playoff tournament by the time the game is held, the JV teams will instead play the game.

==See also==
*Letterman (sports)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1433767" start="2" end="14" title="Varsity team" label="varsity team"/>
<link wikidata="Q382647" start="513" end="523" title="intramural" label="intramural"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="698" end="716" title="junior high school" label="junior high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992826" start="876" end="895" title="athletic conference" label="athletic conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916171" start="1080" end="1094" title="varsity letter" label="varsity letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146990" start="1144" end="1155" title="Collegiate club sports" label="club sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q594235" start="1562" end="1573" title="pay to play" label="pay to play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433767" start="1857" end="1871" title="junior varsity" label="junior varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883551" start="1881" end="1889" title="freshman" label="freshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="1949" end="1962" title="underclassmen" label="underclassmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="2021" end="2032" title="ninth grade" label="ninth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="2068" end="2108" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q382647" start="2279" end="2296" title="intramural sports" label="intramural sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146910" start="2670" end="2688" title="University and college rivalry" label="rival universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="2827" end="2840" title="the Boat Race" label="the Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368660" start="2845" end="2850" title="Roses Tournament" label="Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="3362" end="3372" title="College" label="collegiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883551" start="3554" end="3562" title="freshman" label="freshman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3567" end="3576" title="Tenth grade#United States" label="sophomore"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="4467" end="4471" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146990" start="4801" end="4812" title="Collegiate club sports" label="club squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316121" start="5546" end="5565" title="Resting the starters" label="empty their benches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521994" start="5745" end="5757" title="garbage time" label="garbage time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432080" start="6161" end="6182" title="Scholastic wrestling" label="high school wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520639" start="6252" end="6264" title="Wrestling weight classes" label="weight class"/>
<link wikidata="Q16989156" start="8509" end="8533" title="Missouri Turkey Day Game" label="Missouri Turkey Day Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533680" start="8744" end="8762" title="Letterman (sports)" label="Letterman (sports)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567656" wikidata="Q1209607" url="?curid=567656" title="L'Étranger (disambiguation)">
<text>L&#x27;Étranger is a 1942 novel by Albert Camus.

L&#x27;Étranger may also refer to:

==Books==
* &quot;L&#x27;étranger&quot; series, a BL manga series by Kanna Kii
* &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot;, a poem by Charles Baudelaire

==Music==
* L&#x27;Étranger (band), a 1980s Canadian punk band
* &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot;, a song (1934) by Édith Piaf
* &quot;L&#x27;étranger (voleur d&#x27;eau)&quot;, a 2018 song by Christine and the Queens
* &quot;L&#x27;étranger&quot;, an opera by Vincent d&#x27;Indy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q163297" start="0" end="15" title="L&amp;#x27;Étranger" label="L&amp;#x27;Étranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209607" start="50" end="65" title="L&amp;#x27;Étranger (disambiguation)" label="L&amp;#x27;Étranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q120089490" start="98" end="132" title="L&amp;#x27;étranger series" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;#x27;étranger&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="206" end="224" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Charles Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456023" start="238" end="260" title="L&amp;#x27;Étranger (band)" label="L&amp;#x27;Étranger (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631" start="337" end="347" title="Édith Piaf" label="Édith Piaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838567" start="414" end="438" title="Christine and the Queens" label="Christine and the Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q313584" start="482" end="501" title="Vincent d&amp;#x27;Indy" label="Vincent d&amp;#x27;Indy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567663" wikidata="Q831433" url="?curid=567663" title="Saab 32 Lansen">
<text>The Saab 32 Lansen (English: Lance) is a two-seat, transonic military aircraft designed and manufactured by the Swedish aircraft manufacturer Saab AB.

In late Autumn 1946, development of the Lansen began as a successor to the Saab B 18/S 18 attack aircraft. In December 1948, an initial contract for the design and mockup of Saab&#x27;s proposed &quot;P1150&quot; design was issued. As the design was refined, plans to use the indigenous STAL Dovern turbojet engine were put aside due to technical difficulties in favour of the license-built Rolls-Royce Avon powerplant. On 3 November 1952, the first prototype performed its maiden flight. In 1953, series production of the type began, after flight testing and several refinements.

Deliveries of the Lansen to the Swedish Air Force (&quot;Flygvapnet&quot;) took place between 1955 and 1960. It was the service&#x27;s first twin-seat jet aircraft as well as the first equipped with an integrated search radar. Three principal variants of the Lansen were produced, these being for attack (A 32A), fighter (J 32B), and reconnaissance (S 32C) missions. Later built aircraft were equipped with a more powerful model of the Avon engine and increasingly capable electronics. During its lengthy operational life, the Lansen also served in secondary roles, including as an electronic warfare platform, target tug, and research aircraft. The majority were retired during the 1990s following the end of the Cold War.

==Development==
In Autumn 1946, the Saab company began internal studies aimed at developing a replacement aircraft for the Saab B 18/S 18 as Sweden&#x27;s standard attack aircraft. In 1948, Saab was formally approached by the Swedish Government with a request to investigate the development of a turbojet-powered strike aircraft, to replace a series of 1940s vintage attack, reconnaissance and night-fighter aircraft in the Flygvapnet: the B 18/S 18, J 21R/A 21R and J 30 (de Havilland Mosquito). Out of several differing design studies performed, including a twin-engine aircraft intended to be powered by a pair of de Havilland Ghost turbojet engines, Saab settled on a single-engine design, which was initially designated the &quot;P1150&quot;.

Its basic design also drew upon materials obtained from Switzerland, including drawings on Messerschmitt&#x27;s P.1101, P.1110, P.1111 and P.1112 projects. SAAB&#x27;s project manager Frid Wänström retrieved these secret papers from Switzerland to Sweden in 1945. The documents originated from Messerschmitt engineers who fled to Switzerland at the end of the Second World War. Among them were the engineer and aerodynamicist Hermann Behrbohm, who joined Saab&#x27;s core team around the Saab 29 Tunnan and upcoming aircraft like the Saab 32 Lansen and Saab 35 Draken.

On 20 December 1948, a phase one contract for the design and mock-up of the proposed aircraft was issued, formally initiating development work upon the &quot;P1150&quot;. The requirements laid out by the Swedish Air Force for the &quot;P1150&quot; were demanding: it had to be able to attack anywhere along Sweden&#x27;s 2,000 km (1,245 miles) of coastline within one hour of launch from a central location. It had to be capable of being launched in any weather conditions and at day or night. In response, Saab elected to develop a twin-seat aircraft with a low-mounted wing, and equipped with advanced electronics. The &quot;P1150&quot; broke new grounds for the Swedish Air Force, being their first two-seat jet aircraft, and the first to carry a built-in search radar.

Saab had initially envisaged powering the &quot;P1150&quot; with the indigenously produced STAL Dovern turbojet engine. Both timescale and technical difficulties encountered during the development of the Dovern resulted in the Swedish government electing to substitute the intended Dovern engine with the license-built Rolls-Royce Avon Series 100 turbojet engine instead, designated RM.5. The single Avon engine provided the Saab A 32A with a thrust to weight ratio of about 0.3, and enabled the aircraft to be roughly 10,000lb heavier than the twin engine Saab 18 it replaced. The later-produced J 32B interceptor variant received the upgraded and significantly more powerful RM6A Avon engine instead.

On 3 November 1952, the first &quot;P1150&quot; prototype conducted its first flight. The design of the prototypes had initially featured both Fowler flaps and a leading edge slot. This slot was discarded as unnecessary after trials with the prototypes and never appeared on subsequent production aircraft. Triangular fences were added near the wing roots during flight testing in order to improve airflow when the aircraft was being flown at a high angle of attack. A small batch of &quot;P1150&quot; prototypes completed design and evaluation trials. In 1953, series production of the newly designated &quot;Saab 32 Lansen&quot; began. Development work on the project involved more than 2,000,000 man-hours in total.

In 1955, the first production A 32A Lansen attack aircraft were delivered to the Swedish Air Force. Deliveries of this variant proceeded through to mid 1958, at which point manufacturing activity switched to the other two variants of the Lansen, the J 32B and S 32C. These two models differed substantially from the first. The J 32 B was fitted with a new engine for greater flight performance, and new navigation and fire control systems. On 7 January 1957, the first J 32 B Lansen conducted its maiden flight. On 26 March 1957, the first S 32C Lansen performed its first flight. Production of the Lansen continued until May 1960.

==Design==

The Saab 32 Lansen had a straightforward general arrangement, being one of the first aircraft in the world to be specifically developed to fly attack missions. From the outset, it was designed to effectively accommodate the installation of electronic warfare and weapons systems. The aircraft could be armed with a total of four 20 mm cannon, and wing pylons for various calibers of rockets and assorted bombs. The J 32 variant carried four 30 mm ADEN cannons. The A 32 (&quot;A&quot; stands for attack) had an armament of four 20 mm Bofors m/49 cannon hidden under flaps in the nose. The J 32 differed substantially from the other variant, Saab describing it as &quot;to all intents a new aircraft&quot;, being fitted with a more powerful engine and newer armaments and a different radar.

The Lansen&#x27;s nose contained the Ericsson mapping and navigation radar, the forward antenna housed in a large blister fairing underneath the fuselage, directly forward of the main landing gear. This radar worked in conjunction with the Rb 04C anti-ship missile, one of the earliest cruise missiles in western service. The attack variant of the Lansen could carry up to two RB04 missiles, one underneath each wing. On the reconnaissance variant of the Lansen, up to six cameras could be installed in the place of the four cannon. The camera bodies required the installation of chin blisters on the upper fuselage of the nose. The Lansen could carry up to 12 M62 flash bombs for night photography.
The fuselage of the Lansen was relatively well streamlined, being the first aircraft for which the outer skin curvature and joints between skin panels had been defined by mathematical calculation in order to reduce drag, achieved via an early application of computer technology. The wing had a 10 per cent laminar profile and a 35° sweep. Hydraulically-boosted ailerons and large Fowler flaps on the wings comprised the primary flight control surfaces, as did the hydraulically assisted elevators of the powered tailplane. Four airbrakes were on the sides of the rear fuselage. 

The Lansen had a tricycle undercarriage with a single wheel on all of the landing gear. Other wing features include one-section stall fences on the outer-thirds of the wing, a pitot tube on the right wingtip, and three underwing hardpoints. To test the 35° sweepback design of the Lansen&#x27;s wing, a half-scale wing was mounted on a Saab Safir, designated Saab 202 Safir.

The Lansen was powered by a single afterburning Svenska Flygmotor RM5 turbojet engine, which was a license-produced Rolls-Royce Avon RA.3/Mk.109 engine manufactured by Svenska Flygmotor. For easy maintenance access to the engine, the aircraft&#x27;s entire aft fuselage was detachable. The air intakes for the engine were located just forwards and above the wing. The two-man pilot and navigator crew were contained in a pressurised cockpit, equipped with a single-piece clamshell canopy. A second windscreen separated the cockpit in between the pilot and navigator, to protect the latter in case of inadvertent jettisoning of the canopy.

==Operational history==
On 25 October 1953, a SAAB 32 Lansen attained a Mach number of at least 1.12 while in a shallow dive, exceeding the sound barrier. In December 1955, deliveries of the A 32A attack variant began, allowing the swift retirement of the last piston-powered B 18 bomber from Swedish service shortly thereafter. According to Bill Gunston and Peter Gilchrist, the A 32A proved to be extremely effective, both in terms of serviceability and the accuracy of its armaments. Between 1958 and 1960, 54 S32 C reconnaissance aircraft were manufactured. On 2 May 1960, the last Lansen was delivered to the Flygvapnet .
One intended use for the A 32A was as an aerial delivery system for nuclear or chemical weapons. In the 1950s and 1960s, Sweden operated a nuclear weapons program, however never produced such weapons.

Accidents destroyed a third of all Lansens during 25 years of service, killing 100 crew, along with 7 civilians in Vikbo. The accidents were due to a combination of technical faults, the aircraft not being ready for service, and training deficiencies in regards to flying at night and in adverse weather.

In the 1960 Vikbo crash, pilot Uno Magnusson&#x27;s A 32A suffered an engine outage, and ejected before crashing into a farmhouse, killing all seven civilian occupants. The crash was due to a known fault which occurred when a drop tank was fitted; the fighter variant J32 B had been forbidden from using the drop tank. Replacement parts to correct the fault were available at the base but had not yet been fitted. The crash&#x27;s causes were suppressed from the public by the Flygvapnet press office. As the victims were civilians, they were not included in official accident statistics.

The A 32 Lansen was Sweden&#x27;s last purpose-built attack aircraft. In June 1971, the replacement of the A 32A formally began, the more advanced Saab 37 Viggen being slowly used to take over its attack responsibilities. As the type was gradually being replaced by more modern types, the Saab 32 continued to be operated into the late 1990s as target tugs and electronic warfare platforms, with 20 J 32Bs converted for these duties. In 2010, at least two Lansens were still operational, having the sole task of taking high altitude air samples for research purposes in collaboration with the Swedish Radiation Safety Authority. One of these collected volcanic ash samples in mid 2010. As of April 2020, all aircraft have been withdrawn from active service.

==Variants==
;A 32A
:Ground-attack and maritime-strike version. 287 aircraft built between 1955 and 1957. Retired in 1978. Armed with four 20 mm Bofors m/49 cannons and could carry two SAAB RB 04 missiles, unguided rocket pods and a variety of different bombs up to 3x600 kg bombs. Equipped with Radarvarnare F9/5 Radar warning receiver and Box-3 chaff dispenser. 
;J 32B
: All-weather fighter version, initially operated only for bad weather and night fighter duties. Two prototypes and 118 production aircraft built between 1958 and 1960. Retired in 1973. Armed with four 30 mm ADEN guns, Rb 24 missiles (license-built AIM-9 Sidewinder), or 75 mm unguided rocket pods. J 32B was powered by more powerful Svenska Flygmotor RM6A (Rolls-Royce Avon Mk 47A) engine.
;S 32C
:Specialized maritime and photo reconnaissance version developed from A 32A. 45 aircraft built between 1958 and 1959. Retired in 1978. Equipped with PS-432/A radar with extended range and with six cameras – two SKa 23 (Fairchild K-47), one SKa 15 (Williamson F49 Mk 2) and three SKa 16 (Vinten F95).
;J 32D
:Target tug version. Six J 32B were modified. Retired in 1997.
;J 32E
:ECM (electronic warfare and countermeasures) version, used also for ECM training. Fourteen J 32B were modified. Retired in 1997. Aircraft was equipped with jamming system G 24 in one of three versions (for L, S or C bands) used for jamming ground and naval radars. &quot;Adrian&quot; (for S and C bands) and &quot;Petrus&quot; (for X band) pods were used for jamming aerial radars.
;J 32AD
:Project of day fighter version from 1953 as interim solution between the J 29 Tunnan and J 35 Draken, designated J 32AD (&quot;D&quot; stands for &quot;Dag&quot; [day]). Aircraft was lighter, without radar and armed with four 20 mm and one 30 mm guns in nose and different missiles. None built, 120 Hawker Hunter fighters bought instead.
;J 32U
:Project of fighter version from 1954 (&quot;U&quot; stands for &quot;utveckling&quot; [development]) with much better performance than J 32B. Aircraft was equipped with more powerful Rolls-Royce RA 19R engine and had improved wing design. None built.
;J 32S/J16
: In 1969, at the Norrbotten Wing (F 21), 4 aircraft of the J32B version were modified to become a kind of snow remover by using the heat from the engine to melt snow and ice. The wings and the tail was removed and a small cabin was added on top of the fuselage. Where the engine outlet had been, there was now a square pipe, which lead the air down to the ground. The type was tested and evaluated at F 21 until 1971, when the project was cancelled. The project was cancelled due to low efficiency and a very high fuel-consumption. There was also a problem with the welding in the pipe. The naming of the version is pretty simple, J32S (S stands for Snö [Snow]) and J16, simply because half of the aircraft was removed in order to create the J32S.

==Surviving aircraft==
One aircraft has been restored to flying condition and takes part in air force shows. This is a J32D model which was formerly 32606, now registered as SE-RME.
Production number 32543 is flying under registration SE-RMD as of 2017, for the Swedish Air Force Historic Flight.

Additionally, a number of non flying airframes are on static display at various museums and (former) air force bases. 
* #32070: Gate guardian at Skaraborg Wing (F 7) in Såtenäs.
* #32085: In a museum at former Hälsinge Wing (F 15) in Söderhamn.
* #32127: On display by the drive way to the civilian terminal in Halmstad. Consists of parts from 32127, 32094 and, after the overhaul in 2019, the rear part of 32035.
* #32151: In a museum at former Blekinge Wing (F 17) in Kallinge.
* #32197: At the Swedish Air Force Museum in Linköping.
* #32259: Gate guardian at former Västgöta Wing (F 6) in Karlsborg
* #32284: On display at the Estrella Warbirds Museum in Paso Robles, US.
* #32510: On display in the Österreichisches Luftfahrtmuseum at Graz airport, Austria.
* #32512: In a museum at the former Göta Wing, today Aeroseum, Säve, Göteborg.
* #32543: On display in Museum of Aeronautics and Astronautics (Madrid) (F 3) in Cuatro Vientos, Madrid, Spain.

==Operators==
* Swedish Air Force
** F 1 Hässlö
** F 3 Malmslätt
** F 4 Frösön
** F 6 Karlsborg
** F 7 Såtenäs
** F 11 Nyköping
** F 12 Kalmar
** F 13 Norrköping
** F 14 Halmstad
** F 15 Söderhamn
** F 16 Uppsala
** F 17 Kallinge
** F 21 Luleå

==Specifications (J 32B)==

==See also==
==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===

* Erichs, Rolph et al. &quot;The Saab-Scania Story&quot;. Stockholm: Streiffert &amp; Co., 1988. .
* Forsgren, Jan. &quot;Database: Saab 32 Lansen&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane&quot;, November 2010, vol 38 no. 11, issue 451. pp. 64–74.
* Gunston, Bill and Peter Gilchrist. &quot;Jet Bombers: From the Messerschmitt Me 262 to the Stealth B-2&quot;. Osprey, 1993. .
* &quot;Saab: Sweden&#x27;s Advanced Combat Aircraft.&quot; &quot;Flight International&quot;, 30 December 1960. pp. 1017–20.
* Taylor, John W.R. &quot;Saab 32 Lansen (Lance).&quot; &quot;Combat Aircraft of the World from 1909 to the present&quot;. New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons, 1969. .
* &quot;This Happens in the Swedish Air Force&quot; (brochure). Stockholm: Information Department of the Air Staff, Flygstabens informationsavdelning, Swedish Air Force, 1983.
* Wagner, Paul J. &quot;Air Force Tac Recce Aircraft: NATO and Non-aligned Western European Air Force Tactical Reconnaissance Aircraft of the Cold War&quot;. Dorrance Publishing, 2009. .
* Wilson, Stewart. &quot;Combat Aircraft since 1945&quot;. Fyshwick, Australia: Aerospace Publications, 2000. .
==External links==

* Saab 32 Lansen – an Overview
* The photo flying Saab J32D Lansen in Swedish colours is operated by heritage flight of the Flygvapnet (Swedish Air Force) – 2012.
* Ekstrand, O. &quot;Swedish Test Flying.&quot; &quot;Flight&quot;, p. 704. 12 November 1954.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q831433" start="4" end="18" title="Saab 32 Lansen" label="Saab 32 Lansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003053" start="29" end="34" title="Lance" label="Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579556" start="51" end="60" title="transonic" label="transonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216916" start="61" end="78" title="military aircraft" label="military aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q219501" start="142" end="149" title="Saab AB" label="Saab AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703966" start="227" end="241" title="Saab 18" label="Saab B 18/S 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394637" start="439" end="450" title="STAL Dovern" label="STAL Dovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="451" end="459" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818012" start="529" end="542" title="Licensed production" label="license-built"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164321" start="543" end="559" title="Rolls-Royce Avon" label="Rolls-Royce Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="626" end="639" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q113525" start="766" end="783" title="Swedish Air Force" label="Swedish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="947" end="959" title="List of radar types#Detection and search radars" label="search radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="1031" end="1037" title="attack aircraft" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="1047" end="1054" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="1068" end="1082" title="aerial reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q272826" start="1316" end="1334" title="electronic warfare" label="electronic warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032557" start="1345" end="1355" title="target tug" label="target tug"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1448" end="1456" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703966" start="1582" end="1596" title="Saab 18" label="Saab B 18/S 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="1755" end="1763" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="1772" end="1778" title="attack aircraft" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q113525" start="1883" end="1893" title="Swedish Air Force" label="Flygvapnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q326931" start="1910" end="1921" title="Saab 21" label="J 21R/A 21R"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="1932" end="1953" title="de Havilland Mosquito" label="de Havilland Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q287493" start="2076" end="2094" title="de Havilland Ghost" label="de Havilland Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q606238" start="2320" end="2326" title="Messerschmitt P.1101" label="P.1101"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728276" start="2328" end="2334" title="Messerschmitt P.1110" label="P.1110"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924203" start="2336" end="2342" title="Messerschmitt P.1111" label="P.1111"/>
<link wikidata="Q389874" start="2347" end="2353" title="Messerschmitt P.1112" label="P.1112"/>
<link wikidata="Q67700404" start="2634" end="2650" title="Hermann Behrbohm" label="Hermann Behrbohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q694456" start="2696" end="2710" title="Saab 29 Tunnan" label="Saab 29 Tunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q461475" start="2761" end="2775" title="Saab 35 Draken" label="Saab 35 Draken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394637" start="3643" end="3654" title="STAL Dovern" label="STAL Dovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164321" start="3871" end="3887" title="Rolls-Royce Avon" label="Rolls-Royce Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="4399" end="4411" title="Flap (aircraft)" label="Fowler flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="4706" end="4721" title="angle of attack" label="angle of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141362" start="4955" end="4963" title="man-hour" label="man-hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="5394" end="5406" title="Fire-control system" label="fire control"/>
<link wikidata="Q272826" start="5861" end="5879" title="electronic warfare" label="electronic warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q983821" start="6068" end="6079" title="ADEN cannon" label="ADEN cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q890353" start="6155" end="6161" title="Bofors" label="Bofors"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="6449" end="6457" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="6481" end="6486" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="6596" end="6608" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275992" start="6652" end="6657" title="Rb 04" label="Rb 04"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="6698" end="6712" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q887455" start="7159" end="7170" title="streamliner" label="streamlined"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="7370" end="7378" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="7451" end="7460" title="Hydraulic" label="Hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="7473" end="7480" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="7492" end="7503" title="Fowler flap" label="Fowler flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705284" start="7540" end="7562" title="flight control surface" label="flight control surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="7599" end="7607" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004684" start="7640" end="7648" title="air brake (aeronautics)" label="airbrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874353" start="7709" end="7731" title="Tricycle landing gear" label="tricycle undercarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="7766" end="7778" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q56218" start="7868" end="7878" title="pitot tube" label="pitot tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q789815" start="7921" end="7930" title="hardpoint" label="hardpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q696722" start="8028" end="8038" title="Saab 91 Safir" label="Saab Safir"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="8103" end="8115" title="afterburner" label="afterburning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164321" start="8116" end="8137" title="Rolls-Royce Avon" label="Svenska Flygmotor RM5"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="8138" end="8146" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033664" start="8236" end="8253" title="Volvo Aero" label="Svenska Flygmotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="8780" end="8784" title="Mach number" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="8848" end="8861" title="supersonic" label="sound barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="9403" end="9410" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="9414" end="9429" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751132" start="9456" end="9497" title="Swedish nuclear weapon program" label="Sweden operated a nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q263786" start="10580" end="10594" title="Saab 37 Viggen" label="Saab 37 Viggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q198678" start="11026" end="11060" title="Swedish Radiation Safety Authority" label="Swedish Radiation Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="11085" end="11097" title="volcanic ash" label="volcanic ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275992" start="11382" end="11387" title="RB 04" label="RB 04"/>
<link wikidata="Q235396" start="11813" end="11829" title="AIM-9 Sidewinder" label="AIM-9 Sidewinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q849203" start="12340" end="12343" title="Electronic countermeasures" label="ECM"/>
<link wikidata="Q694456" start="12804" end="12815" title="Saab Tunnan" label="J 29 Tunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q461475" start="12820" end="12831" title="Saab 35 Draken" label="J 35 Draken"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="13030" end="13043" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hawker Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427476" start="13357" end="13372" title="Norrbotten Wing" label="Norrbotten Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507060" start="14351" end="14384" title="Swedish Air Force Historic Flight" label="Swedish Air Force Historic Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355680" start="14533" end="14547" title="Skaraborg Wing" label="Skaraborg Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427471" start="14598" end="14611" title="Hälsinge Wing" label="Hälsinge Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q429761" start="14834" end="14847" title="Blekinge Wing" label="Blekinge Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434569" start="14885" end="14909" title="Swedish Air Force Museum" label="Swedish Air Force Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427481" start="14958" end="14971" title="Västgöta Wing" label="Västgöta Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401818" start="15019" end="15043" title="Estrella Warbirds Museum" label="Estrella Warbirds Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q586528" start="15047" end="15058" title="Paso Robles" label="Paso Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358029" start="15187" end="15196" title="Göta Wing" label="Göta Wing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15204" end="15228" title="Aeroseum, Säve, Göteborg" label="Aeroseum, Säve, Göteborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11057120" start="15254" end="15301" title="Museum of Aeronautics and Astronautics (Madrid)" label="Museum of Aeronautics and Astronautics (Madrid)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113525" start="15359" end="15376" title="Swedish Air Force" label="Swedish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427473" start="15380" end="15390" title="Västmanland Wing" label="F 1 Hässlö"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427477" start="15394" end="15407" title="Östgöta Wing" label="F 3 Malmslätt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427479" start="15411" end="15421" title="Jämtland Wing" label="F 4 Frösön"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427481" start="15425" end="15438" title="Västgöta Wing" label="F 6 Karlsborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355680" start="15442" end="15453" title="Skaraborg Wing" label="F 7 Såtenäs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427467" start="15457" end="15470" title="Södermanland Wing" label="F 11 Nyköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427468" start="15474" end="15485" title="Kalmar Wing" label="F 12 Kalmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427469" start="15489" end="15504" title="Bråvalla Wing" label="F 13 Norrköping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15508" end="15521" title="Halland Wing" label="F 14 Halmstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427471" start="15525" end="15539" title="Hälsinge Wing" label="F 15 Söderhamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427472" start="15543" end="15555" title="Uppland Wing" label="F 16 Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q429761" start="15559" end="15572" title="Blekinge Wing" label="F 17 Kallinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427476" start="15576" end="15586" title="Norrbotten Wing" label="F 21 Luleå"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825662" start="15852" end="15861" title="Aeroplane Magazine" label="Aeroplane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567665" wikidata="Q543457" url="?curid=567665" title="Forward (ice hockey)">
<text>In ice hockey, a forward is a player, and a position on the ice, whose primary responsibility is to score and assist goals. 

Generally, the forwards try to stay in three different lanes of the ice from goal to goal. It is not mandatory, however, to stay in a lane. Staying in a lane aids in forming the common offensive strategy known as a triangle. One forward obtains the puck and then the forwards pass it between themselves making the goalie move side to side. This strategy opens up the net for scoring opportunities. This strategy allows for a constant flow of the play, attempting to maintain the control of play by one team in the offensive zone. The forwards can pass to the defence players playing at the blue line, thus freeing up the play and allowing either a shot from the point (blue line position where the defence stands) or a pass back to the offence. This then begins the triangle again.

Forwards also shared defensive responsibilities on the ice with the defencemen. Each team has three forwards on each line: the left wing, centre, and right wing.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="3" end="13" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q543457" start="17" end="24" title="Forward (ice hockey)" label="forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="60" end="63" title="ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315928" start="716" end="725" title="Blue line (ice hockey)" label="blue line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827965" start="1036" end="1045" title="Winger (ice hockey)" label="left wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583758" start="1047" end="1053" title="Centre (ice hockey)" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827965" start="1059" end="1069" title="Winger (ice hockey)" label="right wing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567667" wikidata="Q1144915" url="?curid=567667" title="Lexicographic order">
<text>In mathematics, the lexicographic or lexicographical order (also known as lexical order, or dictionary order) is a generalization of the alphabetical order of the dictionaries to sequences of ordered symbols or, more generally, of elements of a totally ordered set.

There are several variants and generalizations of the lexicographical ordering. One variant applies to sequences of different lengths by comparing the lengths of the sequences before considering their elements.

Another variant, widely used in combinatorics, orders subsets of a given finite set by assigning a total order to the finite set, and converting subsets into increasing sequences, to which the lexicographical order is applied. 

A generalization defines an order on an &quot;n&quot;-ary Cartesian product of partially ordered sets; this order is a total order if and only if all factors of the Cartesian product are totally ordered.

==Definition==

The words in a lexicon (the set of words used in some language) have a conventional ordering, used in dictionaries and encyclopedias, that depends on the underlying ordering of the alphabet of symbols used to build the words. The lexicographical order is one way of formalizing word order given the order of the underlying symbols.

The formal notion starts with a finite set , often called the alphabet, which is totally ordered. That is, for any two symbols and in that are not the same symbol, either or .

The &quot;words&quot; of are the finite sequences of symbols from , including words of length 1 containing a single symbol, words of length 2 with 2 symbols, and so on, even including the empty sequence formula_1 with no symbols at all. The lexicographical order on the set of all these finite words orders the words as follows:

# Given two different words of the same length, say and , the order of the two words depends on the alphabetic order of the symbols in the first place where the two words differ (counting from the beginning of the words): if and only if in the underlying order of the alphabet .
# If two words have different lengths, the usual lexicographical order pads the shorter one with &quot;blanks&quot; (a special symbol that is treated as smaller than every element of ) at the end until the words are the same length, and then the words are compared as in the previous case.

However, in combinatorics, another convention is frequently used for the second case, whereby a shorter sequence is always smaller than a longer sequence. This variant of the lexicographical order is sometimes called .

In lexicographical order, the word &quot;Thomas&quot; appears before &quot;Thompson&quot; because they first differ at the fifth letter (&#x27;a&#x27; and &#x27;p&#x27;), and letter &#x27;a&#x27; comes before the letter &#x27;p&#x27; in the alphabet. Because it is the first difference, in this case the 5th letter is the &quot;most significant difference&quot; for alphabetical ordering.

An important property of the lexicographical order is that for each , the set of words of length is well-ordered by the lexicographical order (provided the alphabet is finite); that is, every decreasing sequence of words of length is finite (or equivalently, every non-empty subset has a least element). It is not true that the set of &quot;all&quot; finite words is well-ordered; for example, the infinite set of words {b, ab, aab, aaab, ... } has no lexicographically earliest element.

==Numeral systems and dates==

The lexicographical order is used not only in dictionaries, but also commonly for numbers and dates.

One of the drawbacks of the Roman numeral system is that it is not always immediately obvious which of two numbers is the smaller. On the other hand, with the positional notation of the Hindu–Arabic numeral system, comparing numbers is easy, because the natural order on natural numbers is the same as the variant shortlex of the lexicographic order. In fact, with positional notation, a natural number is represented by a sequence of numerical digits, and a natural number is larger than another one if either it has more digits (ignoring leading zeroes) or the number of digits is the same and the first (most significant) digit which differs is larger.

For real numbers written in decimal notation, a slightly different variant of the lexicographical order is used: the parts on the left of the decimal point are compared as before; if they are equal, the parts at the right of the decimal point are compared with the lexicographical order. The padding &#x27;blank&#x27; in this context is a trailing &quot;0&quot; digit.

When negative numbers are also considered, one has to reverse the order for comparing negative numbers. This is not usually a problem for humans, but it may be for computers (testing the sign takes some time). This is one of the reasons for adopting two&#x27;s complement representation for representing signed integers in computers.

Another example of a non-dictionary use of lexicographical ordering appears in the ISO 8601 standard for dates, which expresses a date as YYYY-MM-DD. This formatting scheme has the advantage that the lexicographical order on sequences of characters that represent dates coincides with the chronological order: an earlier CE date is smaller in the lexicographical order than a later date up to year 9999. This date ordering makes computerized sorting of dates easier by avoiding the need for a separate sorting algorithm.

==Monoid of words==

The over an alphabet is the free monoid over . That is, the elements of the monoid are the finite sequences (words) of elements of (including the empty sequence, of length 0), and the operation (multiplication) is the concatenation of words. A word is a prefix (or &#x27;truncation&#x27;) of another word if there exists a word such that . By this definition, the empty word (formula_1) is a prefix of every word, and every word is a prefix of itself (with formula_3); care must be taken if these cases are to be excluded.

With this terminology, the above definition of the lexicographical order becomes more concise: Given a partially or totally ordered set , and two words and over such that is non-empty, then one has under lexicographical order, if at least one of the following conditions is satisfied:

* is a prefix of 
* there exists words , , (possibly empty) and elements and of such that
::

Notice that, due to the prefix condition in this definition, formula_4 where formula_1 is the empty word.

If formula_6 is a total order on formula_7 then so is the lexicographic order on the words of formula_8 However, in general this is not a well-order, even if the alphabet formula_9 is well-ordered. For instance, if , the language has no least element in the lexicographical order: .

Since many applications require well orders, a variant of the lexicographical orders is often used. This well-order, sometimes called or , consists in considering first the lengths of the words (if , then formula_10), and, if the lengths are equal, using the lexicographical order. If the order on is a well-order, the same is true for the shortlex order.

==Cartesian products==

The lexicographical order defines an order on an &quot;n&quot;-ary Cartesian product of ordered sets, which is a total order when all these sets are themselves totally ordered. An element of a Cartesian product formula_11 is a sequence whose formula_12th element belongs to formula_13 for every formula_14 As evaluating the lexicographical order of sequences compares only elements which have the same rank in the sequences, the lexicographical order extends to Cartesian products of ordered sets.

Specifically, given two partially ordered sets formula_9 and formula_16 the formula_17 is defined as
formula_18

The result is a partial order. If formula_9 and formula_20 are each totally ordered, then the result is a total order as well. The lexicographical order of two totally ordered sets is thus a linear extension of their product order.

One can define similarly the lexicographic order on the Cartesian product of an infinite family of ordered sets, if the family is indexed by the natural numbers, or more generally by a well-ordered set. This generalized lexicographical order is a total order if each factor set is totally ordered.

Unlike the finite case, an infinite product of well-orders is not necessarily well-ordered by the lexicographical order. For instance, the set of countably infinite binary sequences (by definition, the set of functions from natural numbers to formula_21 also known as the Cantor space formula_22) is not well-ordered; the subset of sequences that have precisely one formula_23 (that is, ) does not have a least element under the lexicographical order induced by formula_24 because is an infinite descending chain. Similarly, the infinite lexicographic product is not Noetherian either because is an infinite ascending chain.

== Functions over a well-ordered set==

The functions from a well-ordered set formula_25 to a totally ordered set formula_26 may be identified with sequences indexed by formula_25 of elements of formula_28 They can thus be ordered by the lexicographical order, and for two such functions formula_29 and formula_30 the lexicographical order is thus determined by their values for the smallest formula_31 such that formula_32

If formula_26 is also well-ordered and formula_25 is finite, then the resulting order is a well-order. As shown above, if formula_25 is infinite this is not the case.

==Finite subsets==

In combinatorics, one has often to enumerate, and therefore to order the finite subsets of a given set formula_36 For this, one usually chooses an order on formula_36 Then, sorting a subset of formula_38 is equivalent to convert it into an increasing sequence. The lexicographic order on the resulting sequences induces thus an order on the subsets, which is also called the .

In this context, one generally prefer to sort first the subsets by cardinality, such as in the shortlex order. Therefore, in the following, we will consider only orders on subsets of fixed cardinal.

For example, using the natural order of the integers, the lexicographical ordering on the subsets of three elements of formula_39 is
::.

For ordering finite subsets of a given cardinality of the natural numbers, the order (see below) is often more convenient, because all initial segments are finite, and thus the colexicographical order defines an order isomorphism between the natural numbers and the set of sets of formula_40 natural numbers. This is not the case for the lexicographical order, as, with the lexicographical order, we have, for example, formula_41 for every formula_42

==Group orders of Z&quot;n&quot;==

Let formula_43 be the free Abelian group of rank formula_44 whose elements are sequences of formula_40 integers, and operation is the addition. A group order on formula_43 is a total order, which is compatible with addition, that is 
formula_47

The lexicographical ordering is a group order on formula_48

The lexicographical ordering may also be used to characterize all group orders on formula_48 In fact, formula_40 linear forms with real coefficients, define a map from formula_43 into formula_52 which is injective if the forms are linearly independent (it may be also injective if the forms are dependent, see below). The lexicographic order on the image of this map induces a group order on formula_48 Robbiano&#x27;s theorem is that every group order may be obtained in this way.

More precisely, given a group order on formula_54 there exist an integer formula_55 and formula_56 linear forms with real coefficients, such that the induced map formula_57 from formula_43 into formula_59 has the following properties;

* formula_57 is injective;
* the resulting isomorphism from formula_43 to the image of formula_57 is an order isomorphism when the image is equipped with the lexicographical order on formula_63

==Colexicographic order==
The colexicographic or colex order is a variant of the lexicographical order that is obtained by reading finite sequences from the right to the left instead of reading them from the left to the right. More precisely, whereas the lexicographical order between two sequences is defined by

: if for the first where and differ,
the colexicographical order is defined by

: if for the last where and differ

In general, the difference between the colexicographical order and the lexicographical order is not very significant. However, when considering increasing sequences, typically for coding subsets, the two orders differ significantly.

For example, for ordering the increasing sequences (or the sets) of two natural integers, the lexicographical order begins by

and the colexicographic order begins by

The main property of the colexicographical order for increasing sequences of a given length is that every initial segment is finite. In other words, the colexicographical order for increasing sequences of a given length induces an order isomorphism with the natural numbers, and allows enumerating these sequences. This is frequently used in combinatorics, for example in the proof of the Kruskal–Katona theorem.

==Monomials==

When considering polynomials, the order of the terms does not matter in general, as the addition is commutative. However, some algorithms, such as polynomial long division, require the terms to be in a specific order. Many of the main algorithms for multivariate polynomials are related with Gröbner bases, concept that requires the choice of a monomial order, that is a total order, which is compatible with the monoid structure of the monomials. Here &quot;compatible&quot; means that formula_64 if the monoid operation is denoted multiplicatively. This compatibility implies that the product of a polynomial by a monomial does not change the order of the terms. For Gröbner bases, a further condition must be satisfied, namely that every non-constant monomial is greater than the monomial . However this condition is not needed for other related algorithms, such as the algorithms for the computation of the tangent cone.

As Gröbner bases are defined for polynomials in a fixed number of variables, it is common to identify monomials (for example formula_65) with their exponent vectors (here ). If is the number of variables, every monomial order is thus the restriction to formula_66 of a monomial order of formula_43 (see above formula_54 for a classification).

One of these admissible orders is the lexicographical order. It is, historically, the first to have been used for defining Gröbner bases, and is sometimes called for distinguishing it from other orders that are also related to a lexicographical order.

Another one consists in comparing first the total degrees, and then resolving the conflicts by using the lexicographical order. This order is not widely used, as either the lexicographical order or the degree reverse lexicographical order have generally better properties.

The consists also in comparing first the total degrees, and, in case of equality of the total degrees, using the reverse of the colexicographical order. That is, given two exponent vectors, one has 
formula_69
if either 
formula_70
or
formula_71

For this ordering, the monomials of degree one have the same order as the corresponding indeterminates (this would not be the case if the reverse lexicographical order would be used). For comparing monomials in two variables of the same total degree, this order is the same as the lexicographic order. This is not the case with more variables. For example, for exponent vectors of monomials of degree two in three variables, one has for the degree reverse lexicographic order:
formula_72

For the lexicographical order, the same exponent vectors are ordered as
formula_73

A useful property of the degree reverse lexicographical order is that a homogeneous polynomial is a multiple of the least indeterminate if and only if its leading monomial (its greater monomial) is a multiple of this least indeterminate.

==See also==

* Collation
* Kleene–Brouwer order
* Lexicographic preferences - an application of lexicographic order in economics.
* Lexicographic optimization - an algorithmic problem of finding a lexicographically-maximal element.
* Lexicographic order topology on the unit square
* Lexicographic ordering in tensor abstract index notation
* Lexicographically minimal string rotation
* Leximin order
* Long line (topology)
* Lyndon word
* Pre-order - the name of the lexicographical order (of bits) in a binary tree traversal
* Star product, a different way of combining partial orders
* Shortlex order
* Orders on the Cartesian product of totally ordered sets

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144915" start="20" end="33" title="Lexicographic order" label="lexicographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144915" start="37" end="58" title="Lexicographic order" label="lexicographical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144915" start="74" end="87" title="Lexicographic order" label="lexical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144915" start="92" end="108" title="Lexicographic order" label="dictionary order"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925" start="137" end="155" title="alphabetical order" label="alphabetical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="163" end="175" title="dictionaries" label="dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="179" end="187" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="245" end="264" title="totally ordered set" label="totally ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="511" end="524" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="533" end="539" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="552" end="562" title="finite set" label="finite set"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="637" end="657" title="Sequence#Increasing_and_decreasing" label="increasing sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="766" end="783" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="787" end="808" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="944" end="951" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="1031" end="1043" title="dictionaries" label="dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="1048" end="1061" title="encyclopedias" label="encyclopedias"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="1294" end="1304" title="finite set" label="finite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q837518" start="1324" end="1332" title="alphabet (formal languages)" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="1343" end="1358" title="totally ordered" label="totally ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="2351" end="2364" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q659746" start="3049" end="3059" title="well-order" label="well-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="3599" end="3619" title="Roman numeral system" label="Roman numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747853" start="3730" end="3749" title="positional notation" label="positional notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="3757" end="3784" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="Hindu–Arabic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="3842" end="3856" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502202" start="3885" end="3893" title="shortlex order" label="shortlex"/>
<link wikidata="Q82990" start="4006" end="4021" title="numerical digit" label="numerical digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="4232" end="4243" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="4256" end="4272" title="decimal notation" label="decimal notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="4762" end="4770" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q232577" start="4848" end="4869" title="two&amp;#x27;s complement" label="two&amp;#x27;s complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="4902" end="4916" title="signed integer" label="signed integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="5016" end="5024" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q130788" start="5222" end="5241" title="chronological order" label="chronological order"/>
<link wikidata="Q181593" start="5362" end="5382" title="sorting algorithm" label="computerized sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500266" start="5504" end="5515" title="free monoid" label="free monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="5694" end="5707" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626534" start="5730" end="5736" title="prefix (computer science)" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="6103" end="6112" title="Partial order" label="partially"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="6116" end="6131" title="total order" label="totally ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q659746" start="6625" end="6635" title="well-order" label="well-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="6708" end="6716" title="Formal language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="7219" end="7236" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="7675" end="7696" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="7832" end="7847" title="Total order" label="totally ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553442" start="7955" end="7971" title="linear extension" label="linear extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247786" start="7981" end="7994" title="product order" label="product order"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="8142" end="8156" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="8442" end="8460" title="countably infinite" label="countably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q616653" start="8568" end="8580" title="Cantor space" label="Cantor space"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="8783" end="8808" title="infinite descending chain" label="infinite descending chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q338021" start="8863" end="8873" title="Noetherian relation" label="Noetherian"/>
<link wikidata="Q659746" start="8983" end="8999" title="well-ordered set" label="well-ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="9016" end="9035" title="totally ordered set" label="totally ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="9538" end="9551" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="9608" end="9621" title="finite subset" label="finite subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303697" start="9708" end="9715" title="sorting" label="sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="9980" end="9991" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502202" start="10008" end="10022" title="shortlex order" label="shortlex order"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="10309" end="10323" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528262" start="10386" end="10401" title="initial segment" label="initial segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q997521" start="10463" end="10480" title="order isomorphism" label="order isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454111" start="10761" end="10779" title="free Abelian group" label="free Abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681347" start="10873" end="10881" title="Additive group" label="addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q10292020" start="10885" end="10896" title="Totally ordered group" label="group order"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="10916" end="10927" title="total order" label="total order"/>
<link wikidata="Q261527" start="11159" end="11170" title="linear form" label="linear form"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="11177" end="11181" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="11277" end="11297" title="linearly independent" label="linearly independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528262" start="12898" end="12913" title="initial segment" label="initial segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q997521" start="13023" end="13040" title="order isomorphism" label="order isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="13134" end="13147" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527102" start="13181" end="13203" title="Kruskal–Katona theorem" label="Kruskal–Katona theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="13238" end="13248" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="13348" end="13357" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068675" start="13368" end="13392" title="polynomial long division" label="polynomial long division"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="13471" end="13494" title="multivariate polynomial" label="multivariate polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="13513" end="13526" title="Gröbner bases" label="Gröbner bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q934509" start="13566" end="13580" title="monomial order" label="monomial order"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="13592" end="13603" title="total order" label="total order"/>
<link wikidata="Q208237" start="13634" end="13640" title="monoid" label="monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q243723" start="13658" end="13667" title="monomials" label="monomials"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14132" end="14144" title="tangent cone#Definition in algebraic geometry" label="tangent cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473607" start="14788" end="14800" title="total degree" label="total degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474074" start="15910" end="15932" title="homogeneous polynomial" label="homogeneous polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="16093" end="16102" title="Collation" label="Collation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420094" start="16105" end="16125" title="Kleene–Brouwer order" label="Kleene–Brouwer order"/>
<link wikidata="Q138159" start="16128" end="16153" title="Lexicographic preferences" label="Lexicographic preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q116867495" start="16210" end="16236" title="Lexicographic optimization" label="Lexicographic optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537714" start="16312" end="16359" title="Lexicographic order topology on the unit square" label="Lexicographic order topology on the unit square"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16362" end="16418" title="Abstract index notation#Braiding" label="Lexicographic ordering in tensor abstract index notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537716" start="16421" end="16462" title="Lexicographically minimal string rotation" label="Lexicographically minimal string rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860568" start="16465" end="16478" title="Leximin order" label="Leximin order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804923" start="16481" end="16501" title="Long line (topology)" label="Long line (topology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878827" start="16504" end="16515" title="Lyndon word" label="Lyndon word"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16518" end="16527" title="Tree_traversal#Pre-order,_NLR" label="Pre-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q380172" start="16583" end="16594" title="binary tree" label="binary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601281" start="16607" end="16619" title="Star product" label="Star product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502202" start="16667" end="16681" title="Shortlex order" label="Shortlex order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16684" end="16739" title="Total order#Orders on the Cartesian product of totally ordered sets" label="Orders on the Cartesian product of totally ordered sets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="567669" wikidata="Q920430" url="?curid=567669" title="List of members of the Académie française">
<text>This is a list of members of the Académie française (French Academy) by seat number. The primary professions of the academicians are noted. The dates shown indicate the terms of the members, who generally serve for life. Some, however, were &quot;excluded&quot; during the reorganisations of 1803 and 1816 and at other times.

== List of current members ==

==Seat 1==

# Pierre Séguier, 1635–1643, politician and magistrate
# Claude Bazin de Bezons, 1643–1684, lawyer
# Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux, 1684–1711, poet
# Jean d&#x27;Estrées, 1711–1718, ecclesiastic and politician
# Marc-René d&#x27;Argenson, 1718–1721, politician
# Jean-Joseph Languet de Gergy, 1721–1753, ecclesiastic
# Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, 1753–1788, essayist
# Félix Vicq-d&#x27;Azyr, 1788–1794, medical doctor
# François-Urbain Domergue, 1803–1810, grammarian
# Ange-François Fariau, 1810, poet and translator
# François-Auguste Parseval-Grandmaison, 1811–1834, poet
# Narcisse-Achille de Salvandy, 1835–1856, politician and historian
# Émile Augier, 1857–1889, poet and playwright
# Charles de Freycinet, 1890–1923, politician and physicist
# Charles Émile Picard, 1924–1941, mathematician
# Louis de Broglie, 1944–1987, physicist and mathematician
# Michel Debré, 1988–1996, politician
# François Furet, 1997, historian
# René Rémond, 1998–2007, historian
# Claude Dagens, elected 2008, ecclesiastic

==Seat 2==

# Valentin Conrart, 1634–1675, poet and grammarian
# Toussaint Rose, 1675–1701, orator
# Louis de Sacy, 1701–1727, lawyer
# Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu, 1728–1755, magistrate and philosopher
# Jean-Baptiste Vivien de Châteaubrun, 1755–1775, poet and playwright
# François-Jean de Chastellux, 1775–1788, military officer
# Aimar-Charles-Marie de Nicolaï, 1788–1794, magistrate
# Nicolas François de Neufchâteau, 1803–1828, politician and philologist
# Pierre-Antoine Lebrun, 1828–1873, politician and poet
# Alexandre Dumas, fils, 1874–1895, playwright and novelist
# André Theuriet, 1896–1907, novelist and poet
# Jean Richepin, 1908–1926, poet and novelist
# Émile Mâle, 1927–1954, art historian
# François Albert-Buisson, 1955–1961, magistrate and politician
# Marc Boegner, 1962–1970, ecclesiastic and theologian
# René de La Croix de Castries, 1972–1986, historian
# André Frossard, 1987–1995, essayist and journalist
# Hector Bianciotti, 1996–2012, novelist
# Dany Laferrière, elected 2013, writer

==Seat 3==

# Jacques de Serisay, 1634–1653, poet
# Paul-Philippe de Chaumont, 1654–1697, ecclesiastic
# Louis Cousin, 1697–1707, historian and journalist
# Jacques-Louis de Valon, marquis de Mimeure, 1707–1719, poet and translator
# Nicolas Gédoyn, 1719–1744, ecclesiastic
# François-Joachim de Pierre de Bernis, 1744–1794, ecclesiastic
# Roch-Ambroise Cucurron Sicard, 1803–1822, ecclesiastic and grammarian
# Denis-Luc Frayssinous, 1822–1841, ecclesiastic
# Étienne-Denis Pasquier, 1842–1862, politician
# Jules Armand Dufaure, 1863–1881, politician and lawyer
# Victor Cherbuliez, 1881–1899, novelist and playwright
# Émile Faguet, 1900–1916, literary critic and historian
# Georges Clemenceau, 1918–1929, politician and doctor
# André Chaumeix, 1930–1955, journalist and critic
# Jérôme Carcopino, 1955–1970, historian and archaeologist
# Roger Caillois, 1971–1978, essayist and sociologist
# Marguerite Yourcenar, 1980–1987, novelist and essayist
# Jean-Denis Bredin, 1989–2021, magistrate and essayist

==Seat 4==

# Jean Desmarets, 1634–1676, poet and novelist
# Jean-Jacques de Mesmes, 1676–1688, magistrate
# Jean Testu de Mauroy, 1688–1706, ecclesiastic
# Camille le Tellier de Louvois, 1706–1718, ecclesiastic
# Jean Baptiste Massillon, 1718–1742, ecclesiastic
# Louis Jules Mancini Mazarini, Duc de Nivernais, 1742–1798, politician and poet
# Gabriel-Marie Legouvé, 1803–1812, poet
# Alexandre-Vincent Pineux Duval, 1812–1842, poet and playwright
# Pierre-Simon Ballanche, 1842–1847, philosopher
# Jean Vatout, 1848, poet
# Alexis Guignard, comte de Saint-Priest, 1849–1851, politician and historian
# Antoine Pierre Berryer, 1852–1868, lawyer
# François-Joseph de Champagny, 1869–1882, historian
# Charles de Mazade, 1882–1893, poet and critic
# José-Maria de Heredia, 1894–1905, poet
# Maurice Barrès, 1906–1923, novelist and politician
# Louis Bertrand, 1925–1941, novelist and historian
# Jean Tharaud, 1946–1952, novelist
# Alphonse Juin, 1952–1967, soldier
# Pierre Emmanuel, 1968–1984, poet
# Jean Hamburger, 1985–1992, doctor and essayist
# Albert Decourtray, 1993–1994, ecclesiastic
# Jean-Marie Lustiger, 1995–2007, ecclesiastic
# Jean-Luc Marion, elected 2008, philosopher and academic

==Seat 5==

# Jean Ogier de Gombauld, 1634–1666, poet and playwright
# Paul Tallement le Jeune, 1666–1712, ecclesiastic
# Antoine Danchet, 1712–1748, playwright and poet
# Jean-Baptiste-Louis Gresset, 1748–1777, playwright
# Claude-François-Xavier Millot, 1777–1785, ecclesiastic
# André Morellet, 1785–1819, ecclesiastic
# Pierre-Édouard Lémontey, 1819–1826, politician and lawyer
# Joseph Fourier, 1826–1830, mathematician and physicist
# Victor Cousin, 1830–1867, politician and philosopher
# Jules Favre, 1867–1880, politician and lawyer
# Edmond Rousse, 1880–1906, lawyer
# Pierre de Ségur, 1907–1916, historian
# Robert de Flers, 1920–1927, playwright and journalist
# Louis Madelin, 1927–1956, historian
# Robert Kemp, 1956–1959, literary and dramatic critic
# René Huyghe, 1960–1997, art historian and essayist
# Georges Vedel, 1998–2002, magistrate
# Assia Djebar, 2005–2015, author
# Andreï Makine, elected 2016, author

== Seat 6 ==

# François le Métel de Boisrobert, 1634–1662, ecclesiastic and poet
# Jean Regnault de Segrais, 1662–1701, poet and novelist
# Jean Galbert de Campistron, 1701–1723, playwright
# Philippe Néricault Destouches, 1723–1754, playwright and diplomat
# Louis de Boissy, 1754–1758, poet
# Jean-Baptiste de La Curne de Sainte-Palaye, 1758–1781, archaeologist
# Sébastien-Roch-Nicolas (Chamfort), 1781–1794, playwright and publisher
# Pierre Louis Roederer, 1803–1815, politician and lawyer
# Pierre Marc Gaston de Lévis, Duke of Lévis, 1816–1830, politician
# Philippe Paul, comte de Ségur, 1830–1873, diplomat and historian
# Charles de Viel-Castel, 1873–1887, diplomat
# Edmond Jurien de La Gravière, 1888–1892, admiral
# Ernest Lavisse, 1892–1922, historian
# Georges de Porto-Riche, 1923–1930, playwright and poet
# Pierre Benoît, 1931–1962, novelist
# Jean Paulhan, 1963–1968, literary and art critic
# Eugène Ionesco, 1970–1994, playwright
# Marc Fumaroli, 1995–2020, historian and essayist
# Christian Jambet, elected 2024, philosopher

==Seat 7==

# Jean Chapelain, 1634–1674, royal advisor
# Isaac de Benserade, 1674–1691, poet and playwright
# Étienne Pavillon, 1691–1705, lawyer and poet
# Fabio Brulart de Sillery, 1705–1714, ecclesiastic and poet
# Henri-Jacques Nompar de Caumont, duc de La Force, 1715–1726, economist
# Jean-Baptiste de Mirabaud, 1726–1760, translator
# Claude-Henri Watelet, 1760–1786, painter
# Michel-Jean Sedaine, 1786–1793, poet and playwright
# Jean-François Collin d&#x27;Harleville, 1803–1806, playwright and poet
# Pierre Daru, 1806–1829, politician and historian
# Alphonse de Lamartine, 1829–1869, politician and poet
# Émile Ollivier, 1870–1913, politician and lawyer
# Henri Bergson, 1914–1941, philosopher
# Édouard Le Roy, 1945–1954, philosopher and mathematician
# Henri Petiot (Daniel-Rops), 1955–1965, poet and novelist
# Pierre-Henri Simon, 1966–1972, literary historian and novelist
# André Roussin, 1973–1987, playwright
# Jacqueline de Romilly, 1988–2010, philologist and essayist
# Jules Hoffmann, elected 2012, biologist

==Seat 8==

# Claude de Malleville, 1634–1647, poet
# Jean Ballesdens, 1648–1675, lawyer
# Géraud de Cordemoy, 1675–1684, philosopher and historian
# Jean-Louis Bergeret, 1684–1694, lawyer
# Charles-Irénée Castel de Saint-Pierre, 1694–1743, ecclesiastic
# Pierre Louis Maupertuis, 1743–1759, astronomer
# Jean-Jacques Lefranc, Marquis de Pompignan, 1759–1784, magistrate and economist
# Jean-Sifrein Maury, 1784–1793, ecclesiastic and politician 
# Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d&#x27;Angély, 1803–1814, politician and lawyer
# Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1816–1827, politician and mathematician
# Pierre Paul Royer-Collard, 1827–1845, politician
# Charles de Rémusat, 1846–1875, politician and philosopher
# Jules Simon, 1875–1896, politician and philosopher
# Adrien Albert Marie de Mun, 1897–1914, politician and soldier
# Alfred-Henri-Marie Baudrillart, 1918–1942, ecclesiastic and historian
# Octave Aubry, 1946–1946, historian and bureaucrat
# Édouard Herriot, 1946–1957, politician and literary historian
# Jean Rostand, 1959–1977, biologist and philosopher
# Michel Déon, 1978–2016, novelist
# Daniel Rondeau, elected 2019, writer and diplomat

==Seat 9==

# Nicolas Faret, 1634–1646, poet
# Pierre du Ryer, 1646–1658, playwright
# César d&#x27;Estrées, 1658–1714, ecclesiastic and politician
# Victor-Marie d&#x27;Estrées, 1715–1737, politician and soldier
# Charles Armand René de La Trémoille, 1738–1741, aristocrat
# Armand de Rohan-Soubise, 1741–1756, ecclesiastic
# Antoine de Montazet, 1756–1788, ecclesiastic
# Stanislas de Boufflers, 1788–1815, poet
# Pierre-Marie-François Baour-Lormian, 1815–1854, poet and playwright
# François Ponsard, 1855–1867, playwright
# Joseph Autran, 1868–1877, poet
# Victorien Sardou, 1877–1908, playwright
# Marcel Prévost, 1909–1941, novelist
# Émile Henriot, 1945–1961, novelist and literary critic
# Jean Guéhenno, 1962–1978, essayist
# Alain Decaux, 1979–2016, historian
# Patrick Grainville, elected 2018, novelist

==Seat 10==

# Antoine Godeau, 1634–1672, ecclesiastic and poet
# Esprit Fléchier, 1672–1710, ecclesiastic
# Henri de Nesmond, 1710–1727, ecclesiastic
# Jean-Jacques Amelot de Chaillou, 1727–1749, politician
# Charles Louis Auguste Fouquet, duc de Belle-Isle, 1749–1761, politician and soldier
# Nicolas-Charles-Joseph Trublet, 1761–1770, ecclesiastic
# Jean François de Saint-Lambert, 1770–1793, poet and philosopher
# Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano, 1803–1815, politician and diplomat
# Joseph Lainé, 1816–1835, politician and magistrate
# Emmanuel Dupaty, 1836–1851, poet and playwright
# Alfred de Musset, 1852–1857, playwright and poet
# Victor de Laprade, 1858–1883, poet
# François Coppée, 1884–1908, poet and novelist
# Jean Aicard, 1909–1921, poet and novelist
# Camille Jullian, 1924–1933, historian and philologist
# Léon Bérard, 1934–1960, politician and lawyer
# Jean Guitton, 1961–1999, theologian and philosopher
# Florence Delay, elected 2000, novelist and playwright

==Seat 11==

# Philippe Habert, 1634–1638, poet
# Jacques Esprit, 1639–1678, politician
# Jacques-Nicolas Colbert, 1678–1707, ecclesiastic
# Claude-François Fraguier, 1707–1728, ecclesiastic
# Charles d&#x27;Orléans de Rothelin, 1728–1744, ecclesiastic
# Gabriel Girard, 1744–1748, ecclesiastic
# Marc-Antoine-René de Voyer d&#x27;Argenson de Paulmy, 1748–1787, politician
# Henri-Cardin-Jean-Baptiste d&#x27;Aguesseau, 1787–1826, politician
# Charles Brifaut, 1826–1857, poet and playwright
# Jules Sandeau, 1858–1883, novelist and playwright
# Edmond François Valentin About, 1884–1885, novelist and playwright
# Léon Say, 1886–1896, politician and economist
# Albert Vandal, 1896–1910, historian
# Denys Cochin, 1911–1922, politician
# Georges Goyau, 1922–1939, historian
# Paul Hazard, 1940–1944, historian and philosopher
# Maurice Garçon, 1946–1967, lawyer, novelist and historian
# Paul Morand, 1968–1976, diplomat, novelist, playwright and poet
# Alain Peyrefitte, 1977–1999, scholar and politician
# Gabriel de Broglie, 2001–2025, historian

==Seat 12==

# Germain Habert, 1634–1654, ecclesiastic
# Charles Cotin, 1655–1681, ecclesiastic
# Louis de Courcillon, 1682–1723, ecclesiastic and politician
# Charles Jean-Baptiste Fleuriau, 1723–1732, politician
# Jean Terrasson, 1732–1750, ecclesiastic and philosopher
# Claude de Thiard de Bissy, 1750–1810, soldier
# Joseph-Alphonse Esménard, 1810–1811, politician
# Jean Charles Dominique de Lacretelle, 1811–1855, historian
# Jean-Baptiste Biot, 1856–1862, scientist and mathematician
# Louis de Carné, 1863–1876, historian and politician
# Charles Blanc, 1876–1882, art critic
# Édouard Pailleron, 1882–1899, poet and playwright
# Paul Hervieu, 1900–1915, novelist and playwright
# François, Vicomte de Curel, 1918–1928, playwright
# Charles Le Goffic, 1930–1932, novelist and historian
# Abel Bonnard, 1932–1945, poet, novelist and politician; expelled for his collaboration with the Vichy French regime
# Jules Romains, 1946–1972, novelist, playwright and poet
# Jean d&#x27;Ormesson, 1973–2017, novelist
# Chantal Thomas, elected 2021, writer and historian

==Seat 13==

# Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac, 1634–1638, grammarian and mathematician
# François de La Mothe Le Vayer, 1639–1672, critic, grammarian and philosopher
# Jean Racine, 1672–1699, playwright, mathematician, physicist and doctor
# Jean-Baptiste-Henri de Valincour, 1699–1730, historiographer and admiral
# Jean-François Leriget de La Faye, 1730–1731, politician
# Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon, 1731–1762, playwright
# Claude-Henri de Fusée de Voisenon, 1762–1775, ecclesiastic, playwright and poet
# Jean de Dieu-Raymond de Cucé de Boisgelin, 1776–1804, ecclesiastic
# Jean-Baptiste Dureau de la Malle, 1804–1807, translator
# Louis-Benoît Picard, 1807–1828, comedian, poet, novelist and playwright
# Antoine-Vincent Arnault, 1829–1834, poet, fabulist and playwright 
# Eugène Scribe, 1834–1861, playwright
# Octave Feuillet, 1862–1890, novelist and playwright
# Pierre Loti, 1891–1923, novelist and soldier
# Paul-Albert Besnard, 1924–1934, painter and engraver
# Louis Gillet, 1935–1943, historian of art and literature
# Paul Claudel, 1946–1955, poet, playwright, novelist and diplomat
# Wladimir d&#x27;Ormesson, 1956–1973, politician, chronicler and novelist
# Maurice Schumann, 1974–1998, politician, essayist, journalist, novelist and historian
# Pierre Messmer, 1999–2007, soldier and politician
# Simone Veil, 2008–2017, lawyer and politician
# Maurizio Serra, elected 2020, writer and diplomat

==Seat 14==

# François Maynard, 1634–1646, magistrate and poet
# Pierre Corneille, 1647–1684, playwright and lawyer
# Thomas Corneille, 1684–1709, playwright
# Antoine Houdar de la Motte, 1710–1731, playwright
# Michel-Celse-Roger de Bussy-Rabutin, 1732–1736, ecclesiastic
# Étienne Lauréault de Foncemagne, 1736–1779, ecclesiastic
# Michel Paul Guy de Chabanon, 1779–1792, playwright
# Jacques-André Naigeon, 1803–1810, encyclopaedist
# Népomucène Lemercier, 1810–1840, poet and playwright
# Victor Hugo, 1841–1885, poet, playwright and novelist
# Leconte de Lisle, 1886–1894, poet and playwright
# Henry Houssaye, 1894–1911, historian and novelist
# Hubert Lyautey, 1912–1934, soldier
# Louis Franchet d&#x27;Espèrey, 1934–1942, politician and soldier
# Robert d&#x27;Harcourt, 1946–1965, literary historian and essayist
# Jean Mistler, 1966–1988, novelist, essayist, literary historian, music critic and politician
# Hélène Carrère d&#x27;Encausse, 1990–2023, historian

==Seat 15==

# Guillaume Bautru, 1634–1665, politician
# Jacques Testu de Belval, 1665–1706, ecclesiastic and poet
# François-Joseph de Beaupoil de Sainte-Aulaire, 1706–1742, soldier and poet
# Jean-Jacques d&#x27;Ortous de Mairan, 1743–1771, physicist and mathematician
# François Arnaud, 1771–1784, ecclesiastic
# Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target, 1785–1806, magistrate
# Jean-Sifrein Maury, 1806 - excluded by ordinance in 1816, ecclesiastic and politician 
# François-Xavier-Marc-Antoine de Montesquiou-Fézensac, 1816–1832, ecclesiastic and politician
# Antoine Jay, 1832–1854, politician
# Ustazade Silvestre de Sacy, 1854–1879, literary critic
# Eugène Marin Labiche, 1880–1888, playwright and novelist
# Henri Meilhac, 1888–1897, playwright
# Henri Lavedan, 1898–1940, playwright and novelist
# Ernest Seillière, 1946–1955, historian of literature and of philosophy, and essayist
# André Chamson, 1956–1983, novelist, essayist and historian
# Fernand Braudel, 1984–1985, historian of civilisations
# Jacques Laurent, 1986–2000, novelist, essayist and journalist
# Frédéric Vitoux, elected 2001, writer and journalist

==Seat 16==

# Jean Sirmond, 1634–1649, historiographer
# Jean de Montereul, 1649–1651, ecclesiastic
# François Tallemant l&#x27;Aîné, 1651–1693, ecclesiastic
# Simon de la Loubère, 1693–1729, diplomat and poet
# Claude Sallier, 1729–1761, ecclesiastic and philologist
# Jean-Gilles du Coëtlosquet, 1761–1784, ecclesiastic
# Anne-Pierre, marquis de Montesquiou-Fézensac, 1784–1793, politician
# Antoine-Vincent Arnault, 1803, excluded by ordinance in 1816, re-elected in 1829 to seat 13, poet, fabulist and playwright
# Armand-Emmanuel de Vignerot du Plessis, Duc de Richelieu, 1816–1822, politician
# Bon-Joseph Dacier, 1822–1833, philologist
# Pierre François Tissot, 1833–1854, poet and historian
# Félix Dupanloup, 1854–1878, ecclesiastic
# Gaston Audiffret-Pasquier, 1878–1905, politician
# Alexandre Ribot, 1906–1923, politician, lawyer, magistrate and jurist
# Henri-Robert, 1923–1936, lawyer and historian
# Charles Maurras, 1938, not excluded, but seat &quot;declared vacant&quot; for Vichy collaboration in 1945, journalist, politician, essayist and poet
# Antoine de Lévis Mirepoix, 1953–1981, novelist, historian and essayist
# Léopold Sédar Senghor, 1983–2001, head of state (Senegal), politician, poet and essayist
# Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing, 2003–2020, former president of France
# Raphaël Gaillard, elected 2024, psychiatrist and teacher

==Seat 17==

# François de Cauvigny de Colomby, 1634–1649, poet
# François Tristan l&#x27;Hermite, 1649–1655, playwright and poet
# Hippolyte-Jules Pilet de La Mesnardière, 1655–1663, critic, poet and historian
# François de Beauvilliers, 1st duc de Saint-Aignan, 1663–1687, soldier
# François-Timoléon de Choisy, 1687–1724, ecclesiastic
# Antoine Portail, 1724–1736, politician
# Pierre-Claude Nivelle de La Chaussée, 1736–1754, playwright
# Jean-Pierre de Bougainville, 1754–1763, historian
# Jean-François Marmontel, 1763–1793, philosopher and essayist
# Louis-Marcelin de Fontanes, 1803–1821, politician, poet and journalist
# Abel-François Villemain, 1821–1870, politician and literary critic
# Émile Littré, 1871–1881, philologist and philosopher
# Louis Pasteur, 1881–1895, chemist
# Gaston Paris, 1896–1903, philologist and literary historian
# Frédéric Masson, 1903–1923, historian
# Georges Lecomte, 1924–1958, novelist, essayist, art critic and historian
# Jean Delay, 1959–1987, psychiatrist, essayist and novelist
# Jacques Cousteau, 1988–1997, oceanographer, film-maker and essayist
# Érik Orsenna, elected 1998, politician and novelist

==Seat 18==

# Jean Baudoin, 1634–1650, translator
# François Charpentier, 1650–1702, novelist
# Jean-François de Chamillart, 1702–1714, ecclesiastic
# Claude Louis Hector de Villars, 1714–1734, politician and soldier
# Honoré Armand de Villars, 1734–1770, politician
# Étienne Charles de Loménie de Brienne, 1770–1794, ecclesiastic, politician and philosopher
# Jean-Gérard Lacuée, count of Cessac, 1803–1841, politician
# Alexis de Tocqueville, 1841–1859, politician
# Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire, 1860–1861, ecclesiastic
# Albert, 4th duc de Broglie, 1862–1901, politician, diplomat and historian
# Charles-Jean-Melchior de Vogüé, 1901–1916, archaeologist and historian
# Ferdinand Foch, 1918–1929, soldier
# Philippe Pétain, 1929–1945, soldier (expelled from the Academy after trial; from 1945 to 1952, the seat was vacant)
# André François-Poncet, 1952–1978, politician and diplomat
# Edgar Faure, 1978–1988, politician and historian
# Michel Serres, 1990–2019, philosopher
# Mario Vargas Llosa, elected 2021, novelist and essayist

==Seat 19==

# François de Porchères d&#x27;Arbaud, 1634–1640, poet
# Olivier Patru, 1640–1681, lawyer
# Nicolas Potier de Novion, 1681–1693, magistrate
# Philippe Goibaud-Dubois, 1693–1694, translator
# Charles Boileau, 1694–1704, ecclesiastic
# Gaspard Abeille, 1704–1718, ecclesiastic
# Nicolas-Hubert de Mongault, 1718–1746, ecclesiastic
# Charles Pinot Duclos, 1746–1772, grammarian and historian
# Nicolas Beauzée, 1772–1789, grammarian
# Jean-Jacques Barthélemy, 1789–1795, ecclesiastic
# Joseph Chénier, 1803–1811, poet and playwright
# François-René de Chateaubriand, 1811–1848, politician, poet and novelist
# Paul, 6th duc de Noailles, 1849–1885, historian
# Édouard Hervé, 1886–1899, politician
# Paul Deschanel, 1899–1922, politician
# Auguste Jonnart, 1923–1927, politician, senior bureaucrat and diplomat
# Maurice Paléologue, 1928–1944, diplomat and historian
# Charles de Chambrun, 1946–1952, diplomat
# Fernand Gregh, 1953–1960, poet, literary critic and historian
# René Clair, 1960–1981, film director and novelist
# Pierre Moinot, 1982–2007, senior bureaucrat and novelist
# Jean-Loup Dabadie, 2008–2020, journalist, lyricist and screenwriter
# Sylviane Agacinski, elected 2023, philosopher

==Seat 20==

# Paul Hay du Chastelet, 1634–1636, lawyer
# Nicolas Perrot d&#x27;Ablancourt, 1637–1664, translator
# Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy, 1665–1693, novelist
# Jean-Paul Bignon, 1693–1743, ecclesiastic
# Armand-Jérôme Bignon, 1743–1772, politician
# Louis-Georges de Bréquigny, 1772–1795, historian
# Ponce Denis Écouchard Lebrun, 1803–1807, poet
# François Juste Marie Raynouard, 1807–1836, lawyer, poet and playwright
# François Mignet, 1836–1884, historian
# Victor Duruy, 1884–1894, politician and historian
# Jules Lemaître, 1895–1914, playwright and critic
# Henry Bordeaux, 1919–1963, lawyer and novelist
# Thierry Maulnier, 1964–1988, journalist and playwright
# José Cabanis, 1990–2000, magistrate and novelist
# Angelo Rinaldi, elected 2001, writer

==Seat 21==

# Marin le Roy de Gomberville, 1634–1674, novelist
# Pierre Daniel Huet, 1674–1721, ecclesiastic
# Jean Boivin le Cadet, 1721–1726, professor
# Paul-Hippolyte de Beauvilliers, duke of Saint-Aignan, 1726–1776, politician
# Charles-Pierre Colardeau, 1776, poet and playwright
# Jean-François de La Harpe, 1776–1793, poet, playwright and critic
# Pierre Louis de Lacretelle, 1803–1824, lawyer
# Joseph Droz, 1824–1850, philosopher and historian
# Charles Forbes René de Montalembert, 1851–1870, philosopher
# Henri d&#x27;Orleans, duke of Aumale, 1871–1897, soldier, politician and historian
# Jean-Baptiste Claude Eugène Guillaume, 1898–1905, sculptor
# Étienne Lamy, 1905–1919, essayist, politician and lawyer
# André Chevrillon, 1920–1957, essayist and literary historian and critic
# Marcel Achard, 1959–1974, playwright and journalist
# Félicien Marceau, 1975–2012, playwright, novelist and essayist
# Alain Finkielkraut, elected 2014, philosopher and essayist

==Seat 22==

# Antoine Girard de Saint-Amant, 1634–1661, poet
# Jacques Cassagne, 1662–1679, ecclesiastic and poet
# Louis de Verjus, 1679–1709, politician
# Jean-Antoine de Mesmes, 1710–1723, magistrate
# Pierre-Joseph Alary, 1723–1770, ecclesiastic
# Gabriel-Henri Gaillard, 1771–1806, ecclesiastic, historian, grammarian and journalist
# Louis Philippe, comte de Ségur, 1806–1830, diplomat, historian, poet and playwright
# Jean-Pons-Guillaume Viennet, 1830–1868, politician, poet and playwright
# Joseph d&#x27;Haussonville, 1869–1884, politician and diplomat
# Ludovic Halévy, 1884–1908, playwright, librettist and novelist
# Eugène Brieux, 1909–1932, playwright
# François Mauriac, 1933–1970, writer, essayist and literary critic
# Julien Green, 1971–1998, novelist and playwright
# René de Obaldia, 1999–2022, playwright and poet

==Seat 23==

# Guillaume Colletet, 1634–1659, lawyer and playwright
# Gilles Boileau, 1659–1669, poet
# Jean de Montigny, 1670–1671, ecclesiastic and poet
# Charles Perrault, 1671–1703, poet
# Armand Gaston Maximilien de Rohan, 1703–1749, ecclesiastic and politician
# Louis-Gui de Guérapin de Vauréal, 1749–1760, ecclesiastic and politician
# Charles Marie de La Condamine, 1760–1774, explorer
# Jacques Delille, 1774–1813, ecclesiastic and poet
# François-Nicolas-Vincent Campenon, 1813–1843, poet
# Marc Girardin, 1844–1873, politician and literary critic
# Alfred Mézières, 1874–1915, literary historian, politician and essayist
# René Boylesve, 1918–1926, novelist and poet
# Abel Hermant, 1927–1945, novelist, essayist and journalist
# Étienne Gilson, 1946–1978, philosopher
# Henri Gouhier, 1979–1994, philosopher and literary critic
# Pierre Rosenberg, elected 1995, art historian and essayist

==Seat 24==

# Jean de Silhon, 1634–1667, politician
# Jean-Baptiste Colbert, 1667–1683, politician
# Jean de La Fontaine, 1684–1695, poet
# Jules de Clérambault, 1695–1714, ecclesiastic
# Guillaume Massieu, 1714–1722, ecclesiastic
# Claude-François-Alexandre Houtteville, 1722–1742, ecclesiastic
# Pierre de Marivaux, 1742–1763, playwright and novelist
# Claude-François Lysarde de Radonvilliers, 1763–1789, ecclesiastic
# Constantin-François Chassebœuf, 1803–1820, philosopher
# Claude-Emmanuel de Pastoret, 1820–1840, politician, lawyer and poet
# Louis de Beaupoil de Saint-Aulaire, 1841–1854, politician
# Victor de Broglie, 1855–1870, politician
# Prosper Duvergier de Hauranne, 1870–1881, politician
# Sully Prudhomme, 1881–1907, poet and essayist
# Henri Poincaré, 1908–1912, mathematician, astronomer, engineer and philosopher
# Alfred Capus, 1914–1922, playwright, journalist and essayist
# Édouard Estaunié, 1923–1942, novelist and engineer
# Louis-Pasteur Vallery-Radot, 1944–1970, doctor
# Étienne Wolff, 1971–1996, biologist
# Jean-François Revel, 1997–2006, historian and essayist
# Max Gallo, 2007–2017, journalist and novelist
# François Sureau, elected 2020, writer

==Seat 25==

#Claude de L&#x27;Estoile, 1634–1652, playwright and poet
#Armand de Camboust, duc de Coislin, 1652–1702, soldier
#Pierre de Camboust, duc de Coislin, 1702–1710, aristocrat
#Henri Charles du Cambout de Coislin, 1710–1732, ecclesiastic
#Jean-Baptiste Surian, 1733–1754, ecclesiastic
#Jean Le Rond, dit d&#x27;Alembert, 1754–1783, philosopher and mathematician
#Marie-Gabriel-Florent-Auguste de Choiseul-Gouffier, 1783–1793, biographer
#Jean-Étienne-Marie Portalis, 1803–1807, politician, philosopher and lawyer
#Pierre Laujon, 1807–1811, poet and songwriter
# Charles-Guillaume Étienne, 1811–1816, poet and playwright, excluded by ordinance 
#Marie-Gabriel-Florent-Auguste de Choiseul-Gouffier, (2nd time), 1816–1817
#Jean-Louis Laya, 1817–1833, poet and playwright
#Charles Nodier, 1833–1844, novelist, poet and grammarian
#Prosper Mérimée, 1844–1870, novelist
#Louis de Loménie, 1871–1878, essayist
#Hippolyte Taine, 1878–1893, essayist and historian
#Albert Sorel, 1894–1906, historian
#Maurice Donnay, 1907–1945, playwright
#Marcel Pagnol, 1946–1974, playwright, film-maker and novelist
# Jean Bernard, 1976–2006, medical doctor
#Dominique Fernandez, elected 2007, novelist and literary critic

==Seat 26==

# Amable de Bourzeys, 1634–1672, ecclesiastic and scholar
# Jean Gallois, 1672–1707, ecclesiastic
# Edme Mongin, 1707–1746, ecclesiastic
# Jean Ignace de La Ville, 1746–1774, ecclesiastic and diplomat
# Jean-Baptiste-Antoine Suard, 1774–1817, essayist
# Jean-François Roger, 1817–1842, poet and playwright
# Henri Patin, 1842–1876, professor
# Marie-Louis-Antoine-Gaston Boissier, 1876–1908, historian and philologist
# René Doumic, 1909–1937, literary historian and critic, and essayist
# André Maurois, 1938–1967, novelist, essayist, literary historian and critic
# Marcel Arland, 1968–1986, novelist, essayist, literary historian and critic
# Georges Duby, 1987–1996, historian
# Jean-Marie Rouart, elected 1997, novelist and essayist

==Seat 27==

# Abel Servien, 1634–1659, politician
# Jean-Jacques Renouard de Villayer, 1659–1691, politician
# Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle, 1691–1757, playwright and philosopher
# Antoine-Louis Séguier, 1757–1792, lawyer
# Jacques-Henri Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, 1803–1814, essayist
# Étienne Aignan, 1814–1824, journalist and playwright
# Alexandre Soumet, 1824–1845, poet and playwright
# Ludovic Vitet, 1845–1873, archaeologist
# Elme Marie Caro, 1874–1887, philosopher
# Gabriel Paul Othenin de Cléron, comte d&#x27;Haussonville, 1888–1924, politician and lawyer
# Auguste-Armand de la Force, 1925–1961 historian
# Joseph Kessel, 1962–1979, journalist and novelist
# Michel Droit, 1980–2001, novelist
# Pierre Nora, elected 2001, historian

==Seat 28==

# Jean-Louis Guez de Balzac, 1634–1654, essayist
# Paul Hardouin de Péréfixe de Beaumont, 1654–1670, ecclesiastic and historian
# François de Harlay de Champvallon, 1671–1695, ecclesiastic
# André Dacier, 1695–1722, philologist and translator
# Guillaume Dubois, 1722–1723, ecclesiastic and politician
# Charles-Jean-François Hénault, 1723–1770, magistrate
# Charles Juste de Beauvau, 1771–1793, politician and soldier
# Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai, 1803–1815, politician and lawyer; removed by ordinance
# Antoine-François-Claude Ferrand, 1816–1825, magistrate, poet, historian and playwright
# Casimir Delavigne, 1825–1843, poet and playwright
# Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve, 1844–1869, essayist and poet
# Jules Janin, 1870–1874, novelist and critic
# John Lemoinne, 1875–1892, diplomat and journalist
# Ferdinand Brunetière, 1893–1906, literary critic, historian of literature and essayist
# Henri Barboux, 1907–1910, lawyer
# Henry Roujon, 1911–1914, senior bureaucrat, essayist and novelist
# Louis Barthou, 1918–1934, politician, magistrate, historian and historian of literature; assassinated
# Claude Farrère, 1935–1957, novelist, essayist and historian
# Henri Troyat, 1959–2007, novelist, historian of literature, historian
# Jean-Christophe Rufin, elected 2008, physician and novelist

==Seat 29==

# Pierre Bardin, 1634–1635, philosopher and mathematician
# Nicolas Bourbon, 1637–1644, ecclesiastic
# François-Henri Salomon de Virelade, 1644–1670, lawyer
# Philippe Quinault, 1670–1688, poet and playwright
# François de Callières, 1688–1717, philologist
# André-Hercule de Fleury, 1717–1743, ecclesiastic and politician
# Paul d&#x27;Albert de Luynes, 1743–1788, ecclesiastic
# Jean-Pierre Claris de Florian, 1788–1794, playwright, novelist and poet
# Jean-François Cailhava de L&#x27;Estandoux, 1803–1813, playwright, poet and critic
# Joseph Michaud, 1813–1839, journalist and historian
# Jean Pierre Flourens, 1840–1867, physiologist
# Claude Bernard, 1868–1878, doctor
# Ernest Renan, 1878–1892, philosopher
# Paul-Armand Challemel-Lacour, 1893–1896, politician and diplomat
# Gabriel Hanotaux, 1897–1944, politician, diplomat and historian
# André Siegfried, 1944–1959, historian and geographer
# Henry de Montherlant, 1960–1972, playwright, novelist and essayist
# Claude Lévi-Strauss, 1973–2009, anthropologist
# Amin Maalouf, elected 2011, novelist

==Seat 30==

# Honorat de Bueil, seigneur de Racan, 1634–1670, poet
# François-Séraphin Régnier-Desmarais, 1670–1713, ecclesiastic and grammarian
# Bernard de la Monnoye, 1713–1728, philologist and critic
# Michel Poncet de La Rivière, 1728–1730, ecclesiastic
# Jacques Hardion. 1730–1766, historian
# Antoine Léonard Thomas, 1766–1785, poet
# Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert, 1785–1790, playwright
# Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès, 1803- excluded by ordinance 1816, politician; died 1824
# Louis Gabriel Ambroise de Bonald, 1816–1840, philosopher and publicist
# Jacques-François Ancelot, 1841–1854, poet, novelist and playwright
# Ernest Legouvé, 1855–1903, poet, novelist, playwright and essayist
# René Bazin, 1903–1932, novelist and essayist
# Théodore Gosselin, 1932–1935, historian who wrote under the pen name of G. Lenotre
# Georges Duhamel, 1935–1966, doctor, essayist, novelist, poet and playwright
# Maurice Druon, 1966–2009, politician and novelist
# Danièle Sallenave, elected 2011, novelist and journalist

==Seat 31==

# Pierre de Boissat, 1634–1662, soldier
# Antoine Furetière, 1662–1685, poet, fabulist and novelist; excluded but not replaced, died in 1688
# Jean de La Chapelle, 1688–1723, poet
# Pierre-Joseph Thoulier d&#x27;Olivet, 1723–1768, ecclesiastic and grammarian
# Étienne Bonnot de Condillac, 1768–1780, ecclesiastic and philosopher
# Louis-Élisabeth de La Vergne de Tressan, 1780–1783, poet and physicist
# Jean Sylvain Bailly, 1783–1793, mathematician; guillotined
# Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, 1803–1816, ecclesiastic, essayist and diplomat; excluded by ordinance, died 1836
# Gérard de Lally-Tollendal, 1816–1830, politician
# Jean-Baptiste Sanson de Pongerville, 1830–1870, poet
# Xavier Marmier, 1870–1892, novelist and poet
# Henri de Bornier, 1893–1901, playwright and poet
# Edmond Rostand, 1901–1918, playwright and poet
# Joseph Bédier, 1920–1938, philologist
# Jérôme Tharaud, 1938–1953, novelist
# Jean Cocteau, 1955–1963, playwright, poet, choreographer, filmmaker and painter
# Jacques Rueff, 1964–1978, economist and high bureaucrat
# Jean Dutourd, 1978–2011, novelist
# Michael Edwards, elected 2013, literary scholar

==Seat 32==

# Claude Favre de Vaugelas, 1634–1650, grammarian
# Georges de Scudéry, 1650–1667, novelist, playwright and poet
# Philippe de Courcillon, 1667–1720, soldier, governor and diplomat
# Armand de Vignerot du Plessis, 1720–1788, soldier, libertine and politician
# François-Henri d&#x27;Harcourt, 1788–1802, soldier
# Lucien Bonaparte, 1803–1816, politician. Excluded by ordinance.
# Louis-Simon Auger, 1816–1829, journalist and playwright
# Charles-Guillaume Étienne, 1829–1845, poet and playwright 
# Alfred de Vigny, 1845–1863, poet
# Camille Doucet, 1865–1895, poet and playwright
# Charles Costa de Beauregard, 1896–1909, historian and politician
# Hippolyte Langlois, 1911–1912, soldier
# Émile Boutroux, 1912–1921, philosopher and historian of philosophy
# Pierre de Nolhac, 1922–1936, historian, art historian and poet
# Georges-François-Xavier-Marie Grente, 1936–1959, ecclesiastic, historian and essayist
# Henri Massis, 1960–1970, essayist, literary critic and literary historian
# Georges Izard, 1971–1973, politician, lawyer, journalist and essayist
# Robert Aron, 1974–1975, historian and essayist
# Maurice Rheims, 1976–2003, novelist and art historian
# Alain Robbe-Grillet, 2004–2008, novelist and filmmaker
# François Weyergans, 2009–2019, novelist and filmmaker
# Pascal Ory, elected 2021, historian

==Seat 33==

# Vincent Voiture, 1634–1648, poet
# François Eudes de Mézeray, 1648–1683, lawyer
# Jean Barbier d&#x27;Aucour, 1683–1694, lawyer
# François de Clermont-Tonnerre, 1694–1701, ecclesiastic
# Nicolas de Malézieu, 1701–1727, tutor and poet
# Jean Bouhier, 1727–1746, magistrate and archaeologist
# François-Marie Arouet dit Voltaire, 1746–1778, playwright, historian, philosopher and poet
# Jean-François Ducis, 1778–1816, poet and playwright
# Raymond Desèze, 1816–1828, lawyer
# Amable Guillaume Prosper Brugière, baron de Barante, 1828–1866, politician
# Auguste Joseph Alphonse Gratry, 1867–1872, ecclesiastic and philosopher
# René Taillandier, 1873–1879, politician
# Maxime Du Camp, 1880–1894, essayist and novelist
# Paul Bourget, 1894–1935, novelist, poet and playwright
# Edmond Jaloux, 1936–1949, novelist, literary critic and literary historian
# Jean-Louis Vaudoyer, 1950–1963, novelist, poet, essayist and art historian
# Marcel Brion, 1964–1984, novelist, art historian and essayist
# Michel Mohrt, 1985–2011, editor, essayist, novelist and literary historian
# Dominique Bona, elected 2013, novelist

==Seat 34==

# Honorat de Porchères Laugier, 1634–1653, poet
# Paul Pellisson, 1653–1693, historian
# François de Salignac de La Mothe Fénelon, 1693–1715, ecclesiastic and essayist
# Claude Gros de Boze, 1715–1753, erudite and numismatist
# Louis de Bourbon Condé de Clermont, 1753–1771, ecclesiastic
# Pierre-Laurent Buirette de Belloy, 1771–1775, playwright and actor
# Emmanuel-Félicité de Durfort de Duras, 1775–1789, politician and soldier
# Dominique Joseph Garat, 1803–1816, politician, lawyer and philosopher. Excluded by ordinance, he refused readmission in 1829, died in 1833
# Louis-François de Bausset, 1816–1824, ecclesiastic and politician
# Hyacinthe-Louis de Quélen, 1824–1839, ecclesiastic
# Louis-Mathieu Molé, 1840–1855, politician
# Frédéric Alfred Pierre, comte de Falloux, 1856–1886, politician and historian
# Octave Gréard, 1886–1904, high bureaucrat, literary historian and literary critic
# Émile Gebhart, 1904–1908, art historian, literary historian and literary critic
# Raymond Poincaré, 1909–1934, head of state, politician, lawyer and essayist
# Jacques Bainville, 1935–1936, historian and journalist
# Joseph de Pesquidoux, 1936–1946, novelist and essayist
# Maurice Genevoix, 1946–1980, novelist
# Jacques de Bourbon-Busset, 1981–2001, politician, essayist and novelist
# François Cheng, elected 2002, poet, translator and novelist

==Seat 35==

# Henri Louis Habert de Montmor, 1634–1679, hotel-keeper
# Louis de Lavau, 1679–1694, ecclesiastic
# François Lefebvre de Caumartin, 1694–1733, ecclesiastic
# François-Augustin de Paradis de Moncrif, 1733–1770, poet, musician and playwright
# Jean-Armand de Bessuéjouls Roquelaure, 1771–1818, ecclesiastic
# Georges Cuvier, 1818–1832, palaeontologist
# André Marie Jean Jacques Dupin, 1832–1865, politician and lawyer
# Alfred-Auguste Cuvillier-Fleury, 1866–1887, historian and literary critic
# Jules Arsène Arnaud Claretie, 1888–1913, novelist, playwright and critic
# Joseph Joffre, 1918–1931, politician and soldier
# Maxime Weygand, 1931–1965, soldier
# Louis Leprince-Ringuet, 1966–2000, physicist, telecommunications engineer, historian of science and essayist
# Yves Pouliquen, 2001–2020, medical doctor
# Antoine Compagnon, elected 2022, academic

==Seat 36==

# Marin Cureau de la Chambre, 1634–1669, medical doctor and philosopher
# Pierre Cureau de La Chambre, 1670–1693, ecclesiastic
# Jean de La Bruyère, 1693–1696, essayist and moralist
# Claude Fleury, 1696–1723, ecclesiastic
# Jacques Adam, 1723–1735, philologist
# Joseph Séguy, 1736–1761, ecclesiastic
# Louis René Édouard, cardinal de Rohan, 1761–1793, ecclesiastic, politician, philosopher and poet
# Jean Devaines, 1803, state bureaucrat
# Évariste de Parny, 1803–1814, poet
# Victor-Joseph Étienne de Jouy, 1815–1846, journalist, critic and playwright
# Adolphe-Simonis Empis, 1847–1868, poet and playwright
# Henri Auguste Barbier, 1869–1882, poet
# Adolphe Perraud, 1882–1906, ecclesiastic
# François-Désiré Mathieu, 1906–1908, ecclesiastic and historian
# Louis Duchesne, 1910–1922, ecclesiastic, historian and philologist
# Henri Brémond, 1923–1933, ecclesiastic, literary historian and literary critic
# André Bellessort, 1935–1942, essayist, literary critic, historian and historian of literature
# René Grousset, 1946–1952, art historian
# Pierre Gaxotte, 1953–1982, historian and journalist
# Jacques Soustelle, 1983–1990, Americanist, ethnologist, politician and essayist
# Jean-François Deniau, 1990–2007, politician, essayist and novelist
# Philippe Beaussant, 2007–2016, musicologist and novelist
# Barbara Cassin, elected 2018, philologist and philosopher

==Seat 37==

# Daniel Hay du Chastelet de Chambon, 1635–1671, ecclesiastic and mathematician
# Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet, 1671–1704, ecclesiastic and historian
# Melchior de Polignac, 1704–1741, ecclesiastic, politician, philologist and poet
# Odet-Joseph Giry, 1741–1761, ecclesiastic
# Charles Batteux, 1761–1780, ecclesiastic
# Antoine-Marin Lemierre, 1780–1793, poet and playwright
# Félix-Julien-Jean Bigot de Préameneu, 1803–1825, politician and lawyer
# Mathieu de Montmorency, 1825–1826, politician and diplomat
# Alexandre Guiraud, 1826–1847, playwright, poet and novelist
# Jean-Jacques Ampère, 1847–1864, historian of literature
# Lucien-Anatole Prévost-Paradol, 1865–1870, literary critic
# Camille Rousset, 1871–1892, historian
# Paul Thureau-Dangin, 1893–1913, historian
# Pierre de La Gorce, 1914–1934, historian, magistrate and lawyer
# Maurice, 6th duc de Broglie, 1934–1960, sailor and physicist
# Eugène Tisserant, 1961–1972, ecclesiastic and philologist
# Jean Daniélou, 1972–1974, ecclesiastic, theologian, historian and essayist
# Ambroise-Marie Carré, 1975–2004, ecclesiastic
# René Girard, 2005–2015, philosopher, literary critic
# Michel Zink, elected 2017, medievalist, philologist and novelist

==Seat 38==

# Auger de Moléon de Granier, 1635–1636, possibly an ecclesiastic; expelled for theft; died 1650
# Balthazar Baro, 1636–1650, playwright and poet
# Jean Doujat, 1650–1688, lawyer
# Eusèbe Renaudot, 1688–1720, ecclesiastic
# Henri-Emmanuel de Roquette, 1720–1725, ecclesiastic
# Pierre de Pardaillan de Gondrin, 1725–1733, ecclesiastic
# Nicolas-François Dupré de Saint-Maur, 1733–1774, economist and statistician
# Guillaume-Chrétien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes, 1775–1794, politician and magistrate; guillotined
# François Andrieux, 1803–1833, lawyer, poet and playwright
# Adolphe Thiers, 1833–1877, politician and historian
# Henri Martin, 1878–1883, historian
# Ferdinand de Lesseps, 1884–1894, diplomat
# Anatole France, 1896–1924, novelist and poet
# Paul Valéry, 1925–1945, poet, literary critic and essayist
# Henri Mondor, 1946–1962, surgeon, physician, historian of literature and of science
# Louis Armand, 1963–1971, mining engineer, bureaucrat and economist
# Jean-Jacques Gautier, 1972–1986, drama critic, novelist, journalist and essayist
# Jean-Louis Curtis, 1986–1995, novelist and essayist
# François Jacob, 1996–2013, biologist
# Marc Lambron, elected 2014, literary critic and writer

==Seat 39==

# Louis Giry, 1636–1665, lawyer
# Claude Boyer, 1666–1698, ecclesiastic, playwright and poet
# Charles-Claude Genest, 1698–1719, ecclesiastic
# Jean-Baptiste Dubos, 1720–1742, ecclesiastic and historian
# Jean-François Du Bellay du Resnel, 1742–1761, ecclesiastic
# Bernard-Joseph Saurin, 1761–1781, lawyer and poet
# Jean-Antoine-Nicolas de Caritat, marquis de Condorcet, 1782–1794, philosopher and mathematician
# Gabriel Villar, 1803–1826, ecclesiastic
# Charles-Marie de Féletz, 1826–1850, ecclesiastic
# Désiré Nisard, 1850–1888, essayist
# Eugène-Melchior de Vogüé, 1888–1910, essayist, historian, literary critic and diplomat
# Henri de Régnier, 1911–1936, poet, novelist and essayist
# Jacques de Lacretelle, 1936–1985, novelist
# Bertrand Poirot-Delpech, 1986–2006, journalist, essayist and novelist
# Jean Clair, elected 2008, essayist and art historian

==Seat 40==

# Daniel de Priézac, 1639–1662, law professor
# Michel Le Clerc, 1662–1691, lawyer
# Jacques de Tourreil, 1692–1714, translator
# Jean-Roland Malet, 1714–1736, economist and royal valet de chambre
# Jean-François Boyer, 1736–1755, ecclesiastic
# Nicolas Thyrel de Boismont, 1755–1786, ecclesiastic
# Claude-Carloman de Rulhière, 1787–1791, diplomat, poet and historian
# Pierre Jean George Cabanis, 1803–1808, medical doctor and physiologist
# Antoine Destutt de Tracy, 1808–1836, philosopher
# François Guizot, 1836–1874, politician and historian
# Jean-Baptiste Dumas, 1875–1884, politician and chemist
# Joseph Louis François Bertrand, 1884–1900, mathematician, historian of science
# Marcellin Berthelot, 1900–1907, politician, chemist, essayist, historian of science
# Francis Charmes, 1908–1916, diplomat and journalist
# Jules Cambon, 1918–1935, diplomat, lawyer, senior civil servant
# Marie-Jean-Lucien Lacaze, 1936–1955, admiral
# Jacques Chastenet, 1956–1978, journalist, historian and diplomat
# Georges Dumézil, 1978–1986, philologist and historian of civilisations
# Pierre-Jean Rémy, 1988–2010, diplomat, novelist and essayist
# Xavier Darcos, elected 2013, politician, scholar and civil servant

== Notes ==
== References ==

*Académie française: Les immortels Official database of Members of the Académie française.
&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="33" end="51" title="Académie Française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q414528" start="116" end="127" title="academician" label="academician"/>
<link wikidata="Q446912" start="372" end="386" title="Pierre Séguier" label="Pierre Séguier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096508" start="427" end="449" title="Claude Bazin de Bezons" label="Claude Bazin de Bezons"/>
<link wikidata="Q188857" start="471" end="496" title="Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux" label="Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q929092" start="516" end="535" title="Jean d&amp;#x27;Estrées" label="Jean d&amp;#x27;Estrées"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338709" start="578" end="603" title="Marc-René de Voyer de Paulmy d&amp;#x27;Argenson (1652–1721)" label="Marc-René d&amp;#x27;Argenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q948266" start="629" end="657" title="Jean-Joseph Languet de Gergy" label="Jean-Joseph Languet de Gergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q229264" start="685" end="723" title="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon" label="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q961753" start="747" end="769" title="Félix Vicq-d&amp;#x27;Azyr" label="Félix Vicq-d&amp;#x27;Azyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399737" start="799" end="823" title="François-Urbain Domergue" label="François-Urbain Domergue"/>
<link wikidata="Q530816" start="849" end="869" title="Ange-François Fariau" label="Ange-François Fariau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450817" start="899" end="936" title="François-Auguste Parseval-Grandmaison" label="François-Auguste Parseval-Grandmaison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381121" start="956" end="984" title="Narcisse-Achille de Salvandy" label="Narcisse-Achille de Salvandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q256991" start="1024" end="1036" title="Émile Augier" label="Émile Augier"/>
<link wikidata="Q317957" start="1071" end="1091" title="Charles de Freycinet" label="Charles de Freycinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q286375" start="1131" end="1151" title="Charles Émile Picard" label="Charles Émile Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q83331" start="1180" end="1196" title="Louis de Broglie" label="Louis de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q296386" start="1239" end="1251" title="Michel Debré" label="Michel Debré"/>
<link wikidata="Q318667" start="1277" end="1291" title="François Furet" label="François Furet"/>
<link wikidata="Q711542" start="1311" end="1322" title="René Rémond" label="René Rémond"/>
<link wikidata="Q516442" start="1347" end="1360" title="Claude Dagens" label="Claude Dagens"/>
<link wikidata="Q729533" start="1404" end="1420" title="Valentin Conrart" label="Valentin Conrart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392211" start="1455" end="1469" title="Toussaint Rose" label="Toussaint Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400621" start="1491" end="1504" title="Louis de Sacy" label="Louis de Sacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="1526" end="1567" title="Montesquieu" label="Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684691" start="1609" end="1644" title="Jean-Baptiste Vivien de Châteaubrun" label="Jean-Baptiste Vivien de Châteaubrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q655181" start="1679" end="1706" title="François-Jean de Chastellux" label="François-Jean de Chastellux"/>
<link wikidata="Q405482" start="1738" end="1768" title="Aimar-Charles-Marie de Nicolaï" label="Aimar-Charles-Marie de Nicolaï"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397972" start="1794" end="1825" title="Nicolas François de Neufchâteau" label="Nicolas François de Neufchâteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q835566" start="1867" end="1888" title="Pierre-Antoine Lebrun" label="Pierre-Antoine Lebrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q169150" start="1923" end="1944" title="Alexandre Dumas, fils" label="Alexandre Dumas, fils"/>
<link wikidata="Q523039" start="1983" end="1997" title="André Theuriet" label="André Theuriet"/>
<link wikidata="Q551744" start="2030" end="2043" title="Jean Richepin" label="Jean Richepin"/>
<link wikidata="Q286253" start="2076" end="2086" title="Émile Mâle" label="Émile Mâle"/>
<link wikidata="Q517508" start="2115" end="2138" title="François Albert-Buisson" label="François Albert-Buisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q260458" start="2179" end="2191" title="Marc Boegner" label="Marc Boegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q948199" start="2234" end="2262" title="René de La Croix de Castries" label="René de La Croix de Castries"/>
<link wikidata="Q445137" start="2287" end="2301" title="André Frossard" label="André Frossard"/>
<link wikidata="Q470101" start="2340" end="2357" title="Hector Bianciotti" label="Hector Bianciotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165217" start="2381" end="2396" title="Dany Laferrière" label="Dany Laferrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230567" start="2434" end="2452" title="Jacques de Serisay" label="Jacques de Serisay"/>
<link wikidata="Q946894" start="2472" end="2497" title="Paul-Philippe de Chaumont" label="Paul-Philippe de Chaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q946840" start="2525" end="2537" title="Louis Cousin" label="Louis Cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q949940" start="2577" end="2619" title="Jacques-Louis de Valon" label="Jacques-Louis de Valon, marquis de Mimeure"/>
<link wikidata="Q448879" start="2654" end="2668" title="Nicolas Gédoyn" label="Nicolas Gédoyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q374572" start="2696" end="2732" title="François-Joachim de Pierre de Bernis" label="François-Joachim de Pierre de Bernis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681337" start="2760" end="2789" title="Roch-Ambroise Cucurron Sicard" label="Roch-Ambroise Cucurron Sicard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187216" start="2832" end="2853" title="Denis-Luc Frayssinous" label="Denis-Luc Frayssinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q289113" start="2881" end="2903" title="Étienne-Denis Pasquier" label="Étienne-Denis Pasquier"/>
<link wikidata="Q182701" start="2929" end="2949" title="Jules Armand Dufaure" label="Jules Armand Dufaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q116258" start="2986" end="3003" title="Victor Cherbuliez" label="Victor Cherbuliez"/>
<link wikidata="Q551543" start="3042" end="3054" title="Émile Faguet" label="Émile Faguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="3099" end="3117" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q503758" start="3154" end="3168" title="André Chaumeix" label="André Chaumeix"/>
<link wikidata="Q122503" start="3205" end="3221" title="Jérôme Carcopino" label="Jérôme Carcopino"/>
<link wikidata="Q430765" start="3264" end="3278" title="Roger Caillois" label="Roger Caillois"/>
<link wikidata="Q163118" start="3318" end="3338" title="Marguerite Yourcenar" label="Marguerite Yourcenar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230574" start="3375" end="3392" title="Jean-Denis Bredin" label="Jean-Denis Bredin"/>
<link wikidata="Q266337" start="3444" end="3458" title="Jean Desmarets" label="Jean Desmarets"/>
<link wikidata="Q526302" start="3491" end="3513" title="Jean-Jacques de Mesmes" label="Jean-Jacques de Mesmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q948614" start="3539" end="3559" title="Jean Testu de Mauroy" label="Jean Testu de Mauroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q949886" start="3587" end="3616" title="Camille le Tellier de Louvois" label="Camille le Tellier de Louvois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381729" start="3644" end="3667" title="Jean Baptiste Massillon" label="Jean Baptiste Massillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q347372" start="3695" end="3741" title="Louis Jules Mancini Mazarini" label="Louis Jules Mancini Mazarini, Duc de Nivernais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488840" start="3776" end="3797" title="Gabriel-Marie Legouvé" label="Gabriel-Marie Legouvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q767332" start="3817" end="3847" title="Alexandre-Vincent Pineux Duval" label="Alexandre-Vincent Pineux Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q926609" start="3882" end="3904" title="Pierre-Simon Ballanche" label="Pierre-Simon Ballanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q929141" start="3931" end="3942" title="Jean Vatout" label="Jean Vatout"/>
<link wikidata="Q450430" start="3957" end="3995" title="Alexis Guignard, comte de Saint-Priest" label="Alexis Guignard, comte de Saint-Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q917890" start="4035" end="4057" title="Antoine Pierre Berryer" label="Antoine Pierre Berryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q327743" start="4079" end="4107" title="François-Joseph de Champagny" label="François-Joseph de Champagny"/>
<link wikidata="Q984568" start="4132" end="4149" title="Charles de Mazade" label="Charles de Mazade"/>
<link wikidata="Q334970" start="4180" end="4201" title="José-Maria de Heredia" label="José-Maria de Heredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q314957" start="4221" end="4235" title="Maurice Barrès" label="Maurice Barrès"/>
<link wikidata="Q648920" start="4274" end="4288" title="Louis Bertrand (novelist)" label="Louis Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q984359" start="4326" end="4338" title="Jean Tharaud" label="Jean Tharaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q381244" start="4362" end="4375" title="Alphonse Juin" label="Alphonse Juin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164469" start="4398" end="4413" title="Pierre Emmanuel" label="Pierre Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q536286" start="4433" end="4447" title="Jean Hamburger" label="Jean Hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q631293" start="4482" end="4499" title="Albert Decourtray" label="Albert Decourtray"/>
<link wikidata="Q168509" start="4527" end="4546" title="Jean-Marie Lustiger" label="Jean-Marie Lustiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q460824" start="4574" end="4589" title="Jean-Luc Marion" label="Jean-Luc Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q747270" start="4645" end="4667" title="Jean Ogier de Gombauld" label="Jean Ogier de Gombauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q450607" start="4702" end="4725" title="Paul Tallement the Younger" label="Paul Tallement le Jeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q585987" start="4753" end="4768" title="Antoine Danchet" label="Antoine Danchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q942163" start="4803" end="4830" title="Jean-Baptiste-Louis Gresset" label="Jean-Baptiste-Louis Gresset"/>
<link wikidata="Q949412" start="4856" end="4885" title="Claude-François-Xavier Millot" label="Claude-François-Xavier Millot"/>
<link wikidata="Q178653" start="4913" end="4927" title="André Morellet" label="André Morellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q725943" start="4955" end="4978" title="Pierre-Édouard Lémontey" label="Pierre-Édouard Lémontey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772" start="5015" end="5029" title="Joseph Fourier" label="Joseph Fourier"/>
<link wikidata="Q434346" start="5072" end="5085" title="Victor Cousin" label="Victor Cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q923619" start="5127" end="5138" title="Jules Favre" label="Jules Favre"/>
<link wikidata="Q741070" start="5175" end="5188" title="Edmond Rousse" label="Edmond Rousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q743960" start="5210" end="5225" title="Pierre de Ségur" label="Pierre de Ségur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393443" start="5250" end="5265" title="Robert de Flers" label="Robert de Flers"/>
<link wikidata="Q586479" start="5306" end="5319" title="Louis Madelin" label="Louis Madelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157827" start="5344" end="5355" title="Robert Kemp (literary critic)" label="Robert Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q733197" start="5399" end="5410" title="René Huyghe" label="René Huyghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q679004" start="5452" end="5465" title="Georges Vedel" label="Georges Vedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157313" start="5491" end="5503" title="Assia Djebar" label="Assia Djebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q380214" start="5525" end="5538" title="Andreï Makine" label="Andreï Makine"/>
<link wikidata="Q560292" start="5578" end="5609" title="François le Métel de Boisrobert" label="François le Métel de Boisrobert"/>
<link wikidata="Q973961" start="5646" end="5670" title="Jean Regnault de Segrais" label="Jean Regnault de Segrais"/>
<link wikidata="Q204908" start="5703" end="5729" title="Jean Galbert de Campistron" label="Jean Galbert de Campistron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177063" start="5755" end="5784" title="Philippe Néricault Destouches" label="Philippe Néricault Destouches"/>
<link wikidata="Q364931" start="5823" end="5838" title="Louis de Boissy" label="Louis de Boissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923168" start="5858" end="5900" title="Jean-Baptiste de La Curne de Sainte-Palaye" label="Jean-Baptiste de La Curne de Sainte-Palaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q347891" start="5929" end="5962" title="Nicolas Chamfort" label="Sébastien-Roch-Nicolas (Chamfort)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930385" start="6002" end="6023" title="Pierre Louis Roederer" label="Pierre Louis Roederer"/>
<link wikidata="Q984608" start="6060" end="6102" title="Pierre Marc Gaston de Lévis, Duke of Lévis" label="Pierre Marc Gaston de Lévis, Duke of Lévis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087497" start="6128" end="6157" title="Philippe Paul, comte de Ségur" label="Philippe Paul, comte de Ségur"/>
<link wikidata="Q506976" start="6195" end="6217" title="Charles de Viel-Castel" label="Charles de Viel-Castel"/>
<link wikidata="Q963637" start="6241" end="6269" title="Edmond Jurien de La Gravière" label="Edmond Jurien de La Gravière"/>
<link wikidata="Q981891" start="6292" end="6306" title="Ernest Lavisse" label="Ernest Lavisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509108" start="6331" end="6353" title="Georges de Porto-Riche" label="Georges de Porto-Riche"/>
<link wikidata="Q551767" start="6388" end="6401" title="Pierre Benoît (novelist)" label="Pierre Benoît"/>
<link wikidata="Q470557" start="6425" end="6437" title="Jean Paulhan" label="Jean Paulhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46706" start="6476" end="6490" title="Eugène Ionesco" label="Eugène Ionesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q558114" start="6516" end="6529" title="Marc Fumaroli" label="Marc Fumaroli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965357" start="6567" end="6583" title="Christian Jambet" label="Christian Jambet"/>
<link wikidata="Q334978" start="6626" end="6640" title="Jean Chapelain" label="Jean Chapelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q982037" start="6669" end="6687" title="Isaac de Benserade" label="Isaac de Benserade"/>
<link wikidata="Q290024" start="6722" end="6738" title="Étienne Pavillon" label="Étienne Pavillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390486" start="6769" end="6793" title="Fabio Brulart de Sillery" label="Fabio Brulart de Sillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533333" start="6830" end="6878" title="Henri-Jacques Nompar de Caumont, duc de La Force" label="Henri-Jacques Nompar de Caumont, duc de La Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q472399" start="6903" end="6928" title="Jean-Baptiste de Mirabaud" label="Jean-Baptiste de Mirabaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392588" start="6954" end="6974" title="Claude-Henri Watelet" label="Claude-Henri Watelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q367243" start="6997" end="7016" title="Michel-Jean Sedaine" label="Michel-Jean Sedaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q715955" start="7051" end="7089" title="Collin d&amp;#x27;Harleville" label="Jean-François Collin d&amp;#x27;Harleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q715144" start="7124" end="7135" title="Pierre Antoine Noël Bruno, comte Daru" label="Pierre Daru"/>
<link wikidata="Q188697" start="7175" end="7196" title="Alphonse de Lamartine" label="Alphonse de Lamartine"/>
<link wikidata="Q286293" start="7231" end="7245" title="Émile Ollivier" label="Émile Ollivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42156" start="7282" end="7295" title="Henri Bergson" label="Henri Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q274358" start="7322" end="7336" title="Édouard Le Roy" label="Édouard Le Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q660069" start="7381" end="7407" title="Daniel-Rops" label="Henri Petiot (Daniel-Rops)"/>
<link wikidata="Q681776" start="7440" end="7458" title="Pierre-Henri Simon" label="Pierre-Henri Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q522603" start="7505" end="7518" title="André Roussin" label="André Roussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q261687" start="7544" end="7565" title="Jacqueline de Romilly" label="Jacqueline de Romilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q105605" start="7605" end="7619" title="Jules A. Hoffmann" label="Jules Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q177029" start="7660" end="7680" title="Claude de Malleville" label="Claude de Malleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q949534" start="7700" end="7715" title="Jean Ballesdens" label="Jean Ballesdens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370379" start="7737" end="7755" title="Géraud de Cordemoy" label="Géraud de Cordemoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684956" start="7796" end="7815" title="Jean-Louis Bergeret" label="Jean-Louis Bergeret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064976" start="7837" end="7874" title="Charles-Irénée Castel de Saint-Pierre" label="Charles-Irénée Castel de Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q164374" start="7902" end="7925" title="Pierre Louis Maupertuis" label="Pierre Louis Maupertuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393531" start="7951" end="7993" title="Jean-Jacques Lefranc, Marquis de Pompignan" label="Jean-Jacques Lefranc, Marquis de Pompignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q561729" start="8033" end="8051" title="Jean-Sifrein Maury" label="Jean-Sifrein Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310684" start="8095" end="8151" title="Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d&amp;#x27;Angély" label="Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d&amp;#x27;Angély"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="8188" end="8208" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q965524" start="8252" end="8277" title="Pierre Paul Royer-Collard" label="Pierre Paul Royer-Collard"/>
<link wikidata="Q344454" start="8303" end="8321" title="Charles de Rémusat" label="Charles de Rémusat"/>
<link wikidata="Q548532" start="8363" end="8374" title="Jules Simon" label="Jules Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475967" start="8416" end="8442" title="Adrien Albert Marie de Mun" label="Adrien Albert Marie de Mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q666551" start="8480" end="8510" title="Alfred-Henri-Marie Baudrillart" label="Alfred-Henri-Marie Baudrillart"/>
<link wikidata="Q330443" start="8552" end="8564" title="Octave Aubry" label="Octave Aubry"/>
<link wikidata="Q274344" start="8604" end="8619" title="Édouard Herriot" label="Édouard Herriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q287953" start="8668" end="8680" title="Jean Rostand" label="Jean Rostand"/>
<link wikidata="Q138166" start="8721" end="8732" title="Michel Déon" label="Michel Déon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014616" start="8756" end="8770" title="Daniel Rondeau" label="Daniel Rondeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232379" start="8821" end="8834" title="Nicolas Faret" label="Nicolas Faret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633293" start="8854" end="8868" title="Pierre du Ryer" label="Pierre du Ryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150810" start="8894" end="8914" title="César d&amp;#x27;Estrées" label="César d&amp;#x27;Estrées"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346624" start="8957" end="8984" title="Victor-Marie d&amp;#x27;Estrées" label="Victor-Marie d&amp;#x27;Estrées"/>
<link wikidata="Q962501" start="9022" end="9057" title="Charles Armand René de La Trémoille" label="Charles Armand René de La Trémoille"/>
<link wikidata="Q677587" start="9083" end="9106" title="Cardinal de Soubise" label="Armand de Rohan-Soubise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856902" start="9134" end="9153" title="Antoine de Montazet" label="Antoine de Montazet"/>
<link wikidata="Q918355" start="9181" end="9203" title="Stanislas de Boufflers" label="Stanislas de Boufflers"/>
<link wikidata="Q713783" start="9223" end="9258" title="Pierre-Marie-François Baour-Lormian" label="Pierre-Marie-François Baour-Lormian"/>
<link wikidata="Q617539" start="9293" end="9309" title="François Ponsard" label="François Ponsard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359186" start="9335" end="9348" title="Joseph Autran" label="Joseph Autran"/>
<link wikidata="Q354828" start="9368" end="9384" title="Victorien Sardou" label="Victorien Sardou"/>
<link wikidata="Q326138" start="9410" end="9424" title="Marcel Prévost" label="Marcel Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q285992" start="9448" end="9461" title="Émile Henriot (writer)" label="Émile Henriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q518748" start="9505" end="9518" title="Jean Guéhenno" label="Jean Guéhenno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235728" start="9542" end="9554" title="Alain Decaux" label="Alain Decaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369484" start="9579" end="9597" title="Patrick Grainville" label="Patrick Grainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q586272" start="9638" end="9652" title="Antoine Godeau" label="Antoine Godeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368429" start="9689" end="9704" title="Esprit Fléchier" label="Esprit Fléchier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132347" start="9732" end="9748" title="Henri de Nesmond" label="Henri de Nesmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166163" start="9776" end="9807" title="Jean-Jacques Amelot de Chaillou" label="Jean-Jacques Amelot de Chaillou"/>
<link wikidata="Q697511" start="9833" end="9881" title="Charles Louis Auguste Fouquet, duc de Belle-Isle" label="Charles Louis Auguste Fouquet, duc de Belle-Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339949" start="9919" end="9949" title="Nicolas-Charles-Joseph Trublet" label="Nicolas-Charles-Joseph Trublet"/>
<link wikidata="Q981928" start="9977" end="10007" title="Jean François de Saint-Lambert" label="Jean François de Saint-Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277480" start="10043" end="10079" title="Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano" label="Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374377" start="10118" end="10130" title="Joseph Lainé" label="Joseph Lainé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052692" start="10171" end="10186" title="Emmanuel Dupaty" label="Emmanuel Dupaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q179680" start="10221" end="10237" title="Alfred de Musset" label="Alfred de Musset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393498" start="10272" end="10289" title="Victor de Laprade" label="Victor de Laprade"/>
<link wikidata="Q380277" start="10309" end="10324" title="François Coppée" label="François Coppée"/>
<link wikidata="Q726967" start="10357" end="10368" title="Jean Aicard" label="Jean Aicard"/>
<link wikidata="Q333292" start="10401" end="10416" title="Camille Jullian" label="Camille Jullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q716823" start="10457" end="10468" title="Léon Bérard" label="Léon Bérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q551761" start="10505" end="10517" title="Jean Guitton" label="Jean Guitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q459641" start="10559" end="10573" title="Florence Delay" label="Florence Delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q428650" start="10629" end="10644" title="Philippe Habert" label="Philippe Habert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158854" start="10664" end="10678" title="Jacques Esprit" label="Jacques Esprit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159657" start="10704" end="10727" title="Jacques-Nicolas Colbert" label="Jacques-Nicolas Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q965804" start="10755" end="10779" title="Claude-François Fraguier" label="Claude-François Fraguier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750353" start="10807" end="10841" title="Charles d&amp;#x27;Orléans de Rothelin" label="Charles d&amp;#x27;Orléans de Rothelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093760" start="10869" end="10883" title="Gabriel Girard (priest)" label="Gabriel Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681326" start="10911" end="10963" title="Marc-René de Voyer de Paulmy d&amp;#x27;Argenson (1722–1787)" label="Marc-Antoine-René de Voyer d&amp;#x27;Argenson de Paulmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386507" start="10989" end="11032" title="Henri-Cardin-Jean-Baptiste d&amp;#x27;Aguesseau" label="Henri-Cardin-Jean-Baptiste d&amp;#x27;Aguesseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958622" start="11058" end="11073" title="Charles Brifaut" label="Charles Brifaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q609039" start="11108" end="11121" title="Jules Sandeau" label="Jules Sandeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q361004" start="11160" end="11190" title="Edmond François Valentin About" label="Edmond François Valentin About"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271322" start="11229" end="11237" title="Léon Say" label="Léon Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627420" start="11277" end="11290" title="Albert Vandal" label="Albert Vandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023401" start="11315" end="11327" title="Denys Cochin" label="Denys Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q765479" start="11353" end="11366" title="Georges Goyau" label="Georges Goyau"/>
<link wikidata="Q462281" start="11391" end="11402" title="Paul Hazard" label="Paul Hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q998913" start="11443" end="11457" title="Maurice Garçon" label="Maurice Garçon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272" start="11503" end="11514" title="Paul Morand" label="Paul Morand"/>
<link wikidata="Q929334" start="11569" end="11585" title="Alain Peyrefitte" label="Alain Peyrefitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q697183" start="11623" end="11641" title="Gabriel de Broglie" label="Gabriel de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q453279" start="11680" end="11694" title="Germain Habert" label="Germain Habert"/>
<link wikidata="Q935542" start="11722" end="11735" title="Charles Cotin" label="Charles Cotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263429" start="11763" end="11782" title="Louis de Courcillon" label="Louis de Courcillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959458" start="11825" end="11855" title="Charles Jean-Baptiste Fleuriau" label="Charles Jean-Baptiste Fleuriau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273795" start="11881" end="11895" title="Jean Terrasson" label="Jean Terrasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978366" start="11939" end="11964" title="Claude de Thiard de Bissy" label="Claude de Thiard de Bissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698377" start="11987" end="12011" title="Joseph-Alphonse Esménard" label="Joseph-Alphonse Esménard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279426" start="12037" end="12073" title="Jean Charles Dominique de Lacretelle" label="Jean Charles Dominique de Lacretelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q58328" start="12098" end="12116" title="Jean-Baptiste Biot" label="Jean-Baptiste Biot"/>
<link wikidata="Q922233" start="12159" end="12173" title="Louis de Carné" label="Louis de Carné"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063751" start="12213" end="12226" title="Charles Blanc" label="Charles Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427436" start="12252" end="12269" title="Édouard Pailleron" label="Édouard Pailleron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852937" start="12304" end="12316" title="Paul Hervieu" label="Paul Hervieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411919" start="12355" end="12381" title="François, Vicomte de Curel" label="François, Vicomte de Curel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714608" start="12407" end="12424" title="Charles Le Goffic" label="Charles Le Goffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q318391" start="12462" end="12474" title="Abel Bonnard" label="Abel Bonnard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12558" end="12577" title="Vichy French regime" label="Vichy French regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q334983" start="12580" end="12593" title="Jules Romains" label="Jules Romains"/>
<link wikidata="Q353866" start="12638" end="12658" title="Jean d&amp;#x27;Ormesson" label="Jean d&amp;#x27;Ormesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471163" start="12682" end="12696" title="Chantal Thomas" label="Chantal Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q371882" start="12749" end="12782" title="Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac" label="Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451251" start="12826" end="12855" title="François de La Mothe Le Vayer" label="François de La Mothe Le Vayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="12905" end="12916" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163775" start="12979" end="13011" title="Jean-Baptiste-Henri de Valincour" label="Jean-Baptiste-Henri de Valincour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165742" start="13054" end="13086" title="Jean-François Leriget de La Faye" label="Jean-François Leriget de La Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q551721" start="13112" end="13139" title="Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon" label="Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976734" start="13165" end="13198" title="Claude-Henri de Fusée de Voisenon" label="Claude-Henri de Fusée de Voisenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254554" start="13247" end="13288" title="Jean de Dieu-Raymond de Cucé de Boisgelin" label="Jean de Dieu-Raymond de Cucé de Boisgelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164057" start="13316" end="13348" title="Jean-Baptiste Dureau de la Malle" label="Jean-Baptiste Dureau de la Malle"/>
<link wikidata="Q347261" start="13374" end="13393" title="Louis-Benoît Picard" label="Louis-Benoît Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q585558" start="13448" end="13471" title="Antoine-Vincent Arnault" label="Antoine-Vincent Arnault"/>
<link wikidata="Q319261" start="13517" end="13530" title="Eugène Scribe" label="Eugène Scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091989" start="13556" end="13571" title="Octave Feuillet" label="Octave Feuillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q311854" start="13610" end="13621" title="Pierre Loti" label="Pierre Loti"/>
<link wikidata="Q424348" start="13657" end="13676" title="Paul-Albert Besnard" label="Paul-Albert Besnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262035" start="13712" end="13724" title="Louis Gillet" label="Louis Gillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q295830" start="13771" end="13783" title="Paul Claudel" label="Paul Claudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569554" start="13838" end="13862" title="Wladimir d&amp;#x27;Ormesson" label="Wladimir d&amp;#x27;Ormesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q282882" start="13913" end="13929" title="Maurice Schumann" label="Maurice Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q271822" start="14001" end="14015" title="Pierre Messmer" label="Pierre Messmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q298180" start="14053" end="14064" title="Simone Veil" label="Simone Veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10785311" start="14101" end="14115" title="Maurizio Serra" label="Maurizio Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238691" start="14167" end="14183" title="François Maynard" label="François Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q747" start="14218" end="14234" title="Pierre Corneille" label="Pierre Corneille"/>
<link wikidata="Q551787" start="14271" end="14287" title="Thomas Corneille" label="Thomas Corneille"/>
<link wikidata="Q586389" start="14313" end="14339" title="Antoine Houdar de la Motte" label="Antoine Houdar de la Motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308765" start="14365" end="14400" title="Michel-Celse-Roger de Bussy-Rabutin" label="Michel-Celse-Roger de Bussy-Rabutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q289825" start="14428" end="14459" title="Étienne Lauréault de Foncemagne" label="Étienne Lauréault de Foncemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310534" start="14487" end="14514" title="Michel Paul Guy de Chabanon" label="Michel Paul Guy de Chabanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q279912" start="14540" end="14561" title="Jacques-André Naigeon" label="Jacques-André Naigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q354373" start="14591" end="14611" title="Népomucène Lemercier" label="Népomucène Lemercier"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="14646" end="14657" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309704" start="14702" end="14718" title="Leconte de Lisle" label="Leconte de Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q597694" start="14753" end="14767" title="Henry Houssaye" label="Henry Houssaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q265104" start="14805" end="14819" title="Hubert Lyautey" label="Hubert Lyautey"/>
<link wikidata="Q360859" start="14842" end="14871" title="Louis Franchet d&amp;#x27;Espèrey" label="Louis Franchet d&amp;#x27;Espèrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436607" start="14909" end="14931" title="Robert d&amp;#x27;Harcourt" label="Robert d&amp;#x27;Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q845559" start="14978" end="14990" title="Jean Mistler" label="Jean Mistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q270271" start="15073" end="15103" title="Hélène Carrère d&amp;#x27;Encausse" label="Hélène Carrère d&amp;#x27;Encausse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236920" start="15142" end="15158" title="Guillaume Bautru" label="Guillaume Bautru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160073" start="15184" end="15207" title="Jacques Testu de Belval" label="Jacques Testu de Belval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083487" start="15244" end="15289" title="François-Joseph de Beaupoil de Sainte-Aulaire" label="François-Joseph de Beaupoil de Sainte-Aulaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55028639" start="15321" end="15357" title="Jean-Jacques d&amp;#x27;Ortous de Mairan" label="Jean-Jacques d&amp;#x27;Ortous de Mairan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083844" start="15400" end="15415" title="François Arnaud (ecclesiastic)" label="François Arnaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615346" start="15443" end="15467" title="Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target" label="Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q561729" start="15493" end="15511" title="Jean-Sifrein Maury" label="Jean-Sifrein Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334744" start="15582" end="15634" title="François-Xavier-Marc-Antoine de Montesquiou-Fézensac" label="François-Xavier-Marc-Antoine de Montesquiou-Fézensac"/>
<link wikidata="Q586494" start="15677" end="15688" title="Antoine Jay" label="Antoine Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341424" start="15714" end="15740" title="Ustazade Silvestre de Sacy" label="Ustazade Silvestre de Sacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q379929" start="15771" end="15791" title="Eugène Marin Labiche" label="Eugène Marin Labiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q723648" start="15830" end="15843" title="Henri Meilhac" label="Henri Meilhac"/>
<link wikidata="Q945057" start="15869" end="15882" title="Henri Lavedan" label="Henri Lavedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057186" start="15921" end="15937" title="Ernest Seillière" label="Ernest Seillière"/>
<link wikidata="Q517743" start="16008" end="16021" title="André Chamson" label="André Chamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q185105" start="16069" end="16084" title="Fernand Braudel" label="Fernand Braudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q982023" start="16126" end="16141" title="Jacques Laurent" label="Jacques Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227331" start="16190" end="16205" title="Frédéric Vitoux (writer)" label="Frédéric Vitoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219274" start="16259" end="16271" title="Jean Sirmond" label="Jean Sirmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175585" start="16302" end="16319" title="Jean de Montereul" label="Jean de Montereul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085889" start="16347" end="16377" title="François Tallemant the Elder" label="François Tallemant l&amp;#x27;Aîné"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402554" start="16405" end="16424" title="Simon de la Loubère" label="Simon de la Loubère"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978128" start="16457" end="16471" title="Claude Sallier" label="Claude Sallier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684878" start="16515" end="16541" title="Jean-Gilles du Coëtlosquet" label="Jean-Gilles du Coëtlosquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654307" start="16569" end="16613" title="Anne-Pierre, marquis de Montesquiou-Fézensac" label="Anne-Pierre, marquis de Montesquiou-Fézensac"/>
<link wikidata="Q585558" start="16639" end="16662" title="Antoine-Vincent Arnault" label="Antoine-Vincent Arnault"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16723" end="16730" title="List of members of the Académie française#Seat 13" label="seat 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q459197" start="16764" end="16820" title="Armand-Emmanuel de Vignerot du Plessis, Duc de Richelieu" label="Armand-Emmanuel de Vignerot du Plessis, Duc de Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q745505" start="16846" end="16863" title="Bon-Joseph Dacier" label="Bon-Joseph Dacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383066" start="16890" end="16912" title="Pierre François Tissot" label="Pierre François Tissot"/>
<link wikidata="Q708846" start="16946" end="16961" title="Félix Dupanloup" label="Félix Dupanloup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600693" start="16989" end="17014" title="Gaston Audiffret-Pasquier" label="Gaston Audiffret-Pasquier"/>
<link wikidata="Q358387" start="17040" end="17055" title="Alexandre Ribot" label="Alexandre Ribot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606000" start="17112" end="17124" title="Henri-Robert" label="Henri-Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="17160" end="17175" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="17238" end="17243" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="17244" end="17257" title="collaborationism" label="collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q980799" start="17311" end="17336" title="Antoine de Lévis Mirepoix" label="Antoine de Lévis Mirepoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q154545" start="17384" end="17405" title="Léopold Sédar Senghor" label="Léopold Sédar Senghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="17433" end="17440" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="17475" end="17504" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="17524" end="17543" title="president of France" label="president of France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17546" end="17562" title="Raphaël Gaillard" label="Raphaël Gaillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217032" start="17619" end="17650" title="François de Cauvigny de Colomby" label="François de Cauvigny de Colomby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451213" start="17670" end="17701" title="François Tristan l&amp;#x27;Hermite" label="François Tristan l&amp;#x27;Hermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136006" start="17736" end="17775" title="Hippolyte-Jules Pilet de La Mesnardière" label="Hippolyte-Jules Pilet de La Mesnardière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084869" start="17817" end="17866" title="François de Beauvilliers, 1st duc de Saint-Aignan" label="François de Beauvilliers, 1st duc de Saint-Aignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q970490" start="17889" end="17916" title="François-Timoléon de Choisy" label="François-Timoléon de Choisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856639" start="17944" end="17959" title="Antoine Portail" label="Antoine Portail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933689" start="17985" end="18021" title="Pierre-Claude Nivelle de La Chaussée" label="Pierre-Claude Nivelle de La Chaussée"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169841" start="18047" end="18074" title="Jean-Pierre de Bougainville" label="Jean-Pierre de Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q379923" start="18099" end="18122" title="Jean-François Marmontel" label="Jean-François Marmontel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296217" start="18162" end="18188" title="Louis-Marcelin de Fontanes" label="Louis-Marcelin de Fontanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q318337" start="18235" end="18258" title="Abel-François Villemain" label="Abel-François Villemain"/>
<link wikidata="Q286107" start="18304" end="18316" title="Émile Littré" label="Émile Littré"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="18359" end="18372" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q514741" start="18395" end="18407" title="Gaston Paris" label="Gaston Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q690442" start="18457" end="18472" title="Frédéric Masson" label="Frédéric Masson"/>
<link wikidata="Q541308" start="18497" end="18512" title="Georges Lecomte" label="Georges Lecomte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141021" start="18572" end="18582" title="Jean Delay" label="Jean Delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q83233" start="18633" end="18649" title="Jacques Cousteau" label="Jacques Cousteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q288562" start="18703" end="18715" title="Érik Orsenna" label="Érik Orsenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q504538" start="18771" end="18783" title="Jean Baudoin (translator)" label="Jean Baudoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345995" start="18809" end="18829" title="François Charpentier" label="François Charpentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165954" start="18853" end="18880" title="Jean-François de Chamillart" label="Jean-François de Chamillart"/>
<link wikidata="Q158654" start="18908" end="18938" title="Claude Louis Hector de Villars" label="Claude Louis Hector de Villars"/>
<link wikidata="Q630635" start="18976" end="19000" title="Honoré Armand de Villars" label="Honoré Armand de Villars"/>
<link wikidata="Q289522" start="19026" end="19063" title="Étienne Charles de Loménie de Brienne" label="Étienne Charles de Loménie de Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961283" start="19119" end="19154" title="Jean-Gérard Lacuée, count of Cessac" label="Jean-Gérard Lacuée, count of Cessac"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="19180" end="19201" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Alexis de Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q605534" start="19227" end="19257" title="Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire" label="Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q434932" start="19285" end="19311" title="Albert, 4th duc de Broglie" label="Albert, 4th duc de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304994" start="19361" end="19391" title="Charles-Jean-Melchior de Vogüé" label="Charles-Jean-Melchior de Vogüé"/>
<link wikidata="Q192615" start="19434" end="19448" title="Ferdinand Foch" label="Ferdinand Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="19471" end="19486" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q518576" start="19589" end="19610" title="André François-Poncet" label="André François-Poncet"/>
<link wikidata="Q327013" start="19649" end="19660" title="Edgar Faure" label="Edgar Faure"/>
<link wikidata="Q364456" start="19700" end="19713" title="Michel Serres" label="Michel Serres"/>
<link wikidata="Q39803" start="19740" end="19758" title="Mario Vargas Llosa" label="Mario Vargas Llosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217647" start="19812" end="19847" title="François de Porchères d&amp;#x27;Arbaud" label="François de Porchères d&amp;#x27;Arbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351271" start="19867" end="19880" title="Olivier Patru" label="Olivier Patru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340700" start="19902" end="19926" title="Nicolas Potier de Novion" label="Nicolas Potier de Novion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379935" start="19952" end="19975" title="Philippe Goibaud-Dubois" label="Philippe Goibaud-Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958571" start="20001" end="20016" title="Charles Boileau" label="Charles Boileau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338057" start="20044" end="20059" title="Gaspard Abeille" label="Gaspard Abeille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339968" start="20087" end="20113" title="Nicolas-Hubert de Mongault" label="Nicolas-Hubert de Mongault"/>
<link wikidata="Q982034" start="20141" end="20161" title="Charles Pinot Duclos" label="Charles Pinot Duclos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986451" start="20201" end="20216" title="Nicolas Beauzée" label="Nicolas Beauzée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418816" start="20242" end="20265" title="Jean-Jacques Barthélemy" label="Jean-Jacques Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736424" start="20293" end="20307" title="Joseph Chénier" label="Joseph Chénier"/>
<link wikidata="Q49767" start="20342" end="20372" title="François-René de Chateaubriand" label="François-René de Chateaubriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q320659" start="20417" end="20442" title="Paul, 6th duc de Noailles" label="Paul, 6th duc de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579886" start="20467" end="20480" title="Édouard Hervé" label="Édouard Hervé"/>
<link wikidata="Q309995" start="20506" end="20520" title="Paul Deschanel" label="Paul Deschanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212634" start="20546" end="20561" title="Charles Jonnart" label="Auguste Jonnart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164102" start="20619" end="20637" title="Maurice Paléologue" label="Maurice Paléologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960549" start="20675" end="20694" title="Charles de Chambrun (1875–1952)" label="Charles de Chambrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q945624" start="20718" end="20731" title="Fernand Gregh" label="Fernand Gregh"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388" start="20782" end="20792" title="René Clair" label="René Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235443" start="20834" end="20847" title="Pierre Moinot" label="Pierre Moinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q667925" start="20893" end="20910" title="Jean-Loup Dabadie" label="Jean-Loup Dabadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507241" start="20963" end="20981" title="Sylviane Agacinski" label="Sylviane Agacinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237217" start="21025" end="21046" title="Paul Hay du Chastelet" label="Paul Hay du Chastelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000265" start="21068" end="21100" title="Nicolas Perrot d&amp;#x27;Ablancourt" label="Nicolas Perrot d&amp;#x27;Ablancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q733246" start="21126" end="21158" title="Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy" label="Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3168368" start="21182" end="21198" title="Jean-Paul Bignon" label="Jean-Paul Bignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861746" start="21226" end="21246" title="Armand-Jérôme Bignon" label="Armand-Jérôme Bignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260557" start="21272" end="21298" title="Louis-Georges de Bréquigny" label="Louis-Georges de Bréquigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q537788" start="21323" end="21351" title="Ponce Denis Écouchard Lebrun" label="Ponce Denis Écouchard Lebrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q769608" start="21371" end="21401" title="François Juste Marie Raynouard" label="François Juste Marie Raynouard"/>
<link wikidata="Q660553" start="21444" end="21459" title="François Mignet" label="François Mignet"/>
<link wikidata="Q583868" start="21484" end="21496" title="Victor Duruy" label="Victor Duruy"/>
<link wikidata="Q197935" start="21536" end="21550" title="Jules Lemaître" label="Jules Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558435" start="21587" end="21601" title="Henry Bordeaux" label="Henry Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q683230" start="21636" end="21652" title="Thierry Maulnier" label="Thierry Maulnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118765" start="21693" end="21705" title="José Cabanis" label="José Cabanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238522" start="21744" end="21758" title="Angelo Rinaldi" label="Angelo Rinaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q646986" start="21797" end="21824" title="Marin le Roy de Gomberville" label="Marin le Roy de Gomberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q568497" start="21848" end="21866" title="Pierre Daniel Huet" label="Pierre Daniel Huet"/>
<link wikidata="Q775414" start="21894" end="21914" title="Jean Boivin the Younger" label="Jean Boivin le Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q961218" start="21939" end="21991" title="Paul-Hippolyte de Beauvilliers, duke of Saint-Aignan" label="Paul-Hippolyte de Beauvilliers, duke of Saint-Aignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q431528" start="22017" end="22041" title="Charles-Pierre Colardeau" label="Charles-Pierre Colardeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q379022" start="22071" end="22096" title="Jean-François de La Harpe" label="Jean-François de La Harpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860809" start="22139" end="22165" title="Pierre Louis de Lacretelle" label="Pierre Louis de Lacretelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615445" start="22187" end="22198" title="Joseph Droz" label="Joseph Droz"/>
<link wikidata="Q577504" start="22239" end="22274" title="Charles Forbes René de Montalembert" label="Charles Forbes René de Montalembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q712502" start="22301" end="22337" title="Henri d&amp;#x27;Orleans, duke of Aumale" label="Henri d&amp;#x27;Orleans, duke of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615602" start="22386" end="22423" title="Jean-Baptiste Claude Eugène Guillaume" label="Jean-Baptiste Claude Eugène Guillaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218474" start="22447" end="22459" title="Étienne Lamy" label="Étienne Lamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847528" start="22506" end="22522" title="André Chevrillon" label="André Chevrillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q314990" start="22580" end="22593" title="Marcel Achard" label="Marcel Achard"/>
<link wikidata="Q462579" start="22634" end="22650" title="Félicien Marceau" label="Félicien Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q380443" start="22699" end="22717" title="Alain Finkielkraut" label="Alain Finkielkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238681" start="22774" end="22803" title="Antoine Girard de Saint-Amant" label="Antoine Girard de Saint-Amant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158474" start="22823" end="22839" title="Jacques Cassagne" label="Jacques Cassagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263572" start="22876" end="22891" title="Louis de Verjus" label="Louis de Verjus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163733" start="22917" end="22939" title="Jean-Antoine de Mesmes (premier président)" label="Jean-Antoine de Mesmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093064" start="22965" end="22984" title="Pierre-Joseph Alary" label="Pierre-Joseph Alary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093558" start="23012" end="23034" title="Gabriel-Henri Gaillard" label="Gabriel-Henri Gaillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262731" start="23100" end="23130" title="Louis Philippe, comte de Ségur" label="Louis Philippe, comte de Ségur"/>
<link wikidata="Q205591" start="23186" end="23213" title="Jean-Pons-Guillaume Viennet" label="Jean-Pons-Guillaume Viennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q345822" start="23260" end="23286" title="Joseph d&amp;#x27;Haussonville" label="Joseph d&amp;#x27;Haussonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q723585" start="23325" end="23339" title="Ludovic Halévy" label="Ludovic Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q960640" start="23390" end="23403" title="Eugène Brieux" label="Eugène Brieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q81685" start="23429" end="23445" title="François Mauriac" label="François Mauriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q334952" start="23497" end="23509" title="Julien Green" label="Julien Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221840" start="23548" end="23563" title="René de Obaldia" label="René de Obaldia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750798" start="23612" end="23630" title="Guillaume Colletet" label="Guillaume Colletet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106111" start="23667" end="23681" title="Gilles Boileau" label="Gilles Boileau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175590" start="23701" end="23717" title="Jean de Montigny" label="Jean de Montigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="23754" end="23770" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q677590" start="23790" end="23823" title="Armand Gaston Maximilien de Rohan" label="Armand Gaston Maximilien de Rohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q933301" start="23866" end="23898" title="Louis-Gui de Guérapin de Vauréal" label="Louis-Gui de Guérapin de Vauréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26681" start="23941" end="23970" title="Charles Marie de La Condamine" label="Charles Marie de La Condamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q981922" start="23994" end="24009" title="Jacques Delille" label="Jacques Delille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415943" start="24046" end="24079" title="François-Nicolas-Vincent Campenon" label="François-Nicolas-Vincent Campenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317629" start="24099" end="24112" title="Marc Girardin" label="Marc Girardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835365" start="24158" end="24173" title="Alfred Mézières" label="Alfred Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="Q965117" start="24232" end="24245" title="René Boylesve" label="René Boylesve"/>
<link wikidata="Q318440" start="24278" end="24290" title="Abel Hermant" label="Abel Hermant"/>
<link wikidata="Q289739" start="24339" end="24353" title="Étienne Gilson" label="Étienne Gilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q678163" start="24380" end="24393" title="Henri Gouhier" label="Henri Gouhier"/>
<link wikidata="Q966176" start="24440" end="24456" title="Pierre Rosenberg" label="Pierre Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226865" start="24515" end="24529" title="Jean de Silhon" label="Jean de Silhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188971" start="24555" end="24576" title="Jean-Baptiste Colbert" label="Jean-Baptiste Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q49496" start="24602" end="24621" title="Jean de La Fontaine" label="Jean de La Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188981" start="24641" end="24661" title="Jules de Clérambault" label="Jules de Clérambault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120080" start="24689" end="24706" title="Guillaume Massieu" label="Guillaume Massieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096330" start="24734" end="24771" title="Claude-François-Alexandre Houtteville" label="Claude-François-Alexandre Houtteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q49478" start="24799" end="24817" title="Pierre de Marivaux" label="Pierre de Marivaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976707" start="24856" end="24896" title="Claude-François Lysarde de Radonvilliers" label="Claude-François Lysarde de Radonvilliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q466093" start="24924" end="24954" title="Constantin-François Chassebœuf" label="Constantin-François Chassebœuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q372652" start="24981" end="25008" title="Claude-Emmanuel de Pastoret" label="Claude-Emmanuel de Pastoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341204" start="25051" end="25085" title="Louis de Beaupoil de Saint-Aulaire" label="Louis de Beaupoil de Saint-Aulaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q338386" start="25111" end="25128" title="Victor de Broglie (1785–1870)" label="Victor de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042506" start="25154" end="25183" title="Prosper Duvergier de Hauranne" label="Prosper Duvergier de Hauranne"/>
<link wikidata="Q42247" start="25209" end="25224" title="Sully Prudhomme" label="Sully Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="25257" end="25271" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q198621" start="25338" end="25350" title="Alfred Capus" label="Alfred Capus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206391" start="25401" end="25417" title="Édouard Estaunié" label="Édouard Estaunié"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262847" start="25454" end="25481" title="Louis-Pasteur Vallery-Radot" label="Louis-Pasteur Vallery-Radot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508038" start="25503" end="25516" title="Étienne Wolff" label="Étienne Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q455421" start="25541" end="25560" title="Jean-François Revel" label="Jean-François Revel"/>
<link wikidata="Q516318" start="25598" end="25607" title="Max Gallo" label="Max Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085868" start="25646" end="25661" title="François Sureau" label="François Sureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237752" start="25699" end="25723" title="Claude de L&amp;#x27;Estoile" label="Claude de L&amp;#x27;Estoile"/>
<link wikidata="Q82726" start="25757" end="25791" title="Armand de Camboust, duc de Coislin" label="Armand de Camboust, duc de Coislin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387793" start="25813" end="25847" title="Pierre de Camboust, duc de Coislin" label="Pierre de Camboust, duc de Coislin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130355" start="25872" end="25907" title="Henri Charles du Cambout de Coislin" label="Henri Charles du Cambout de Coislin"/>
<link wikidata="Q366972" start="25934" end="25954" title="Jean-Baptiste Surian" label="Jean-Baptiste Surian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="25981" end="26014" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean Le Rond, dit d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336002" start="26058" end="26108" title="Marie-Gabriel-Florent-Auguste de Choiseul-Gouffier" label="Marie-Gabriel-Florent-Auguste de Choiseul-Gouffier"/>
<link wikidata="Q519797" start="26133" end="26160" title="Jean-Étienne-Marie Portalis" label="Jean-Étienne-Marie Portalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385814" start="26209" end="26222" title="Pierre Laujon" label="Pierre Laujon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277482" start="26257" end="26282" title="Charles-Guillaume Étienne" label="Charles-Guillaume Étienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336002" start="26340" end="26390" title="Marie-Gabriel-Florent-Auguste de Choiseul-Gouffier" label="Marie-Gabriel-Florent-Auguste de Choiseul-Gouffier"/>
<link wikidata="Q649515" start="26415" end="26430" title="Jean-Louis Laya" label="Jean-Louis Laya"/>
<link wikidata="Q336010" start="26464" end="26478" title="Charles Nodier" label="Charles Nodier"/>
<link wikidata="Q160333" start="26522" end="26537" title="Prosper Mérimée" label="Prosper Mérimée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615633" start="26560" end="26576" title="Louis de Loménie" label="Louis de Loménie"/>
<link wikidata="Q297726" start="26599" end="26614" title="Hippolyte Taine" label="Hippolyte Taine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278915" start="26651" end="26663" title="Albert Sorel" label="Albert Sorel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251496" start="26687" end="26701" title="Charles Maurice Donnay" label="Maurice Donnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q236630" start="26726" end="26739" title="Marcel Pagnol" label="Marcel Pagnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q928270" start="26790" end="26802" title="Jean Bernard (physician)" label="Jean Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q442505" start="26831" end="26850" title="Dominique Fernandez" label="Dominique Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237898" start="26911" end="26929" title="Amable de Bourzeys" label="Amable de Bourzeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685541" start="26969" end="26981" title="Jean Gallois (abbot)" label="Jean Gallois"/>
<link wikidata="Q971289" start="27009" end="27020" title="Edme Mongin" label="Edme Mongin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172741" start="27048" end="27071" title="Jean Ignace de La Ville" label="Jean Ignace de La Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q786579" start="27112" end="27139" title="Jean-Baptiste-Antoine Suard" label="Jean-Baptiste-Antoine Suard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689438" start="27163" end="27182" title="Jean-François Roger (1776–1842)" label="Jean-François Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q664722" start="27217" end="27228" title="Henri Patin" label="Henri Patin"/>
<link wikidata="Q607202" start="27253" end="27288" title="Marie-Louis-Antoine-Gaston Boissier" label="Marie-Louis-Antoine-Gaston Boissier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248117" start="27329" end="27340" title="René Doumic" label="René Doumic"/>
<link wikidata="Q224029" start="27399" end="27412" title="André Maurois" label="André Maurois"/>
<link wikidata="Q59076" start="27477" end="27490" title="Marcel Arland" label="Marcel Arland"/>
<link wikidata="Q271295" start="27555" end="27567" title="Georges Duby" label="Georges Duby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215270" start="27592" end="27609" title="Jean-Marie Rouart" label="Jean-Marie Rouart"/>
<link wikidata="Q318496" start="27663" end="27675" title="Abel Servien" label="Abel Servien"/>
<link wikidata="Q321666" start="27701" end="27734" title="Jean-Jacques Renouard de Villayer" label="Jean-Jacques Renouard de Villayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q310309" start="27760" end="27791" title="Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle" label="Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q585513" start="27833" end="27854" title="Antoine-Louis Séguier" label="Antoine-Louis Séguier"/>
<link wikidata="Q361976" start="27876" end="27915" title="Jacques-Henri Bernardin de Saint-Pierre" label="Jacques-Henri Bernardin de Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355014" start="27939" end="27953" title="Étienne Aignan" label="Étienne Aignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564908" start="27994" end="28010" title="Alexandre Soumet" label="Alexandre Soumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q442299" start="28045" end="28058" title="Ludovic Vitet" label="Ludovic Vitet"/>
<link wikidata="Q682706" start="28087" end="28102" title="Elme Marie Caro" label="Elme Marie Caro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370290" start="28129" end="28186" title="Gabriel Paul Othenin de Cléron, comte d&amp;#x27;Haussonville" label="Gabriel Paul Othenin de Cléron, comte d&amp;#x27;Haussonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871483" start="28223" end="28249" title="Auguste-Armand de la Force" label="Auguste-Armand de la Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q356537" start="28273" end="28286" title="Joseph Kessel" label="Joseph Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373922" start="28325" end="28337" title="Michel Droit" label="Michel Droit"/>
<link wikidata="Q266382" start="28361" end="28372" title="Pierre Nora" label="Pierre Nora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248124" start="28414" end="28439" title="Jean-Louis Guez de Balzac" label="Jean-Louis Guez de Balzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837192" start="28463" end="28500" title="Hardouin de Péréfixe de Beaumont" label="Paul Hardouin de Péréfixe de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q686100" start="28542" end="28575" title="François de Harlay de Champvallon" label="François de Harlay de Champvallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q518173" start="28603" end="28615" title="André Dacier" label="André Dacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q542800" start="28657" end="28673" title="Guillaume Dubois" label="Guillaume Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q129022" start="28716" end="28745" title="Charles-Jean-François Hénault" label="Charles-Jean-François Hénault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959512" start="28771" end="28795" title="Charles Juste de Beauvau" label="Charles Juste de Beauvau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550536" start="28833" end="28865" title="Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai" label="Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853464" start="28924" end="28955" title="Antoine-François-Claude Ferrand" label="Antoine-François-Claude Ferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q126961" start="29013" end="29030" title="Casimir Delavigne" label="Casimir Delavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063392" start="29065" end="29094" title="Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve" label="Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q956459" start="29127" end="29138" title="Jules Janin" label="Jules Janin"/>
<link wikidata="Q354382" start="29173" end="29186" title="John Lemoinne" label="John Lemoinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q729578" start="29225" end="29245" title="Ferdinand Brunetière" label="Ferdinand Brunetière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130614" start="29314" end="29327" title="Henri Barboux" label="Henri Barboux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133051" start="29349" end="29361" title="Henry Roujon" label="Henry Roujon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271887" start="29417" end="29430" title="Louis Barthou" label="Louis Barthou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341186" start="29521" end="29535" title="Claude Farrère" label="Claude Farrère"/>
<link wikidata="Q193674" start="29583" end="29595" title="Henri Troyat" label="Henri Troyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q713222" start="29655" end="29676" title="Jean-Christophe Rufin" label="Jean-Christophe Rufin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383867" start="29731" end="29744" title="Pierre Bardin" label="Pierre Bardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340134" start="29789" end="29804" title="Nicholas Bourbon (the younger)" label="Nicolas Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083383" start="29832" end="29866" title="François-Henri Salomon de Virelade" label="François-Henri Salomon de Virelade"/>
<link wikidata="Q379947" start="29888" end="29905" title="Philippe Quinault" label="Philippe Quinault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086151" start="29940" end="29961" title="François de Callières" label="François de Callières"/>
<link wikidata="Q439144" start="29988" end="30011" title="André-Hercule de Fleury" label="André-Hercule de Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079775" start="30054" end="30082" title="Paul d&amp;#x27;Albert de Luynes" label="Paul d&amp;#x27;Albert de Luynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q551740" start="30110" end="30139" title="Jean-Pierre Claris de Florian" label="Jean-Pierre Claris de Florian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165511" start="30184" end="30226" title="Jean-François Cailhava de L&amp;#x27;Estandoux" label="Jean-François Cailhava de L&amp;#x27;Estandoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041329" start="30269" end="30283" title="Joseph François Michaud" label="Joseph Michaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q964160" start="30323" end="30343" title="Jean Pierre Flourens" label="Jean Pierre Flourens"/>
<link wikidata="Q208230" start="30371" end="30385" title="Claude Bernard" label="Claude Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q157155" start="30407" end="30419" title="Ernest Renan" label="Ernest Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q674393" start="30446" end="30474" title="Paul-Armand Challemel-Lacour" label="Paul-Armand Challemel-Lacour"/>
<link wikidata="Q956253" start="30513" end="30529" title="Gabriel Hanotaux" label="Gabriel Hanotaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q326584" start="30579" end="30594" title="André Siegfried" label="André Siegfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q379956" start="30634" end="30654" title="Henry de Montherlant" label="Henry de Montherlant"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="30703" end="30722" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q115243" start="30752" end="30764" title="Amin Maalouf" label="Amin Maalouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428109" start="30805" end="30840" title="Honorat de Bueil, seigneur de Racan" label="Honorat de Bueil, seigneur de Racan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083667" start="30860" end="30895" title="François-Séraphin Régnier-Desmarais" label="François-Séraphin Régnier-Desmarais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898822" start="30938" end="30959" title="Bernard de la Monnoye" label="Bernard de la Monnoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q588696" start="30997" end="31024" title="Michel Poncet de La Rivière" label="Michel Poncet de La Rivière"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380036" start="31052" end="31067" title="Jacques Hardion" label="Jacques Hardion"/>
<link wikidata="Q301210" start="31092" end="31114" title="Antoine Léonard Thomas" label="Antoine Léonard Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q666631" start="31134" end="31177" title="Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert" label="Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q290045" start="31203" end="31235" title="Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès" label="Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès"/>
<link wikidata="Q316674" start="31295" end="31327" title="Louis Gabriel Ambroise de Bonald" label="Louis Gabriel Ambroise de Bonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677861" start="31368" end="31392" title="Jacques-François Ancelot" label="Jacques-François Ancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333348" start="31437" end="31451" title="Ernest Legouvé" label="Ernest Legouvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q127539" start="31506" end="31516" title="René Bazin" label="René Bazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093059" start="31553" end="31570" title="Théodore Gosselin" label="Théodore Gosselin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20733" start="31638" end="31653" title="Georges Duhamel" label="Georges Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223949" start="31716" end="31729" title="Maurice Druon" label="Maurice Druon"/>
<link wikidata="Q459596" start="31768" end="31785" title="Danièle Sallenave" label="Danièle Sallenave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387462" start="31841" end="31858" title="Pierre de Boissat" label="Pierre de Boissat"/>
<link wikidata="Q586211" start="31881" end="31898" title="Antoine Furetière" label="Antoine Furetière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175477" start="31982" end="32001" title="Jean de La Chapelle" label="Jean de La Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428893" start="32021" end="32057" title="Pierre-Joseph Thoulier d&amp;#x27;Olivet" label="Pierre-Joseph Thoulier d&amp;#x27;Olivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q272119" start="32100" end="32127" title="Étienne Bonnot de Condillac" label="Étienne Bonnot de Condillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q219622" start="32171" end="32210" title="Louis-Élisabeth de La Vergne de Tressan" label="Louis-Élisabeth de La Vergne de Tressan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685301" start="32244" end="32263" title="Jean Sylvain Bailly" label="Jean Sylvain Bailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q294344" start="32305" end="32327" title="Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès" label="Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès"/>
<link wikidata="Q725675" start="32412" end="32437" title="Gérard de Lally-Tollendal" label="Gérard de Lally-Tollendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164434" start="32463" end="32498" title="Jean-Baptiste Sanson de Pongerville" label="Jean-Baptiste Sanson de Pongerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q963467" start="32518" end="32532" title="Xavier Marmier" label="Xavier Marmier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340976" start="32565" end="32581" title="Henri de Bornier" label="Henri de Bornier"/>
<link wikidata="Q202749" start="32616" end="32630" title="Edmond Rostand" label="Edmond Rostand"/>
<link wikidata="Q380842" start="32665" end="32678" title="Joseph Bédier" label="Joseph Bédier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191078" start="32705" end="32719" title="Jérôme Tharaud" label="Jérôme Tharaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="32743" end="32755" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398687" start="32825" end="32838" title="Jacques Rueff" label="Jacques Rueff"/>
<link wikidata="Q736648" start="32883" end="32895" title="Jean Dutourd" label="Jean Dutourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308172" start="32919" end="32934" title="Michael Edwards (literary scholar)" label="Michael Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q560343" start="32983" end="33007" title="Claude Favre de Vaugelas" label="Claude Favre de Vaugelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q772240" start="33033" end="33051" title="Georges de Scudéry" label="Georges de Scudéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881019" start="33096" end="33118" title="Philippe de Courcillon" label="Philippe de Courcillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q697562" start="33164" end="33193" title="Armand de Vignerot du Plessis" label="Armand de Vignerot du Plessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083388" start="33242" end="33272" title="François-Henri d&amp;#x27;Harcourt" label="François-Henri d&amp;#x27;Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q151098" start="33295" end="33311" title="Lucien Bonaparte" label="Lucien Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q327552" start="33361" end="33378" title="Louis-Simon Auger" label="Louis-Simon Auger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277482" start="33419" end="33444" title="Charles-Guillaume Étienne" label="Charles-Guillaume Étienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q309702" start="33480" end="33495" title="Alfred de Vigny" label="Alfred de Vigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219520" start="33515" end="33529" title="Camille Doucet" label="Camille Doucet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957903" start="33564" end="33591" title="Charles Costa de Beauregard" label="Charles Costa de Beauregard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136079" start="33631" end="33649" title="Hippolyte Langlois" label="Hippolyte Langlois"/>
<link wikidata="Q274969" start="33672" end="33686" title="Émile Boutroux" label="Émile Boutroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387652" start="33741" end="33757" title="Pierre de Nolhac" label="Pierre de Nolhac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508946" start="33806" end="33842" title="Georges-François-Xavier-Marie Grente" label="Georges-François-Xavier-Marie Grente"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131604" start="33894" end="33906" title="Henri Massis" label="Henri Massis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102929" start="33970" end="33983" title="Georges Izard" label="Georges Izard"/>
<link wikidata="Q984530" start="34042" end="34053" title="Robert Aron" label="Robert Aron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243536" start="34091" end="34105" title="Maurice Rheims" label="Maurice Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q216266" start="34147" end="34166" title="Alain Robbe-Grillet" label="Alain Robbe-Grillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q662366" start="34204" end="34222" title="François Weyergans" label="François Weyergans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367546" start="34260" end="34270" title="Pascal Ory" label="Pascal Ory"/>
<link wikidata="Q729846" start="34312" end="34327" title="Vincent Voiture" label="Vincent Voiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618397" start="34347" end="34372" title="François Eudes de Mézeray" label="François Eudes de Mézeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170594" start="34394" end="34420" title="Jean Barbier d&amp;#x27;Aucour" label="Jean Barbier d&amp;#x27;Aucour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086168" start="34442" end="34471" title="François de Clermont-Tonnerre" label="François de Clermont-Tonnerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340955" start="34499" end="34518" title="Nicolas de Malézieu" label="Nicolas de Malézieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170899" start="34548" end="34560" title="Jean Bouhier (jurist)" label="Jean Bouhier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="34604" end="34638" title="Voltaire" label="François-Marie Arouet dit Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500310" start="34697" end="34716" title="Jean-François Ducis" label="Jean-François Ducis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357659" start="34751" end="34765" title="Raymond Desèze" label="Raymond Desèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988452" start="34787" end="34838" title="Amable Guillaume Prosper Brugière, baron de Barante" label="Amable Guillaume Prosper Brugière, baron de Barante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580421" start="34864" end="34894" title="Auguste Joseph Alphonse Gratry" label="Auguste Joseph Alphonse Gratry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463272" start="34938" end="34954" title="Saint-René Taillandier" label="René Taillandier"/>
<link wikidata="Q918268" start="34980" end="34994" title="Maxime Du Camp" label="Maxime Du Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q198644" start="35031" end="35043" title="Paul Bourget" label="Paul Bourget"/>
<link wikidata="Q706785" start="35088" end="35101" title="Edmond Jaloux" label="Edmond Jaloux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167016" start="35165" end="35184" title="Jean-Louis Vaudoyer" label="Jean-Louis Vaudoyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725605" start="35242" end="35254" title="Marcel Brion" label="Marcel Brion"/>
<link wikidata="Q727302" start="35306" end="35318" title="Michel Mohrt" label="Michel Mohrt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035010" start="35383" end="35397" title="Dominique Bona" label="Dominique Bona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140186" start="35438" end="35466" title="Honorat de Porchères Laugier" label="Honorat de Porchères Laugier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368276" start="35486" end="35500" title="Paul Pellisson" label="Paul Pellisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310002" start="35525" end="35565" title="François Fénelon" label="François de Salignac de La Mothe Fénelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977512" start="35606" end="35625" title="Claude Gros de Boze" label="Claude Gros de Boze"/>
<link wikidata="Q537780" start="35664" end="35698" title="Louis, Count of Clermont" label="Louis de Bourbon Condé de Clermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q711842" start="35726" end="35759" title="Pierre-Laurent Buirette de Belloy" label="Pierre-Laurent Buirette de Belloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052519" start="35795" end="35832" title="Emmanuel-Félicité de Durfort de Duras" label="Emmanuel-Félicité de Durfort de Duras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238234" start="35870" end="35892" title="Dominique Joseph Garat" label="Dominique Joseph Garat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386118" start="36011" end="36036" title="Louis-François de Bausset" label="Louis-François de Bausset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456807" start="36079" end="36104" title="Hyacinthe-Louis de Quélen" label="Hyacinthe-Louis de Quélen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371497" start="36132" end="36150" title="Louis-Mathieu Molé" label="Louis-Mathieu Molé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627019" start="36176" end="36216" title="Frédéric Alfred Pierre, comte de Falloux" label="Frédéric Alfred Pierre, comte de Falloux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348840" start="36256" end="36269" title="Octave Gréard" label="Octave Gréard"/>
<link wikidata="Q475489" start="36340" end="36353" title="Émile Gebhart" label="Émile Gebhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="36422" end="36438" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q966894" start="36500" end="36517" title="Jacques Bainville" label="Jacques Bainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185863" start="36557" end="36577" title="Joseph de Pesquidoux" label="Joseph de Pesquidoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q22750" start="36614" end="36630" title="Maurice Genevoix" label="Maurice Genevoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238654" start="36654" end="36679" title="Jacques de Bourbon-Busset" label="Jacques de Bourbon-Busset"/>
<link wikidata="Q469459" start="36728" end="36742" title="François Cheng" label="François Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131513" start="36804" end="36833" title="Henri Louis Habert de Montmor" label="Henri Louis Habert de Montmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263510" start="36861" end="36875" title="Louis de Lavau" label="Louis de Lavau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085145" start="36903" end="36933" title="François Lefebvre de Caumartin" label="François Lefebvre de Caumartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q375270" start="36961" end="37000" title="François-Augustin de Paradis de Moncrif" label="François-Augustin de Paradis de Moncrif"/>
<link wikidata="Q454900" start="37045" end="37082" title="Jean-Armand de Bessuéjouls Roquelaure" label="Jean-Armand de Bessuéjouls Roquelaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="37110" end="37124" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q652688" start="37155" end="37185" title="André Marie Jean Jacques Dupin" label="André Marie Jean Jacques Dupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q705174" start="37222" end="37253" title="Alfred-Auguste Cuvillier-Fleury" label="Alfred-Auguste Cuvillier-Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q912271" start="37298" end="37326" title="Jules Arsène Arnaud Claretie" label="Jules Arsène Arnaud Claretie"/>
<link wikidata="Q207958" start="37373" end="37386" title="Joseph Joffre" label="Joseph Joffre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170357" start="37424" end="37438" title="Maxime Weygand" label="Maxime Weygand"/>
<link wikidata="Q554018" start="37461" end="37483" title="Louis Leprince-Ringuet" label="Louis Leprince-Ringuet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215771" start="37572" end="37586" title="Yves Pouliquen" label="Yves Pouliquen"/>
<link wikidata="Q860387" start="37616" end="37633" title="Antoine Compagnon" label="Antoine Compagnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q730427" start="37674" end="37700" title="Marin Cureau de la Chambre" label="Marin Cureau de la Chambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384584" start="37746" end="37773" title="Pierre Cureau de La Chambre" label="Pierre Cureau de La Chambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q314975" start="37801" end="37819" title="Jean de La Bruyère" label="Jean de La Bruyère"/>
<link wikidata="Q929742" start="37856" end="37869" title="Claude Fleury" label="Claude Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158097" start="37897" end="37909" title="Jacques Adam" label="Jacques Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185667" start="37936" end="37948" title="Joseph Séguy" label="Joseph Séguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q363636" start="37976" end="38013" title="Cardinal de Rohan" label="Louis René Édouard, cardinal de Rohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171732" start="38075" end="38088" title="Jean Devaines" label="Jean Devaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q931980" start="38115" end="38132" title="Évariste de Parny" label="Évariste de Parny"/>
<link wikidata="Q204889" start="38152" end="38181" title="Victor-Joseph Étienne de Jouy" label="Victor-Joseph Étienne de Jouy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824914" start="38230" end="38251" title="Adolphe-Simonis Empis" label="Adolphe-Simonis Empis"/>
<link wikidata="Q738494" start="38286" end="38307" title="Henri Auguste Barbier" label="Henri Auguste Barbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q365794" start="38327" end="38342" title="Adolphe Perraud" label="Adolphe Perraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q614133" start="38370" end="38393" title="François-Désiré Mathieu" label="François-Désiré Mathieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q695178" start="38435" end="38449" title="Louis Duchesne" label="Louis Duchesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371115" start="38504" end="38517" title="Henri Brémond" label="Henri Brémond"/>
<link wikidata="Q75059" start="38585" end="38601" title="André Bellessort" label="André Bellessort"/>
<link wikidata="Q527963" start="38681" end="38694" title="René Grousset" label="René Grousset"/>
<link wikidata="Q727576" start="38723" end="38737" title="Pierre Gaxotte" label="Pierre Gaxotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q699510" start="38777" end="38794" title="Jacques Soustelle" label="Jacques Soustelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q662406" start="38859" end="38879" title="Jean-François Deniau" label="Jean-François Deniau"/>
<link wikidata="Q766776" start="38928" end="38946" title="Philippe Beaussant" label="Philippe Beaussant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984757" start="38987" end="39001" title="Barbara Cassin" label="Barbara Cassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014162" start="39061" end="39095" title="Daniel Hay du Chastelet de Chambon" label="Daniel Hay du Chastelet de Chambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q294100" start="39141" end="39164" title="Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet" label="Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247737" start="39206" end="39226" title="Melchior de Polignac" label="Melchior de Polignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185026" start="39288" end="39304" title="Odet-Joseph Giry" label="Odet-Joseph Giry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063695" start="39332" end="39347" title="Charles Batteux" label="Charles Batteux"/>
<link wikidata="Q343159" start="39375" end="39397" title="Antoine-Marin Lemierre" label="Antoine-Marin Lemierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q745986" start="39432" end="39468" title="Félix-Julien-Jean Bigot de Préameneu" label="Félix-Julien-Jean Bigot de Préameneu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345371" start="39505" end="39527" title="Mathieu de Montmorency" label="Mathieu de Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833737" start="39566" end="39583" title="Alexandre Guiraud" label="Alexandre Guiraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q380824" start="39628" end="39647" title="Jean-Jacques Ampère" label="Jean-Jacques Ampère"/>
<link wikidata="Q958294" start="39686" end="39716" title="Lucien-Anatole Prévost-Paradol" label="Lucien-Anatole Prévost-Paradol"/>
<link wikidata="Q706002" start="39747" end="39762" title="Camille Rousset" label="Camille Rousset"/>
<link wikidata="Q736699" start="39787" end="39806" title="Paul Thureau-Dangin" label="Paul Thureau-Dangin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387585" start="39831" end="39849" title="Pierre de La Gorce" label="Pierre de La Gorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q18443" start="39897" end="39924" title="Maurice, 6th duc de Broglie" label="Maurice, 6th duc de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q648584" start="39960" end="39976" title="Eugène Tisserant" label="Eugène Tisserant"/>
<link wikidata="Q355495" start="40020" end="40033" title="Jean Daniélou" label="Jean Daniélou"/>
<link wikidata="Q481450" start="40097" end="40117" title="Ambroise-Marie Carré" label="Ambroise-Marie Carré"/>
<link wikidata="Q129228" start="40145" end="40156" title="René Girard" label="René Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311134" start="40200" end="40211" title="Michel Zink" label="Michel Zink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870904" start="40281" end="40307" title="Auger de Moléon de Granier" label="Auger de Moléon de Granier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881598" start="40378" end="40392" title="Balthazar Baro" label="Balthazar Baro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171797" start="40427" end="40438" title="Jean Doujat" label="Jean Doujat"/>
<link wikidata="Q710804" start="40460" end="40475" title="Eusèbe Renaudot" label="Eusèbe Renaudot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130370" start="40503" end="40529" title="Henri-Emmanuel de Roquette" label="Henri-Emmanuel de Roquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387665" start="40557" end="40588" title="Pierre de Pardaillan de Gondrin" label="Pierre de Pardaillan de Gondrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339956" start="40616" end="40652" title="Nicolas-François Dupré de Saint-Maur" label="Nicolas-François Dupré de Saint-Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q551456" start="40694" end="40740" title="Guillaume-Chrétien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes" label="Guillaume-Chrétien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q970585" start="40794" end="40811" title="François Andrieux" label="François Andrieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738" start="40854" end="40868" title="Adolphe Thiers" label="Adolphe Thiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q954657" start="40908" end="40920" title="Henri Martin (historian)" label="Henri Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209169" start="40945" end="40965" title="Ferdinand de Lesseps" label="Ferdinand de Lesseps"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="40989" end="41003" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France"/>
<link wikidata="Q200639" start="41036" end="41047" title="Paul Valéry" label="Paul Valéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q454685" start="41097" end="41109" title="Henri Mondor" label="Henri Mondor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398" start="41183" end="41195" title="Louis Armand" label="Louis Armand"/>
<link wikidata="Q366227" start="41252" end="41272" title="Jean-Jacques Gautier" label="Jean-Jacques Gautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435287" start="41335" end="41352" title="Jean-Louis Curtis" label="Jean-Louis Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q218311" start="41389" end="41403" title="François Jacob" label="François Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237205" start="41428" end="41440" title="Marc Lambron" label="Marc Lambron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262043" start="41499" end="41509" title="Louis Giry" label="Louis Giry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977083" start="41531" end="41543" title="Claude Boyer" label="Claude Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957993" start="41592" end="41613" title="Charles-Claude Genest" label="Charles-Claude Genest"/>
<link wikidata="Q432585" start="41641" end="41660" title="Jean-Baptiste Dubos" label="Jean-Baptiste Dubos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165580" start="41702" end="41735" title="Jean-François Du Bellay du Resnel" label="Jean-François Du Bellay du Resnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q822205" start="41763" end="41784" title="Bernard-Joseph Saurin" label="Bernard-Joseph Saurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201477" start="41815" end="41868" title="Marquis de Condorcet" label="Jean-Antoine-Nicolas de Caritat, marquis de Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345749" start="41913" end="41927" title="Gabriel Villar" label="Gabriel Villar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958252" start="41955" end="41978" title="Charles-Marie de Féletz" label="Charles-Marie de Féletz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270734" start="42006" end="42019" title="Désiré Nisard" label="Désiré Nisard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16053" start="42043" end="42067" title="Eugène-Melchior de Vogüé" label="Eugène-Melchior de Vogüé"/>
<link wikidata="Q561510" start="42132" end="42148" title="Henri de Régnier" label="Henri de Régnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q537014" start="42191" end="42212" title="Jacques de Lacretelle" label="Jacques de Lacretelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q643408" start="42236" end="42259" title="Bertrand Poirot-Delpech" label="Bertrand Poirot-Delpech"/>
<link wikidata="Q767435" start="42308" end="42318" title="Jean Clair" label="Jean Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014880" start="42377" end="42394" title="Daniel de Priézac" label="Daniel de Priézac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310136" start="42423" end="42438" title="Michel Le Clerc" label="Michel Le Clerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160354" start="42460" end="42479" title="Jacques de Tourreil" label="Jacques de Tourreil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169989" start="42505" end="42522" title="Jean-Roland Malet" label="Jean-Roland Malet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723189" start="42555" end="42571" title="valet de chambre" label="valet de chambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165493" start="42574" end="42593" title="Jean-François Boyer" label="Jean-François Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340825" start="42621" end="42647" title="Nicolas Thyrel de Boismont" label="Nicolas Thyrel de Boismont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096309" start="42675" end="42702" title="Claude-Carloman de Rulhière" label="Claude-Carloman de Rulhière"/>
<link wikidata="Q705666" start="42746" end="42772" title="Pierre Jean George Cabanis" label="Pierre Jean George Cabanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q351691" start="42819" end="42843" title="Antoine Destutt de Tracy" label="Antoine Destutt de Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157324" start="42870" end="42885" title="François Guizot" label="François Guizot"/>
<link wikidata="Q164824" start="42925" end="42944" title="Jean-Baptiste Dumas" label="Jean-Baptiste Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q315436" start="42982" end="43012" title="Joseph Louis François Bertrand" label="Joseph Louis François Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18425" start="43063" end="43082" title="Marcellin Berthelot" label="Marcellin Berthelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341785" start="43149" end="43164" title="Francis Charmes" label="Francis Charmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q706123" start="43203" end="43215" title="Jules Cambon" label="Jules Cambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q932986" start="43269" end="43293" title="Marie-Jean-Lucien Lacaze" label="Marie-Jean-Lucien Lacaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158523" start="43316" end="43333" title="Jacques Chastenet" label="Jacques Chastenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q310590" start="43383" end="43398" title="Georges Dumézil" label="Georges Dumézil"/>
<link wikidata="Q690286" start="43456" end="43472" title="Pierre-Jean Rémy" label="Pierre-Jean Rémy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470586" start="43519" end="43532" title="Xavier Darcos" label="Xavier Darcos"/>
</links>
</doc>
