<doc id="578152" wikidata="Q44378" url="?curid=578152" title="Big Show">
<text>Paul Donald Wight II (born February 8, 1972) is an American professional wrestler and actor. He is signed to All Elite Wrestling (AEW), as a wrestler and was a commentator for its web television show, &quot;AEW Dark: Elevation,&quot; under his real name of Paul Wight. He is best known for his tenure with World Championship Wrestling (WCW) from 1995 to 1999 as The Giant and his tenure with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, later WWE) from 1999 to 2021 under the ring name (The) Big Show.

Wight played college basketball at Wichita State University before transferring to other schools. Wight began his wrestling career in 1994. In 1995 he signed with WCW, where, due to his very large frame, he was known by the ring name The Giant (and was initially introduced as &quot;the son of André the Giant&quot;). In early 1999, he left WCW to join the World Wrestling Federation (WWF).

Between WWF/WWE and WCW, he has held 23 total championships - including being a seven-time world champion, having held the WCW World Heavyweight Championship twice, the WWF/WWE Championship twice, WWE&#x27;s World Heavyweight Championship twice and the ECW World Heavyweight Championship once, (making him the only wrestler who has won all four titles), and an 11-time world tag team champion, holding the WWF/World, WWE and WCW World Tag Team Championships multiple times with various partners. Having also won the Intercontinental, United States and Hardcore championships, he is the 24th Triple Crown and 12th Grand Slam winner in WWE history. He also won the 60-man battle royal at World War 3 and the 30-man André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal at WrestleMania 31. He has headlined multiple pay-per-view events for WCW and WWF/WWE since 1995, including the 2000 edition of WWE&#x27;s premier annual event, WrestleMania.

Outside of professional wrestling, Wight has appeared in feature films and television series such as &quot;Jingle All the Way&quot;, &quot;The Waterboy&quot;, &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot;, and two USA Network&#x27;s comedy-dramas &quot;Royal Pains&quot;, &quot;Psych&quot; and the action-drama &quot;Burn Notice&quot;. He had lead roles in the WWE Studios comedy film &quot;Knucklehead&quot; and the Netflix sitcom &quot;The Big Show Show&quot;.

== Early life ==
Wight was born February 8, 1972, in Aiken, South Carolina. He was born with acromegaly, a disease of the endocrine system that causes accelerated growth. By the age of twelve, he was tall, weighed , and had chest hair. In 1991, as a member of the Wichita State University basketball team at age 19, he was listed at . He underwent successful surgery in the early 1990s on his pituitary gland, which halted the growth. His shoe size is 22 5E, his ring size is 22, and his chest is in circumference. In 2005, he leased a bus and hired a bus driver because of the practical problems his size presents to air travel and car rental.

Wight played basketball and American football in high school at Wyman King Academy in Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. He was a standout center for the basketball team and a tight end for the football team. He quit football after his freshman year because of disputes with the coach. He continued to support the team by joining the cheerleading squad as a sophomore, partly from spite. He later called it &quot;the greatest experience of my life... Everybody else was riding a bus with sweaty equipment, and I&#x27;m in a van with seven cheerleaders who are all learning about life&quot;. The van was driven by &quot;a mom who was deaf in her right ear and chain-smoked&quot;.

After leaving high school, Wight attended Northern Oklahoma Junior College in Tonkawa, Oklahoma, where his basketball averages of 14 points and 6.5 rebounds earned him all-conference honors and helped the team win the Western Division of the Oklahoma Bi-State Conference. He went on to attend Wichita State University, where in 1991-1992 he played for the Wichita State Shockers. Wight subsequently attended Southern Illinois University Edwardsville from 1992 to 1993, where he was a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division II Cougars basketball team and scored 39 points for the Cougars in limited action; he joined the Xi Beta chapter of Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity at Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville.

After graduating, Wight worked various jobs including bouncing, bounty hunting, and answering phone calls.

== Professional wrestling career ==

=== Training and early career (1994–1995) ===
Wight paid $5,000 to train at Larry Sharpe&#x27;s Monster Factory, but due to Sharpe&#x27;s gout at the time, he was only very minimally trained (Johnny Polo taught him the collar-and-elbow tie-up). Wight wrestled the first match of his career on December 3, 1994, at a World Wrestling Association (WWA) show in Clementon, New Jersey; he lost by count-out to WWA Heavyweight Champion Frank Finnegan.

Wight attempted to inquire about joining the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) during an autograph session at the Rosemont Horizon. Promoter and scout Bob Collins turned him away after he admitted he had no experience. While attending the Monster Factory, Wight made an audition tape and gave it to Mike Chioda, whom he had met in a Philadelphia bar. Chioda forwarded it to Pat Patterson, who did not bother watching it because he assumed Wight was another wrestler, Kurrgan. Only when he later saw The Giant debut in World Championship Wrestling (WCW) did Patterson realize his mistake, much to Vince McMahon&#x27;s displeasure.

While answering phones for a karaoke company, Wight met Danny Bonaduce in a live microphone amateur contest on his morning radio show. Bonaduce introduced Wight to his friend, WCW wrestler Hulk Hogan. They had an informal basketball game, as part of a WCW promotion for an upcoming show at the Rosemont Horizon. Hogan liked how Wight worked the crowd and recommended him to WCW&#x27;s vice president, Eric Bischoff. Wight went to the Horizon show, and was invited into the locker room, where he met Ric Flair, Arn Anderson (his boyhood hero) and Paul Orndorff. He later met Bischoff there and came to a deal.

=== World Championship Wrestling (1995–1999) ===

==== WCW World Heavyweight Champion (1995–1996) ====
In 1995, Wight signed with WCW. He debuted on May 21 at Slamboree, where he was billed as the son of André the Giant (although this was later dropped) and accordingly used the ring name &quot;The Giant&quot; as a member of Kevin Sullivan&#x27;s Dungeon of Doom stable. Wight made his professional in-ring debut at Halloween Havoc on October 29 against Hulk Hogan for the WCW World Heavyweight Championship. He won the match after Hogan&#x27;s manager, Jimmy Hart, purposely got Hogan disqualified and then turned on him. The next night The Giant showed up on &quot;WCW Monday Nitro&quot; wearing the championship belt; Hart, who became The Giant&#x27;s manager, revealed that he had put a stipulation in the contract for the match that if Hogan lost via disqualification, he would lose his championship. WCW responded by nullifying the title change due to the circumstances surrounding it and the championship was vacated.

The Giant then entered the sixty-man battle royal contested for the vacant championship at World War 3 on November 26. He was one of the final six combatants, being eliminated simultaneously with Sting and Lex Luger by Hogan. The Giant did not leave the ring upon being eliminated and pulled Hogan underneath the ropes while Randy Savage was eliminating the One Man Gang from the match. The referee did not see The Giant&#x27;s actions, only that Hogan was on the floor, and thus awarded the match and the title to Savage. The Giant teamed with Ric Flair to defeat Hogan and Savage at Clash of the Champions XXXII on January 23, 1996, but was defeated by Hogan in a cage match at SuperBrawl VI on February 11. After a short feud with Loch Ness (defeating him at Uncensored on March 24), The Giant regained the World Heavyweight Championship by defeating Flair. After Hogan formed the New World Order (nWo), he defeated The Giant for the title at Hog Wild on August 10 following interference from Scott Hall and Kevin Nash.

==== New World Order (1996–1999) ====

The Giant joined the nWo 23 days later, citing Ted DiBiase&#x27;s money as his primary motivation, feuding with Lex Luger and the Four Horsemen. After winning the battle royal at World War 3 on November 24, The Giant asked Hogan for a World Heavyweight Championship title match. For this, he was thrown out of the nWo on December 30. He fought against the nWo along with Sting and Luger, winning the WCW World Tag Team Championship twice.

The Giant began a feud with nWo member Nash, who constantly dodged the Giant, including no-showing their scheduled match at Starrcade on December 28, 1997. At Souled Out on January 24, 1998, the two finally met in the ring, with Nash accidentally injuring The Giant&#x27;s neck when he botched his signature jackknife powerbomb finisher. The botch was worked into a storyline, according to which Nash had intentionally dropped the Giant on his head in order to break his neck. When Nash left the nWo and formed his own stable, the nWo Wolfpac, The Giant rejoined the original nWo to oppose Nash and his allies. While back with the nWo, The Giant won two more Tag Team Championships, once with Sting as an unwilling partner (as the match was signed before The Giant returned to the nWo) and once with Scott Hall. In the interim between those two reigns, he lost his half of the titles to Sting in a singles match where only the winner would remain champion and could choose a new partner.

On the October 12 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;, Bill Goldberg defeated The Giant in a no-disqualification match. In a show of strength, Goldberg executed a delayed vertical suplex before executing the Jackhammer on The Giant. After the nWo Hollywood and nWo Wolfpac stables merged again in January 1999, Hogan declared that there was only room for one &quot;giant&quot; in the group, forcing Giant and Nash to wrestle for that spot. Nash defeated Giant following a run-in by Scott Hall and Eric Bischoff. The Giant was then attacked by the entire nWo. On the &quot;Building An Army&quot; episode of the &quot;Monday Night War&quot; feature from the WWE Network, Wight stated that he was making a fraction of what the main eventers were making and his salary was not increased after he requested it be by Eric Bischoff; as a result, Wight allowed his WCW contract to expire on February 8, 1999, his 27th birthday.

=== World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment (1999–2007) ===

==== WWF Champion (1999–2003) ====
Wight signed a ten-year contract with the World Wrestling Federation in the midst of the promotion&#x27;s &quot;Attitude Era&quot; . He debuted on February 14, 1999, under the name &quot;Paul Wight&quot; at St. Valentine&#x27;s Day Massacre: In Your House, establishing himself as a member of Vince McMahon&#x27;s villainous stable, the Corporation. During McMahon&#x27;s cage match against Stone Cold Steve Austin, Wight tore through the canvas from underneath the ring and attacked Austin, establishing himself as a heel. After he threw Austin into the side of the cage, the cage broke, causing Austin to fall outside to the floor, resulting in Austin winning the match. Wight subsequently served as McMahon&#x27;s enforcer.

Renamed as Big Show, he made his WrestleMania debut at WrestleMania XV on March 28, facing Mankind for the right to referee the main event between Austin and The Corporation&#x27;s WWF Champion The Rock. However, Big Show incapacitated Mankind and was disqualified in the process, losing the match. After the match, McMahon slapped him, so he punched McMahon, turning face and leaving The Corporation. After being defeated by Mankind in a Boiler Room Brawl, they formed a stable with Test, and Ken Shamrock known as The Union, who fought against the Corporation and later The Corporate Ministry. On the June 7 episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;, Big Show faced The Undertaker for the WWF Championship, which ended by referee stoppage and The Undertaker retained his title. Big Show later turned heel once again by teaming with The Undertaker, wrestling against X-Pac and Kane at SummerSlam on August 22, and they won the WWF Tag Team Championship twice.

After The Undertaker was sidelined with injuries, Big Show turned face once again and began a feud with the Big Boss Man around the death of Big Show&#x27;s father (in reality, Wight&#x27;s father had died years before). During his feud, they taped a segment where Big Boss Man invaded the funeral and used a chain to steal the coffin. Big Show then took on Big Boss Man, Prince Albert, Mideon and Viscera at Survivor Series on November 14 in a 4-on-1 elimination match. His feud was poorly received, winning the &quot;Wrestling Observer Newsletter&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Worst Feud Award&quot; and he won the match after Big Boss Man was counted out. Later that night, Big Show participated in a Triple Threat match against The Rock and the WWF Champion, Triple H, replacing Austin in the match after he was kayfabe run over by a car and winning the title. At that point, WWF looked for something new and fresh, so they gave the title to Big Show. Despite Big Show retaining the title at Armageddon on December 12 against Big Boss Man, he lost the title against Triple H on the January 3, 2000, episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;. Trying to regain the title, Big Show participated in the Royal Rumble match on January 23 where he was last eliminated by The Rock. They started a storyline where Big Show turned heel once again by producing a videotape that showed The Rock&#x27;s feet striking the ground first, leading to a match with The Rock at No Way Out on February 27, with the WrestleMania title shot on the line. At No Way Out, Big Show defeated The Rock when Shane McMahon interfered, knocking out The Rock with a chair shot. The Rock was desperate to reclaim his title shot and eventually agreed to a match with Big Show on the March 13 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; – if he won, the WrestleMania title match would become a Triple Threat match, and if he lost, he would retire from the WWF. Shane McMahon, now actively supporting Big Show&#x27;s bid to become champion, appointed himself as the special guest referee. However, The Rock defeated Big Show when Vince McMahon assaulted Shane and donned the referee shirt, personally making the three count. On the March 20 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H defended the title against The Rock and Big Show on the condition that the match would not take place at WrestleMania 2000 on April 2, pinning Big Show. Linda McMahon stated this match would not occur at WrestleMania as Triple H would defend the title there in a Fatal Four-Way Elimination match, with Mick Foley as the fourth man. Big Show was the first man eliminated from the match at WrestleMania after the other three competitors worked together against him.

After WrestleMania, Big Show turned face again and took on a comical gimmick where he began mimicking other wrestlers, lampooning Rikishi as Showkishi, The Berzerker as Shonan the Barbarian, and Val Venis as The Big Showbowski. He defeated Kurt Angle at Backlash on April 30 dressed like Hulk Hogan as the Showster, complete with skullcap/wig and yellow tights. Big Show began feuding with Shane McMahon after Shane voiced his disapproval of Big Show&#x27;s antics. At Judgment Day on May 21, Shane defeated Big Show in a Falls Count Anywhere match following interference from Big Boss Man, Bull Buchanan, Test, and Albert. Big Show returned two months later, apparently intending to gain revenge on Shane. Instead, he turned heel again and attacked The Undertaker and sided with Shane once more, forming a short-lived stable known as &quot;The Conspiracy&quot; with Shane, Chris Benoit, Kurt Angle, and Edge and Christian. After The Undertaker threw Big Show off a stage through a table on the August 7, 2000, episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;, he was removed from WWF television for the remainder of the year. Big Show was sent to Ohio Valley Wrestling, a WWF developmental territory, to lose weight and improve his cardiovascular fitness. Indicating the company&#x27;s lack of faith and plans for him at the time, he was completely removed from the upcoming WWF video games &quot;WWF SmackDown! 2: Know Your Role&quot; and &quot;WWF No Mercy&quot; which were both released in November 2000.
Big Show made a surprise, unannounced return as the #23 entrant in the Royal Rumble match on January 21, 2001, but was immediately eliminated by The Rock less than 2 minutes after his entry. Angered by his quick elimination, Big Show proceeded to chokeslam The Rock through the broadcast table before leaving the arena. He then began competing for the WWF Hardcore Championship and at No Way Out on February 25, Big Show defeated Raven to win the championship. He would lose the title to Raven on the March 19 episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;. Big Show lost to Kane in a Triple Threat match for the Hardcore Championship that also included Raven at WrestleMania X-Seven on April 1. He faced Shane McMahon, the on-screen owner of WCW, in a Last Man Standing match at Backlash on April 29 and was defeated following interference from Test. He turned face again soon after. Throughout The Invasion, Big Show remained loyal to the WWF. Big Show was also part of the victorious Team WWF at Survivor Series on November 18, though he was the first man eliminated.

Shortly after WrestleMania X8 on March 17, 2002, Big Show was drafted to the Raw brand. On the April 22 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show turned heel again when he chokeslammed Stone Cold Steve Austin during a tag team match against X-Pac and Scott Hall, joining the nWo in the process. At Judgment Day on May 19, Big Show and Ric Flair were defeated by Austin in a Handicap match. The stable disbanded after Kevin Nash was injured. After the nWo disbanded, Big Show achieved little success on &quot;Raw&quot;, losing matches against Jeff Hardy, Booker T, and the Dudley Boyz.

In October, Big Show was traded to the SmackDown! brand, immediately challenging Brock Lesnar for the WWE Championship. During this time, Big Show adopted a new attire, donning black jeans and taking on a new hairstyle and facial hair. Big Show won the WWE Championship by defeating Lesnar at Survivor Series on November 17, ending Lesnar&#x27;s undefeated streak with help from Paul Heyman. He lost the title to Kurt Angle a month later at Armageddon on December 15. Then SmackDown! general manager Stephanie McMahon announced that Big Show would wrestle Chris Benoit on the December 26 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot; in a match to determine who would face Angle at the Royal Rumble on January 19, 2003. He lost to Benoit after Benoit pinned him. After the match, Benoit was brutally attacked by Big Show and Angle. At the Royal Rumble, Big Show lost a Royal Rumble qualifying match to Brock Lesnar. He then began feuding with The Undertaker, after Big Show threw him off the stage, injuring his neck, leading to Big Show and his partner A-Train losing to The Undertaker at WrestleMania XIX on March 30. He renewed his feud with Lesnar, wrestling him four times for the WWE Championship (including a Stretcher match at Judgment Day on May 18), but was unsuccessful in his attempt to regain the title. On the June 12 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, Lesnar superplexed Big Show off the ropes and the ring imploded, two ring posts moved and three rows of ropes came down. The referee called for the event physician Dr. Burke, EMTs, medics, trainers, and even more referees. This kept the title in Lesnar&#x27;s hands and both went to the hospital. On the June 26 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, Big Show, Shelton Benjamin, and Charlie Haas defeated Mr. America (a disguised Hulk Hogan), Lesnar, and Angle in a six-man tag team match when Big Show pinned Mr. America. This was Hogan&#x27;s last appearance as Mr. America. For several months afterwards, WWE hyped up Big Show as the man who retired Hogan.

==== United States Champion (2003–2005) ====
At No Mercy on October 19, Big Show defeated Eddie Guerrero for the WWE United States Championship. He then allied with then-WWE Champion Brock Lesnar. He was eliminated by Chris Benoit at the Royal Rumble on January 25, 2004. Big Show abandoned a departing Lesnar immediately before WrestleMania XX on March 14. At WrestleMania XX, Big Show lost the United States Championship to John Cena. On the April 15 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, Big Show promised to quit if he failed to defeat Eddie Guerrero that night. He lost to Guerrero after Guerrero performed a Frog Splash, and, believing that Torrie Wilson had laughed at him for losing, upended her car and threatened to throw her off a ledge. Then General Manager of SmackDown! Kurt Angle ascended the ledge to try to talk some reason into Big Show, but he chokeslammed Angle off the ledge, kayfabe concussing him and breaking his leg, as well as causing the back of Angle&#x27;s head to bleed. After the show, Big Show was neither seen nor heard from on WWE television for months as he had knee surgery on April 24.

In August, Big Show was reinstated by new general manager Theodore Long, as he interfered during a Lumberjack match between Eddie Guerrero and Kurt Angle on the September 9 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot;. Big Show had a choice to face either Guerrero or Angle at No Mercy on October 3, choosing to fight Angle, turning face in the process. Big Show defeated Angle at No Mercy. In the weeks before the match, he claimed to have &quot;lost his dignity&quot; when Angle tranquilized him in the middle of the ring using a dart gun and shaved his head on the fifth anniversary episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot;. At No Way Out on February 20, 2005, he faced John &quot;Bradshaw&quot; Layfield (JBL) for the WWE Championship in the first-ever Barbed Wire Steel Cage match. He chokeslammed JBL through the ring and broke the lock on the door but JBL crawled from under the canvas and won. Big Show attacked JBL but The Cabinet attacked Big Show until Batista attacked The Cabinet and John Cena attacked JBL as he crawled away.

At WrestleMania 21 on April 3, Big Show faced Sumo Grand Champion Akebono in a worked sumo match; the match was added to the show to attract a strong pay-per-view audience in Japan, where Akebono is considered a sporting legend. In the weeks preceding the match, Big Show pushed over a jeep driven to the ring by Luther Reigns to show that he was capable of moving the marginally heavier Akebono. Big Show lost to Akebono at WrestleMania 21. Big Show subsequently feuded with Carlito and his bodyguard, Matt Morgan, losing a match to Carlito at Judgment Day on May 22 after Morgan interfered.

On the June 27 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show was drafted to the Raw brand in the 2005 WWE draft lottery; preventing him from participating in a scheduled Six-Man Elimination match for the &quot;SmackDown!&quot; Championship. He successfully pinned Gene Snitsky in a tag team match, which turned into a singles match when both men&#x27;s partners brawled backstage. After squashing his scheduled opponents for several weeks, Big Show returned to his rivalry with Snitsky. On the August 22 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, he foiled Snitsky&#x27;s harassment of backstage interviewer Maria. The following week, Snitsky hit Big Show with the ring bell immediately after Big Show had won a match. As a result, Big Show and Snitsky were placed in a match at Unforgiven on September 18, in which Big Show defeated Snitsky. On the September 26 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show defeated Snitsky again in a Street Fight.

==== Teaming with Kane (2005–2006) ====

On the October 17 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show defeated Edge and was thus entered in an online opinion poll, with the winner of the poll facing John Cena and Kurt Angle in a Triple Threat match for the WWE Championship at Taboo Tuesday on November 1. The poll was won by Shawn Michaels, meaning that the other two wrestlers competed for the World Tag Team Championship. At Taboo Tuesday, Big Show teamed with Kane to defeat Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch for the World Tag Team Championship.

In the weeks preceding Survivor Series on November 27, Big Show became involved in the rivalry between the Raw and SmackDown! brands. Big Show and Kane invaded the November 11 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot; and, along with Edge, attacked Batista (inadvertently injuring him in the process). On the November 14 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show and Kane defeated SmackDown! wrestlers and reigning WWE Tag Team Champions MNM in an inter-brand, non-title match. On the November 21 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show and Kane &quot;injured&quot; Batista by delivering a double chokeslam onto the windshield of a car. At Survivor Series, Big Show, Kane, Carlito, Chris Masters, and team captain Shawn Michaels represented Raw in a match with Team SmackDown! (JBL, Rey Mysterio, Bobby Lashley, Randy Orton, and Batista). Big Show was eliminated by Mysterio and Team SmackDown! won the match, with Orton being the sole survivor. On the November 29 &quot;SmackDown! Special&quot;, Big Show wrestled Rey Mysterio in an inter-brand promotional match, however, Kane interfered, resulting in the match being declared a no-contest. Following the match, Big Show and Kane attacked Mysterio until The Undertaker chased them from the ring. Big Show and Kane returned to &quot;SmackDown!&quot; on December 2, defeating Mysterio and JBL after JBL abandoned the match, claiming the referee had poked him in the eye. Following the match, Big Show and Kane&#x27;s attempt to assault Mysterio was once again foiled, this time when Batista ran in to see them off. As a result, on the December 16 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, Big Show and Kane were booked to face Batista and Mysterio, the WWE Tag Team Champions, at Armageddon on December 18. Big Show and Kane defeated Batista and Mysterio at Armageddon.

On the December 12 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show took part in a qualifying match for a shot at the WWE Championship in an Elimination Chamber match at New Year&#x27;s Revolution on January 8, 2006. Big Show lost to his opponent, Shawn Michaels, by disqualification after Triple H hit Michaels with a chair, intentionally costing Big Show the match and the title shot. In retaliation, Big Show cost Triple H his qualifying match with Kane later that evening. On the December 26 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, during the contract-signing for the match between Big Show and Triple H at New Year&#x27;s Revolution, Triple H struck Big Show in the hand that Big Show favored when using the chokeslam with his sledgehammer. The following week, Big Show attacked Triple H while wearing a cast on his hand, using the padding provided by the cast to punch a hole in a chair held by Triple H, destroying a monitor from the broadcast table that Triple H intended to throw at him, and chasing Triple H away from the ring. At New Year&#x27;s Revolution, Triple H defeated Big Show after striking him in the head with his sledgehammer and a &quot;Pedigree&quot;.

Subsequently, Big Show was one of eight participants in the 2006 Road to WrestleMania Tournament, the winner of which would receive a shot at the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 22 on April 2. On the February 16 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show faced Triple H in the tournament semi-finals in a match that ended in a double count-out. As a result, Big Show and Triple H faced Rob Van Dam (the winner of the opposing semi-finals) in a Triple Threat match to determine the winner of the tournament on the February 20 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. The match was won by Triple H after he pinned Van Dam.

In the weeks following the tournament, Big Show and Kane feuded with Chris Masters and Carlito, leading to a World Tag Team Championship match being scheduled for WrestleMania 22. At WrestleMania, Big Show and Kane defeated Carlito and Masters, marking Big Show&#x27;s first victory at WrestleMania. On the following night on &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show and Kane lost the World Tag Team Championship to Spirit Squad members Kenny and Mikey following copious interference from the other members of the Spirit Squad. They faced Spirit Squad members Johnny and Nicky in a rematch one week later, but lost via disqualification after Kane &quot;snapped&quot; and left the ring to attack the other members of the Spirit Squad. The ensuing feud between Kane and Big Show culminated in a match at Backlash on April 30 that ended in a ruling of no-contest.

==== ECW World Champion (2006–2007) ====

At WWE vs. ECW Head-to-Head on June 7, Big Show joined the newly debuted ECW brand as he removed his Raw shirt to reveal an ECW shirt during a twenty-man battle royal including members of the Raw and SmackDown! rosters against members of the ECW roster. Big Show won the match for ECW by eliminating Randy Orton. Big Show then appeared at ECW One Night Stand on June 11, attacking Tajiri, Super Crazy and The Full Blooded Italians after their tag team match.

On the July 4 episode of &quot;ECW&quot;, Big Show defeated Rob Van Dam to win the ECW World Heavyweight Championship in Philadelphia with the assistance of ECW&#x27;s Representative Paul Heyman, who declined to make the three-count for Van Dam after Van Dam performed the Five Star Frog Splash on Big Show. Heyman then instructed Big Show to chokeslam Van Dam onto a chair, before making the three-count, meaning Big Show won the title. The fans almost rioted when Big Show won the title, throwing drinks and empty cups into the ring as Heyman and Big Show celebrated, turning heel in the process. The victory made him the first ever professional wrestler to hold the WWE Championship, WCW World Heavyweight Championship and ECW World Heavyweight Championship. He is also the first non-ECW Original to hold the title. Over the next several weeks, Big Show defeated many other wrestlers from other brands, such as Ric Flair and Kane to retain the now renamed ECW World Championship, but lost to Batista and The Undertaker by disqualification. Big Show lost to The Undertaker at The Great American Bash on July 23 in the first ever Punjabi Prison match, replacing The Great Khali, who was removed by SmackDown! General Manager Theodore Long and replaced with Big Show as punishment for an attack on The Undertaker shortly before the match. He also had a brief feud with Sabu, whom he defeated at SummerSlam on August 20 to retain the ECW World Championship. Also at SummerSlam, Big Show was one of the &quot;resources&quot; used by Vince and Shane McMahon in their match against D-Generation X (DX). He became further involved in the McMahons&#x27; feud with DX when he teamed with Vince and Shane against Triple H and Shawn Michaels in a 3-on-2 handicap Hell in a Cell match at Unforgiven on September 17, which was won by DX. During the match, DX shoved Vince&#x27;s head up Big Show&#x27;s buttocks in a mockery of Vince&#x27;s Kiss My Ass Club.

At Cyber Sunday on November 5, Big Show faced John Cena and King Booker in a Champion of Champions match. The fans voted for King Booker&#x27;s World Heavyweight Championship to be on the line. However, Big Show failed to win the match, which was won by King Booker after pinning Cena following interference from Kevin Federline, who was just beginning a feud with Cena himself at the time. At Survivor Series on November 26, Big Show competed in the traditional 10-man Survivor Series tag team match which he lost after being pinned by Cena, the final survivor of the match along with Bobby Lashley. Big Show then began a feud with Lashley, who left &quot;SmackDown!&quot; to join the ECW brand to participate in the Extreme Elimination Chamber match at December to Dismember on December 3 for the ECW World Championship. At December to Dismember, after busting Big Show open by breaking one of the plexiglass pods with his face, Lashley defeated Big Show to win the ECW World Championship. Following an unsuccessful rematch on the December 5 episode of &quot;ECW&quot;, Big Show took time off from the ring to heal injuries he had sustained on ECW. After two months of inactivity, Wight&#x27;s contract expired on February 8, 2007.

=== Memphis Wrestling (2007) ===
After a two-month departure from WWE, Wight replaced Jerry Lawler when the WWE withdrew him from a match with former nWo partner Hulk Hogan at the PMG Clash of Legends on April 27, 2007. Wight was introduced as Paul &quot;The Great&quot; Wight. He stated that &quot;Big Show&quot; was his slave name and that he did not want to be owned anymore. Hogan won the match after he bodyslammed Wight and pinned him following the leg drop.

=== Return to WWE (2008–2021) ===
==== Unified WWE Tag Team Champion (2008–2010) ====
On February 17, 2008, at No Way Out, a much slimmer looking Big Show made his return to WWE television, attempted to attack Rey Mysterio after his World Heavyweight Championship match with Edge but got into a physical confrontation with boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr. after Mayweather came from the crowd to challenge Big Show. The confrontation ended with Mayweather breaking Big Show&#x27;s nose with a punching combination. Big Show lost to Mayweather at WrestleMania XXIV on March 30 by knockout after a shot to the jaw with brass knuckles. He turned face soon after.

At One Night Stand on June 1, Big Show defeated CM Punk, John Morrison, Chavo Guerrero, and Tommy Dreamer in a Singapore Cane match. During the bout, he received a black eye and deep gash along the eyebrow, which required stitches after Morrison swung a Singapore cane to his knee, which caused Big Show to fall with the steps. As he fell, the steps accidentally moved to the right, which hit Big Show in the eye. The win gave him contention to face Kane and Mark Henry at Night of Champions on June 29 for the ECW Championship, which Henry won by pinning Kane.

Big Show was then assigned to the SmackDown brand. Big Show turned heel once again by siding with Vickie Guerrero in her ongoing feud with The Undertaker by attacking him at Unforgiven on September 7 and later interfering in many of The Undertaker&#x27;s matches on &quot;SmackDown&quot;. He defeated The Undertaker by knockout at No Mercy on October 5. However, Big Show lost to The Undertaker in a fan-voted Last Man Standing match at Cyber Sunday on October 26 and a Casket Match at Survivor Series on November 23. Big Show then lost a Steel Cage match against The Undertaker on the December 5 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, ending the feud. In March 2009, it was revealed by John Cena that the Big Show was having secret relations with Vickie Guerrero. At WrestleMania 25 on April 5, Big Show was involved in a Triple Threat match for the World Heavyweight Championship featuring champion Edge and eventual winner Cena.

On April 13, Big Show was drafted to the Raw brand as a part of the 2009 WWE draft. At Backlash on April 26, Big Show interfered in a Last Man Standing match for the World Heavyweight Championship between Cena and Edge when he threw Cena into a spotlight, thus resulting in Edge winning the title and Cena being seriously injured. He continued to feud with John Cena, losing to him at Judgment Day on May 17 by pinfall and at Extreme Rules on June 7 in a submission match, before defeating Cena on the June 22 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; to end the feud.
In the weeks prior to Night of Champions on July 26, Big Show constantly attacked United States Champion Kofi Kingston and Evan Bourne among others. He then feuded with Kingston over the United States Championship and earned himself a spot in the six-pack challenge at Night of Champions. At Night of Champions, Big Show was introduced as Chris Jericho&#x27;s new tag team partner due to Edge needing time off to tend to an injury, thus taking Big Show out of the six-pack challenge for the United States Championship. Together, Jeri-Show were able to successfully defend the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship against The Legacy. Jeri-Show successfully defended the titles against Cryme Tyme at SummerSlam on August 23, MVP and Mark Henry at Breaking Point on September 13 and Rey Mysterio and Batista at Hell in a Cell on October 4. At Bragging Rights on October 25, Big Show represented Team Raw, but he betrayed and attacked his teammates, which led to Team SmackDown winning, so that he could receive an opportunity at the World Heavyweight Championship. Big Show received his title shot at Survivor Series on November 22 in a triple threat match against The Undertaker and Jericho, but The Undertaker successfully retained his title.

Jeri-Show lost the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship at on December 13 to D-Generation X (DX) in a Tables, Ladders and Chairs match. As a member of the SmackDown roster, Jericho could only appear on &quot;Raw&quot; as a champion and so DX intentionally disqualified themselves in a rematch to force Jericho off the show. Eventually the teams had a match with a definitive finish on the January 4, 2010 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, though DX still won, signalling the end of Jeri-Show.

On the February 8 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show regained the titles from DX with his new tag team partner The Miz in a Triple Threat Tag Team Elimination match, which also included the Straight Edge Society (CM Punk and Luke Gallows). On the February 16 episode of &quot;ECW&quot;, he and Miz successfully defended the titles against Yoshi Tatsu and Goldust on the final episode of &quot;ECW&quot;. On the March 1 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show and The Miz defeated DX in their rematch. At WrestleMania XXVI on March 28, Big Show and The Miz defeated John Morrison and R-Truth to retain the titles again. At Extreme Rules on April 25, ShoMiz was in a tag team gauntlet match where the team that beat them would get a title match the next night on &quot;Raw&quot;. ShoMiz beat the first two teams in the gauntlet match, John Morrison and R-Truth, then MVP and Mark Henry. They then lost to The Hart Dynasty, who earned the title shot. On the April 26, 2010, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show and The Miz lost the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship to The Hart Dynasty.

==== Championship pursuits and reunion with Kane (2010–2011) ====
After the title loss, he attacked The Miz with a knockout punch and hugged Theodore Long, turning face in the process. Later on in the night as part of the 2010 WWE draft, Big Show was drafted back to the SmackDown brand. He returned to the brand on the April 30 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot; and was subsequently named the number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship, later on in the night, he interrupted World Heavyweight Champion Jack Swagger as he was giving his &quot;State of Championship Address&quot; and knocked him out with a WMD. On the May 7 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show sat ringside during the Swagger/Kane main event. After Swagger was disqualified, Big Show chokeslammed him through the announce table. He also crashed Swagger&#x27;s achievement celebration and cost him his match with Kofi Kingston in the next week. Big Show defeated Swagger via disqualification at Over the Limit, but did not win the title. On the May 28 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, general manager Theodore Long scheduled qualifying matches for the World Heavyweight Championship match at Fatal 4-Way and that Big Show had already qualified by defeating Jack Swagger via disqualification at Over the Limit. At Fatal 4-Way, Big Show faced Rey Mysterio, CM Punk and Swagger for the World Heavyweight Championship, but Mysterio won the title. On the following episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Swagger debuted his new finishing move, &quot;The Ankle Lock&quot;, and applied it on Big Show, thus injuring his ankle and continuing their feud. Two weeks later on &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show saved Rey Mysterio, whose ankle was injured by the same move, from Swagger. Later that night, Big Show fought Swagger to a double count-out. Soon he began a feud with CM Punk and his Straight Edge Society, confronting him the Friday night before the Money in the Bank event, and unmasking him to reveal his bald head. After failing to win the SmackDown Money in the Bank ladder match at Money in the Bank, he fought the mysterious masked member of the SES, also unmasking him as Joey Mercury. Big Show&#x27;s feud with the Straight Edge Society continued after he defeated them in a 3 on 1 Handicap match at SummerSlam and CM Punk at Night of Champions. Big Show was made Team SmackDown&#x27;s captain for Bragging Rights on the October 8 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;. At Bragging Rights, Big Show was counted out with Sheamus during the match but his team ultimately won with Edge and Rey Mysterio left on the team. He was on Rey Mysterio&#x27;s team for Survivor Series where he was a survivor along with Mysterio. The following episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, he was unsuccessful in qualifying for the King of the Ring tournament as he was defeated by Alberto Del Rio by count-out thanks to interference by his personal ring announcer, Ricardo Rodriguez.
On the January 7, 2011, episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show participated in a Fatal 4-Way match to determine the number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship, losing due to interference by former Nexus leader Wade Barrett. The next week, Show faced Barrett and won via disqualification when former Nexus members Heath Slater and Justin Gabriel attacked him. Moments later Ezekiel Jackson appeared to help him, but instead attacked Big Show. The next week, Barrett, Slater, Gabriel and Jackson informed that they had formed the Corre. In the following weeks, the Corre continued to assault Show, due to the size and power of Ezekiel Jackson. At Elimination Chamber, Show participated in the Elimination Chamber match for the World Heavyweight Championship, eliminating Wade Barrett before being eliminated by Kane. Big Show feuded with The Corre in the following weeks.

On the March 4 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show faced Kane in a confrontation until the Corre interfered on Kane&#x27;s behalf. However, a miscommunication led to Kane turning on the Corre. Big Show and Kane thus reunited to take on the Corre. At WrestleMania XXVII, Big Show and Kane teamed with Santino Marella and Kofi Kingston to beat The Corre. On the April 22 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, the duo defeated Corre members Justin Gabriel and Heath Slater to win the WWE Tag Team Championship, their second championship win as a team. Big Show was drafted back to the Raw brand as a part of the 2011 WWE draft. He and Kane then started feuding with the New Nexus. After defending the titles against Wade Barrett and Ezekiel Jackson at Extreme Rules and CM Punk and Mason Ryan at Over the Limit, Kane and Big Show lost their titles to Michael McGilligutty and David Otunga on the following night on &quot;Raw&quot;. After losing the titles, Big Show was run over by Alberto Del Rio&#x27;s car, driven by his ring announcer Ricardo Rodriguez, and was sidelined with an injury for almost a month. He returned during a match between Kane and Del Rio, attacking both Del Rio and Rodriguez.

Big Show then began feuding with Mark Henry after he attacked and injured him on the June 17 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, as Big Show&#x27;s frustrations and anger towards Del Rio was redirected unintentionally to Mark Henry. Henry retaliated by attacking Big Show during his match at Capitol Punishment and attacking him with the World&#x27;s Strongest Slam through an announce table, causing Big Show to lose to Del Rio by knockout. Henry did the same thing on Kane through the broadcast table the next night on &quot;Raw&quot; after their arm wrestling match, and again on the June 27 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; when Henry then broke the cage door during the steel cage match between Big Show and Alberto Del Rio, allowing Del Rio to escape. He then attacked Big Show with the cage door, breaking the cage viciously. On July 17, 2011, at Money in the Bank, Henry defeated Big Show. After the match, Henry fractured Big Show&#x27;s fibula, keeping him out of action for almost three months.

==== World Heavyweight Champion (2011–2013) ====

On the October 7 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show returned and became number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship after he attacked Mark Henry and chokeslammed him through the broadcast table. At Vengeance, Big Show fought Henry to a no-contest after the ring collapsed following a superplex from Henry, similar to his match with Brock Lesnar in 2003. This time, less damage was done, and the damage mainly occurred around the lower right-hand ring post. Big Show ended up being taken out on a motorized cart with a flatbed. Big Show faced Mark Henry for the World Heavyweight Championship once again at Survivor Series winning via disqualification when Henry hit Big Show with a low blow, afterwards he leg dropped a chair on Henry&#x27;s leg, much like what Henry did to Big Show months before.

On December 18 at , Big Show finally defeated Henry for the World Heavyweight Championship in a Chairs Match. Afterwards, Henry knocked Big Show out with a DDT onto a chair and Daniel Bryan immediately cashed his Money in the Bank contract on Big Show to win the title. This gave Big Show the shortest-ever World Heavyweight Championship reign at 45 seconds. Big Show challenged Bryan for the World Heavyweight Championship on the January 6, 2012, episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, but Bryan retained his title by disqualification when he goaded Mark Henry into attacking him. The next week on &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show received a rematch for the title contested under no disqualification, no count-out rules. Bryan again retained his title as the rematch ended in a no-contest after Big Show accidentally crashed into AJ (Bryan&#x27;s storyline girlfriend) at ringside, injuring her. At the 2012 Royal Rumble, Big Show faced Bryan and Henry in a triple threat steel cage match for the World Heavyweight Championship, but Bryan escaped the steel cage to retain his title. At the Elimination Chamber event, Big Show failed again to capture the World Heavyweight Championship in an Elimination Chamber match after he was eliminated second by Cody Rhodes.

In the following weeks, Big Show began a feud with Rhodes after Rhodes highlighted Big Show&#x27;s embarrassing moments in previous WrestleManias, often costing Big Show to lose matches in the process. At WrestleMania XXVIII, Big Show defeated Rhodes to win the Intercontinental Championship. With this, Big Show became the twenty-fourth wrestler to win the Triple Crown Championship and the twelfth Grand Slam Champion in the WWE, and is currently the most recent wrestler to complete the original Grand Slam format. Big Show then began highlighting embarrassing moments in Rhodes&#x27; career. After a four-week reign, Big Show lost the Intercontinental Championship back to Rhodes at Extreme Rules in a Tables match. Big Show received his rematch on the May 7 episode of &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;, where he defeated Rhodes via countout after Rhodes walked out on the match. After a series of confrontations with Raw and SmackDown General Manager John Laurinaitis, Big Show was fired by Laurinaitis for making fun of his voice on the May 14 episode of &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;.

Six days later, Big Show returned at Over the Limit, seemingly to help John Cena in his match against John Laurinaitis; instead, he knocked Cena out with a WMD and allowed Laurinaitis to win the match by pinfall, turning heel in the process. The following night on &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;, Big Show explained that his actions were of necessity to keep his job in the WWE, therefore resulting in Laurinaitis re-signing him to an &quot;ironclad contract with a big fat bonus&quot;, also stating that nobody showed him any sympathy when he got fired. Over the next few weeks, he attacked Cena, Brodus Clay, Alex Riley, R-Truth, Santino Marella, Zack Ryder, and Kofi Kingston because of the terms of his contract. On the June 11 episode of &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;, he accidentally knocked out Vince McMahon after McMahon decided that Laurinatis would be fired if Big Show lost to Cena at No Way Out in a steel cage match. Big Show went on to lose that match at No Way Out and as per stipulation, Laurinaitis was fired. At Money in the Bank, Big Show faced Cena, Kane, Chris Jericho, and The Miz in the WWE Championship Money in the Bank ladder match, but was unsuccessful as the match was won by Cena. On July 23 at &quot;Raw 1000&quot;, Big Show attacked Cena during his WWE Championship match against CM Punk causing a disqualification. He continued the attack on Cena until The Rock made the save. The following week on &quot;Raw&quot;, a WWE Championship number one contenders match between Big Show and Cena ended in a no contest due to interference from Punk. Following this, both Big Show and Cena were entered in the championship match at SummerSlam by Raw General Manager AJ Lee. At SummerSlam, however, Big Show was unsuccessful as Punk retained the title.

Big Show returned on the September 24 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, attacking Brodus Clay and Tensai during their match. Four days later on &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show defeated Randy Orton to become the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship. Big Show received his title opportunity on October 28 at Hell in a Cell, where he defeated Sheamus to win the World Heavyweight Championship for the second time. On November 18 at Survivor Series, Big Show lost a title rematch to Sheamus via disqualification and retaining the World Heavyweight Championship as a result. After the match, Sheamus attacked Big Show and repeatedly hit him with a chair. This led to a Chairs match on December 16 at , where Big Show defeated Sheamus to retain the World Heavyweight Championship. On the December 24 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show was defeated by Sheamus in a non-title lumberjack match. On the December 28 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show defended his title against Alberto Del Rio, however, the match ended in a no-contest after Sheamus interfered and attacked Big Show. Three days later on the December 31 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show defended the World Heavyweight Championship against Del Rio&#x27;s ring announcer Ricardo Rodriguez and defeated him via disqualification after Del Rio attacked Big Show from behind. On the January 11 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show lost the World Heavyweight Championship to Del Rio in a Last Man Standing match, ending his reign at 72 days. Big Show received his rematch for the title in another Last Man Standing match on January 27 at the Royal Rumble, but was again defeated by Del Rio when Rodriguez used duct tape to stop Big Show from getting up. After Big Show repeatedly attacked Del Rio and Rodriguez, Del Rio defeated Big Show via submission on February 17 at Elimination Chamber to again retain his title.

On the March 1 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show knocked out Roman Reigns of The Shield with the &quot;KO Punch&quot; after Reigns was shoved into him during an attack on Randy Orton and Sheamus. After the March 4 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; went off-air, Big Show was attacked by the Shield. Four days later on &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show again assisted Sheamus and Orton in warding off The Shield, though he hit Sheamus with a KO Punch and was hit with an RKO by Orton in return. On the March 11 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show defeated Shield member Seth Rollins via disqualification after the rest of The Shield interfered. Orton and Sheamus were then allowed to pick a third partner to face the Shield in a six-man tag team match at WrestleMania 29 and originally chose Ryback. However, on the March 18 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Ryback was booked in another match at the event, leaving the spot open. Later that night, Big Show saved the two from an attack by The Shield and was immediately recruited as their partner. On April 7 at WrestleMania, Big Show, Orton and Sheamus were defeated by The Shield, after which, Big Show knocked out both Orton and Sheamus. The following night on &quot;Raw&quot;, Orton and Sheamus faced off in a match to earn a match with Big Show, however, the match ended in a no contest after Big Show interfered. Big Show was then defeated by Orton and Sheamus in two handicap matches, first on the April 12 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot; via count-out, and second on the April 15 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; via pinfall. On the April 19 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show teamed up with old rival Mark Henry to defeat Orton and Sheamus in a tag team match, with Big Show pinning Orton for the win. The feud between Big Show and Orton led to an Extreme Rules match on May 19 at Extreme Rules, which Big Show lost. After Extreme Rules, Big Show took a hiatus from WWE television.

==== The Authority (2013–2016) ====

Big Show made his televised return to WWE on the August 12 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, and helped Mark Henry and Rob Van Dam from an attack by The Shield, turning face in the process. On the August 16 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show, Henry, and Van Dam defeated the Shield in a six-man tag team match. After speaking out against COO Triple H on the following &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show was placed into a three-on-one handicap tornado tag team match against The Shield, which he lost. Following this, the Authority (Triple H and Stephanie McMahon) claimed Big Show was broke, and in order to save his job, forced him to knock out his friends including Daniel Bryan, Dusty Rhodes, and The Miz. At Battleground, he interfered in the WWE Championship match between Bryan and Randy Orton (the later of whom was allied with the Authority) and knocked out both of them, ending the match in a no-contest. He then faced Orton for the WWE Championship at Survivor Series but failed to win.
At , Big Show teamed with Rey Mysterio to unsuccessfully challenge Cody Rhodes and Goldust for the WWE Tag Team Championship in a four-way match, also involving RybAxel (Ryback and Curtis Axel), and The Real Americans (Antonio Cesaro and Jack Swagger). He subsequently started a feud with Brock Lesnar, which was settled at the Royal Rumble, where he was defeated. Big Show later participated in the André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal at WrestleMania XXX, being the last person eliminated by winner Cesaro. On the September 26 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show started a feud with Rusev, when he defeated him by disqualification, but Rusev was ultimately successful in a rematch at Hell in a Cell.

Big Show turned heel when joined the Authority at Survivor Series when he turned on John Cena and caused him to be eliminated from the Survivor Series elimination match against the Authority. In his first pay-per-view match as part of the faction, Big Show defeated Erick Rowan in a first-ever Steel Stairs match at . Later in the event, Big Show attacked Cena during his match with Seth Rollins but was then confronted by Roman Reigns, leading to Cena winning the match. Reigns went on to defeat Big Show multiple times by count-out and disqualification. On January 25, 2015, at the Royal Rumble, Big Show entered the Royal Rumble match at #29, eliminating five superstars before being eliminated by Reigns, the eventual winner. At Fastlane, Big Show, Rollins and Kane defeated Dolph Ziggler, Erick Rowan and Ryback. Big Show went on to win the 2nd Annual André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal at WrestleMania 31. However, Big Show lost to Reigns in a Last Man Standing match at Extreme Rules.

After a brief hiatus, Big Show returned on the June 1 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, where he knocked out The Miz and confronted Intercontinental Champion Ryback. Big Show challenged Ryback for his title at Money in the Bank, winning the match by disqualification after The Miz attacked Big Show. A triple threat match for the title took place at SummerSlam, where Ryback retained the title. On the August 31 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show received another championship match against Ryback, which he lost following a distraction from The Miz, ending the feud.
Big Show later became involved in the Authority&#x27;s feud with Sting, facing him in a match on the September 14 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. The match ended in a disqualification after interference from Seth Rollins. This led to John Cena storming the ring and the match becoming a tag team match with the team of Cena and Sting defeating the team of Big Show and Rollins. He was subsequently defeated by Brock Lesnar in the main event of Live from Madison Square Garden. On the November 9 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show entered the 16-man tournament to crown the new WWE World Heavyweight Champion and lost to Roman Reigns in the first round. At the Royal Rumble, Big Show entered the Royal Rumble match at #15 and eliminated Ryback and Titus O&#x27;Neil before being eliminated by Braun Strowman.

On the January 28, 2016, episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show turned face by helping Roman Reigns, Dean Ambrose, and Chris Jericho fend off all the members of The Wyatt Family, whom he, Kane and Ryback defeated at Fastlane after several singles matches against the likes of Erick Rowan and Braun Strowman, mostly in winning efforts, leading up to the event. However, the next night on &quot;Raw&quot;, The Wyatt Family would defeat the trio in a rematch. At WrestleMania 32, Big Show and Kane participated in the Andre the Giant Memorial Battle Royal, where Big Show faced off with Shaquille O&#x27;Neal, but the other participants would gang up on the two powerhouses and they were eliminated simultaneously. Kane and Big Show subsequently defeated Braun Strowman and Erick Rowan on the April 19 episode of &quot;Main Event&quot;, ending their feud the Wyatt Family in the process.

==== Sporadic appearances (2016–2021) ====

Big Show was drafted to Raw as part of the 2016 WWE draft. During this time, Big Show began appearing mostly on the live event circuit rather than televised events, as he transitioned into a part-time role. At the Royal Rumble on January 29, 2017, Big Show entered the Royal Rumble match at number 9, but was eliminated by Braun Strowman. After defeating Rusev at Fastlane, he competed in the André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal at WrestleMania 33, from which he was also eliminated by Strowman. Big Show wrestled Strowman two weeks later on &quot;Raw&quot;, where the ring collapsed after Strowman superplexed him, resulting in the match going to a no contest, similar to his matches with Brock Lesnar in 2003 and Mark Henry in 2011, respectively. Throughout the summer of 2017, Big Show feuded with Big Cass, culminating in a match at SummerSlam, where he was defeated. On the September 4 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show lost to Strowman in a steel cage match and was thrown through the cage after the match. The attack was written to take Big Show off television as he required hip surgery. His next appearance for WWE was on April 6, 2018, when he inducted his long-time friend and rival Mark Henry into the WWE Hall of Fame class of 2018.

Big Show returned on the October 9 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, where he faced Randy Orton in a losing effort. The following week, on the 1000th episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Big Show formed a short-lived alliance with The Bar (Cesaro and Sheamus) by helping them defeat The New Day for the SmackDown Tag Team Championship, thus turning heel in the process. This alliance ended on the November 27 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, after Big Show performed a KO Punch on Cesaro backstage. Following this, Big Show was written off television due to him suffering a hamstring injury. He didn&#x27;t wrestle in 2019. 

On the January 6, 2020, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show returned from injury over a year later as a fan favorite, teaming with Kevin Owens and Samoa Joe to defeat Seth Rollins and AOP via disqualification. In a match filmed after WrestleMania 36 ended, which aired on the April 6 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show reverted to a heel after insulting and challenging newly crowned WWE Champion Drew McIntyre for his title. He was subsequently defeated. His heel turn was short-lived, as Big Show turned face again by helping The Street Profits and The Viking Raiders fend off the group of ninjas led by Akira Tozawa on the June 15 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. He last wrestled in an unsanctioned match against Randy Orton on the July 20 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;.

On November 22, 2020, he made an appearance at Survivor Series during The Undertaker&#x27;s retirement ceremony. He made his final WWE appearance on the January 4, 2021, edition of &quot;Raw&quot; for &quot;Legends Night&quot;. Wight and WWE parted ways the following month after it was reported the two sides were unable to agree to financial terms on a new contract. Wight also cited &quot;creative frustrations&quot; and lack of ideas as reasons for his exit.

==== Cameo (2022)====
On the June 27, 2022, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Big Show appeared via video to congratulate John Cena on his career.

=== All Elite Wrestling (2021–present) ===
On February 24, 2021, All Elite Wrestling (AEW) announced that Big Show, now known in AEW by his real name, Paul Wight, had signed with the company and would be providing commentary alongside Tony Schiavone for their new YouTube series &quot;AEW Dark: Elevation&quot;, which premiered on March 15. It was also confirmed that while commentary for &quot;Elevation&quot; would be his initial role, he would also compete as an in-ring performer.

He debuted on the March 3 episode of &quot;AEW Dynamite&quot; titled The Crossroads and announced he had a &quot;big scoop&quot; that AEW would sign &quot;a Hall of Fame worthy talent that is a huge surprise and a huge asset&quot; at Revolution which was revealed to be Christian Cage. He also had some matches on AEW, most notably, defeating Q. T. Marshall at All Out.

On the November 1, 2023 episode of &quot;AEW Dynamite&quot;, Paul made his return to television where he was announced as a part of Jericho and Kenny Omega&#x27;s tag team to face off against The Don Callis Family in a four-on-four Street Fight. Wight appeared on the stage and knocked out Kyle Fletcher. On the November 15 episode of &quot;Dynamite&quot;, Wight&#x27;s team successfully defeated The Don Callis Family. After a year long absence, Wight returned on November 23, 2024 during the 2024 &quot;Full Gear&quot; event where he joined the commentary team for &quot;Big Boom&quot; A.J. and Q.T. Marshall&#x27;s match.

== Reception and legacy ==
Wight has often been compared to André the Giant throughout his career due to both suffering from acromegaly and having a similar overall body structure to André. Unlike André, who was content with his fate, Wight had surgery of the pituitary gland to halt his condition. The similarities led to WCW billing him as André&#x27;s son early in his career (despite no biological relation) and WWE involving him in similar angles as André. Wight has also stated that many older fans in the Southern United States (where Wight is from and where André made his home in the United States) not aware of kayfabe have often told Wight during autograph sessions how much they &quot;loved his father when he wrestled&quot;, even though Wight&#x27;s biological father was a mechanic. Wight would also outlive André, who died at age 46.

Wight is also well known for his frequent turns between face and heel throughout his career, to the point it has become a running gag among wrestling fans. One wrestling site has estimated that through 2018 Wight has made approximately 34 turns since his WCW debut in 1995, four of those alone coming during his first year with the WWF. Wight himself acknowledged that while the frequent turns may have hurt his legacy and his mystique, he was also honored with the fact that he can play both roles well and fit in wherever he is needed to put younger talent over.

== Other media ==
Big Show has been featured in infomercials for Stacker 2 with former NASCAR drivers Kenny Wallace and Scott Wimmer, NASCAR Xfinity Series driver Elliott Sadler, retired crew chief turned Fox Sports broadcaster Jeff Hammond, and 2002, 2005, and 2011 Sprint Cup Champion Tony Stewart. In addition, Wight appeared on the &quot;Thong Song&quot; remix music video by Sisqó and Foxy Brown. Wight was featured on the game show &quot;Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader?&quot;, winning $15,000 for his chosen charity, United Service Organizations. He is the only contestant to appear on two versions of the game show in two different countries. On March 31, 2012, Big Show won the first-ever Slime Wrestling World Championship at the Nickelodeon Kids&#x27; Choice Awards, defeating The Miz after throwing him into a tub of slime. In 2018, The Big Show appeared in the Wizards of the Coast&#x27;s &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; stream &quot;Stream of Many Eyes Day Three - Jocks Machina&quot; alongside Joe Manganiello, Travis Willingham, cross fit athlete Ron Mathews, and Mike Mearls as Dungeon Master.

== Filmography ==


== Video games ==


== Personal life ==
Wight married his first wife, Melissa Piavis, in 1997. They separated in 2000 and their divorce was finalized in 2002. Together, they have a daughter. In 2002, he married his second wife, Bess Katramados. They have two children together.

For many years, Wight has been an active supporter of Special Olympics, including the 2014 Special Olympics USA Games in New Jersey, where he participated in the Opening Ceremony. He was later named WWE Goodwill Ambassador for the 2015 Special Olympics World Games in Los Angeles. Since 2018, he has served as a Global Ambassador for Special Olympics International.

===Legal issues===
Wight was arrested in December 1998 by the Memphis Police Department for allegedly exposing himself to a female motel employee who was the front desk clerk at a hotel in Memphis, Tennessee. The charge though was subsequently dropped due to insufficient evidence.

In March 1999, Wight was charged with assault by Robert Sawyer, who alleged that Wight had broken his jaw during the summer of 1998 in the course of an altercation at Marriott Hotels &amp; Resorts in Uniondale, New York. Wight claimed that Sawyer had verbally abused, threatened, and shoved him, and that he had responded by punching Sawyer. After three days, Judge Thomas Feinman delivered a verdict of not guilty.

== Championships and accomplishments ==

* Pro Wrestling Illustrated
** Rookie of the Year (1996)
** Wrestler of the Year (1996)
** Ranked him No. 2 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the year in the &quot;PWI 500&quot; in 1996
**Ranked him No. 137 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; in 2003
* World Championship Wrestling
** WCW World Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
** WCW World Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Lex Luger (1), Sting (1), and Scott Hall (1)
** World War 3 (1996)
* World Wrestling Federation/World Wrestling Entertainment/WWE
** WWF/E Championship (2 times)
** World Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
** ECW World Championship (1 time)
** WWE Intercontinental Championship (1 time)
** WWF/E Hardcore Championship (3 times)
** WWE United States Championship (1 time)
**WWE Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Chris Jericho (1), The Miz (1), and Kane (1)
**WWF/World Tag Team Championship (5 times) – with The Undertaker (2), Kane (1), Chris Jericho (1), and The Miz (1)
** Brisbane Cup (2010)
** André the Giant Memorial Trophy (2015)
** Bragging Rights Trophy (2010) – With Team SmackDown 
** 24th Triple Crown Champion
** 12th Grand Slam Champion
** Slammy Award (5 times)
*** Tag Team of the Year (2009) – 
*** Holy $#!+ Move of the Year (2011) – 
*** Betrayal of the Year (2012) – 
*** &quot;This is Awesome&quot; Moment of the Year (2013) – 
*** Match of the Year (2014) – 
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter
** Most Embarrassing Wrestler (2002)
** Rookie of the Year (1996)
** Best Gimmick (1996) – nWo
** Feud of the Year (1996) 
** Worst Feud of the Year (1999) 
** Worst Feud of the Year (2013) 
** Worst Wrestler (2001, 2002)

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="0" end="20" title="Big Show" label="Paul Donald Wight II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="60" end="81" title="professional wrestler" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="109" end="128" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="180" end="194" title="web television" label="web television"/>
<link wikidata="" start="207" end="226" title="AEW Dark: Elevation" label="AEW Dark: Elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="257" end="267" title="Big Show" label="Paul Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="306" end="334" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="362" end="371" title="Big Show" label="The Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="396" end="422" title="World Wrestling Federation" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="435" end="438" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="478" end="492" title="Big Show" label="(The) Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="530" end="554" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q44368" start="789" end="804" title="André the Giant" label="André the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="978" end="992" title="Professional wrestling championship#World championships" label="world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="1010" end="1044" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="1045" end="1050" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="1056" end="1076" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF/WWE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331393" start="1077" end="1082" title="List of WWE Champions" label="twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="1095" end="1125" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339517" start="1126" end="1131" title="List of World Heavyweight Champions (WWE)" label="twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q666074" start="1140" end="1174" title="ECW World Heavyweight Championship" label="ECW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658122" start="1175" end="1179" title="List of ECW World Heavyweight Champions" label="once"/>
<link wikidata="Q721063" start="1256" end="1279" title="World tag team championship" label="world tag team champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="1293" end="1302" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF/World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="1304" end="1307" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="1312" end="1343" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="1403" end="1419" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="1421" end="1434" title="WWE United States Championship" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q74322" start="1439" end="1447" title="WWE Hardcore Championship" label="Hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1473" end="1490" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)#WWE" label="24th Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1495" end="1517" title="Grand Slam (professional wrestling)#List of WWE Grand Slam winners" label="12th Grand Slam winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944691" start="1557" end="1569" title="Battle royal (professional wrestling)" label="battle royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453378" start="1573" end="1584" title="World War 3 (1996)" label="World War 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q28200846" start="1600" end="1637" title="André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal" label="André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320207" start="1641" end="1656" title="WrestleMania 31" label="WrestleMania 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178296" start="1684" end="1711" title="List of WCW pay-per-view events" label="pay-per-view events for WCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q35826" start="1716" end="1723" title="List of WWE pay-per-view events" label="WWF/WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q50881" start="1750" end="1754" title="WrestleMania 2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q35516" start="1799" end="1811" title="WrestleMania" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064530" start="1921" end="1939" title="Jingle All the Way" label="Jingle All the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574222" start="1953" end="1965" title="The Waterboy" label="The Waterboy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1979" end="2000" title="Star Trek: Enterprise" label="Star Trek: Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="2016" end="2027" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138359" start="2055" end="2066" title="Royal Pains" label="Royal Pains"/>
<link wikidata="Q48758" start="2080" end="2085" title="Psych" label="Psych"/>
<link wikidata="Q682825" start="2119" end="2130" title="Burn Notice" label="Burn Notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149935" start="2163" end="2174" title="WWE Studios" label="WWE Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199977" start="2193" end="2204" title="Knucklehead (2010 film)" label="Knucklehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="2219" end="2226" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="2227" end="2233" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806550" start="2240" end="2257" title="The Big Show Show" label="The Big Show Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q404887" start="2319" end="2340" title="Aiken, South Carolina" label="Aiken, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="2359" end="2369" title="acromegaly" label="acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="2388" end="2404" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="2530" end="2554" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="2555" end="2565" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="2659" end="2674" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538775" start="2729" end="2738" title="ring size" label="ring size"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="2949" end="2957" title="high school football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139658" start="2998" end="3033" title="Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina" label="Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058805" start="3636" end="3668" title="Northern Oklahoma Junior College" label="Northern Oklahoma Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091202" start="3672" end="3689" title="Tonkawa, Oklahoma" label="Tonkawa, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="3887" end="3911" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998162" start="3950" end="3972" title="Wichita State Shockers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Wichita State Shockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q519349" start="4002" end="4043" title="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville" label="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="4092" end="4132" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q33498885" start="4265" end="4282" title="Tau Kappa Epsilon" label="Tau Kappa Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="4283" end="4293" title="Fraternities and sororities in North America" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491096" start="4562" end="4574" title="Larry Sharpe (wrestler)" label="Larry Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="4624" end="4628" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q452217" start="4678" end="4689" title="Raven (wrestler)" label="Johnny Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145947" start="4705" end="4728" title="collar-and-elbow tie-up" label="collar-and-elbow tie-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082950" start="4844" end="4865" title="Clementon, New Jersey" label="Clementon, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="4978" end="5004" title="World Wrestling Federation" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336027" start="5046" end="5062" title="Rosemont Horizon" label="Rosemont Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q924934" start="5231" end="5242" title="Mike Chioda" label="Mike Chioda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="5265" end="5277" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q720955" start="5306" end="5319" title="Pat Patterson (wrestler)" label="Pat Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q589775" start="5399" end="5406" title="Kurrgan" label="Kurrgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="5528" end="5541" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271088" start="5619" end="5633" title="Danny Bonaduce" label="Danny Bonaduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="5752" end="5762" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="5964" end="5977" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="6062" end="6071" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q690063" start="6073" end="6085" title="Arn Anderson" label="Arn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388872" start="6109" end="6122" title="Paul Orndorff" label="Paul Orndorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647467" start="6332" end="6341" title="Slamboree (1995)" label="Slamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q44368" start="6377" end="6392" title="André the Giant" label="André the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382255" start="6499" end="6513" title="Kevin Sullivan (wrestler)" label="Kevin Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265732" start="6521" end="6536" title="Dungeon of Doom" label="Dungeon of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741325" start="6590" end="6605" title="Halloween Havoc 1995" label="Halloween Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="6628" end="6638" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="6647" end="6681" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q529443" start="6728" end="6738" title="Jimmy Hart" label="Jimmy Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944691" start="7237" end="7249" title="battle royal (professional wrestling)" label="battle royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453376" start="7291" end="7302" title="World War 3 (1995)" label="World War 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617415" start="7396" end="7415" title="Sting and Lex Luger" label="Sting and Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635" start="7525" end="7537" title="Randy Savage" label="Randy Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q720095" start="7558" end="7570" title="One Man Gang" label="One Man Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="7745" end="7754" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="7785" end="7813" title="Clash of the Champions XXXII" label="Clash of the Champions XXXII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7866" end="7876" title="professional wrestling match types#Cages" label="cage match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44077188" start="7880" end="7893" title="SuperBrawl VI" label="SuperBrawl VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239620" start="7934" end="7943" title="Martin Ruane" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453386" start="7962" end="7972" title="Uncensored (1996)" label="Uncensored"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="8084" end="8105" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="New World Order (nWo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842752" start="8146" end="8154" title="Hog Wild 1996" label="Hog Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="8196" end="8206" title="Scott Hall" label="Scott Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="8211" end="8221" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q344997" start="8310" end="8321" title="Ted DiBiase" label="Ted DiBiase"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="8375" end="8384" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q202784" start="8393" end="8406" title="Four Horsemen (professional wrestling)" label="Four Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453378" start="8442" end="8453" title="World War 3 (1996)" label="World War 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="8634" end="8639" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="8663" end="8694" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602246" start="8827" end="8836" title="Starrcade (1997)" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597432" start="8862" end="8872" title="Souled Out (1998)" label="Souled Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948541" start="8989" end="8996" title="Botch (professional wrestling)" label="botched"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9011" end="9030" title="Powerbomb#Release Powerbomb" label="jackknife powerbomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193741" start="9727" end="9732" title="WCW Monday Nitro" label="Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="9740" end="9753" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Bill Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9848" end="9871" title="Suplex#Delayed vertical suplex" label="delayed vertical suplex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9893" end="9903" title="Powerslam#Suplex powerslam" label="Jackhammer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10157" end="10163" title="glossary of professional wrestling terms#R" label="run-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="10182" end="10195" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="10763" end="10789" title="World Wrestling Federation" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35560" start="10833" end="10845" title="Attitude Era" label="Attitude Era"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10928" end="10976" title="St. Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre: In Your House" label="St. Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre: In Your House"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="11014" end="11027" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q721130" start="11054" end="11069" title="The Corporation (professional wrestling)" label="the Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="11112" end="11135" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="11438" end="11446" title="Enforcer (professional wrestling)" label="enforcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50876" start="11504" end="11519" title="WrestleMania XV" label="WrestleMania XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="11540" end="11547" title="Mick Foley" label="Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="11630" end="11642" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="11643" end="11651" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11888" end="11905" title="Professional wrestling match types#Boiler Room Brawl" label="Boiler Room Brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q467402" start="11933" end="11937" title="Test (wrestler)" label="Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q380834" start="11943" end="11955" title="Ken Shamrock" label="Ken Shamrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q721130" start="11965" end="11974" title="The Union (professional wrestling)" label="The Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437851" start="12025" end="12043" title="Corporate Ministry" label="Corporate Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="12076" end="12086" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw is War"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="12132" end="12148" title="WWE World Championship" label="WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q178796" start="12309" end="12314" title="Sean Waltman" label="X-Pac"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="12319" end="12323" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q59305" start="12327" end="12337" title="SummerSlam (1999)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="12369" end="12394" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q461317" start="12511" end="12523" title="Ray Traylor" label="Big Boss Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q349030" start="12775" end="12788" title="Matt Bloom" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q377984" start="12790" end="12796" title="Mideon" label="Mideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q317374" start="12801" end="12808" title="Viscera (wrestler)" label="Viscera"/>
<link wikidata="Q80384" start="12812" end="12827" title="Survivor Series (1999)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="12922" end="12951" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253451" start="12971" end="12987" title="Worst Feud Award" label="Worst Feud Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="13096" end="13115" title="Triple Threat match" label="Triple Threat match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="13155" end="13163" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345821" start="13388" end="13398" title="Armageddon (1999)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36683" start="13587" end="13605" title="Royal Rumble (2000)" label="Royal Rumble match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806218" start="13846" end="13856" title="No Way Out (2000)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q35516" start="13882" end="13894" title="WrestleMania" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q861110" start="13966" end="13979" title="Shane McMahon" label="Shane McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14400" end="14421" title="Professional wrestling match types#Special referee" label="special guest referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q50881" start="14717" end="14734" title="WrestleMania 2000" label="WrestleMania 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q233905" start="14765" end="14778" title="Linda McMahon" label="Linda McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14875" end="14907" title="professional wrestling match types#Basic elimination matches" label="Fatal Four-Way Elimination match"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="14914" end="14924" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q461070" start="15146" end="15153" title="Gimmick (professional wrestling)" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q360518" start="15207" end="15214" title="Rikishi (wrestler)" label="Rikishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250614" start="15229" end="15242" title="John Nord" label="The Berzerker"/>
<link wikidata="Q555510" start="15272" end="15281" title="Val Venis" label="Val Venis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="15317" end="15327" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046251" start="15331" end="15339" title="Backlash (2000)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="15365" end="15375" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80520" start="15546" end="15558" title="Judgment Day (2000)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="15599" end="15625" title="Falls Count Anywhere match" label="Falls Count Anywhere match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189386" start="15668" end="15681" title="Barry Buchanan" label="Bull Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="15951" end="15963" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932631" start="15981" end="15999" title="Edge and Christian" label="Edge and Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q862021" start="16210" end="16231" title="Ohio Valley Wrestling" label="Ohio Valley Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="16295" end="16309" title="Circulatory system" label="cardiovascular"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16460" end="16492" title="WWF SmackDown! 2: Know Your Role" label="WWF SmackDown! 2: Know Your Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484974" start="16503" end="16527" title="WWF No Mercy (video game)" label="&amp;quot;WWF No Mercy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36696" start="16642" end="16660" title="Royal Rumble (2001)" label="Royal Rumble match"/>
<link wikidata="Q74322" start="16923" end="16948" title="WWE Hardcore Championship" label="WWF Hardcore Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679353" start="16956" end="16966" title="No Way Out (2001)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q452217" start="17212" end="17217" title="Raven (wrestler)" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q50892" start="17221" end="17241" title="WrestleMania X-Seven" label="WrestleMania X-Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="17311" end="17334" title="Last Man Standing match" label="Last Man Standing match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950197" start="17338" end="17346" title="Backlash (2001)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q35574" start="17454" end="17466" title="The Invasion (professional wrestling)" label="The Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397620" start="17557" end="17572" title="Survivor Series (2001)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q50898" start="17644" end="17659" title="WrestleMania X8" label="WrestleMania X8"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797029" start="17707" end="17710" title="Raw (WWE brand)" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q80377" start="17923" end="17935" title="Judgment Day (2002)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="18167" end="18177" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="18179" end="18187" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190952" start="18197" end="18208" title="Dudley Boyz" label="Dudley Boyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797348" start="18250" end="18260" title="SmackDown (WWE brand)" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="18292" end="18304" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80361" start="18504" end="18519" title="Survivor Series (2002)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q382188" start="18590" end="18601" title="Paul Heyman" label="Paul Heyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085936" start="18652" end="18662" title="Armageddon (2002)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q842633" start="18711" end="18728" title="Stephanie McMahon" label="Stephanie McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="18767" end="18779" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36735" start="18885" end="18897" title="Royal Rumble (2003)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q50902" start="19289" end="19305" title="WrestleMania XIX" label="WrestleMania XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241595" start="19434" end="19446" title="Judgment Day (2003)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q299570" start="19923" end="19939" title="Shelton Benjamin" label="Shelton Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q351985" start="19945" end="19957" title="Charlie Haas" label="Charlie Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044478" start="20271" end="20279" title="No Mercy (2003)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44374" start="20313" end="20327" title="Eddie Guerrero" label="Eddie Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="20336" end="20366" title="WWE United States Championship" label="WWE United States Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36744" start="20461" end="20473" title="Royal Rumble (2004)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q50904" start="20552" end="20567" title="WrestleMania XX" label="WrestleMania XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="20649" end="20658" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q231173" start="20867" end="20880" title="Torrie Wilson" label="Torrie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="21004" end="21014" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q284536" start="21083" end="21092" title="chokeslam" label="chokeslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051055" start="21402" end="21415" title="Theodore Long" label="Theodore Long"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21443" end="21459" title="Professional wrestling match types#Lumberjack match" label="Lumberjack match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296825" start="21610" end="21618" title="No Mercy (2004)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="21814" end="21826" title="Sedative" label="tranquilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602034" start="21865" end="21873" title="Dart (missile)" label="dart gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679500" start="21957" end="21967" title="No Way Out (2005)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q44692" start="21999" end="22033" title="John Layfield" label="John &amp;quot;Bradshaw&amp;quot; Layfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q580477" start="22254" end="22265" title="The Cabinet (professional wrestling)" label="The Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="22290" end="22297" title="Dave Batista" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="22323" end="22332" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q50915" start="22370" end="22385" title="WrestleMania 21" label="WrestleMania 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q40561" start="22413" end="22417" title="Sumo" label="Sumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41152" start="22433" end="22440" title="Akebono Tarō" label="Akebono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="22446" end="22452" title="Work (professional wrestling)" label="worked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22453" end="22463" title="Professional wrestling match types#Sumo match" label="sumo match"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="22517" end="22529" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="22653" end="22657" title="jeep" label="jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079325" start="22680" end="22693" title="Matt Wiese" label="Luther Reigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q296511" start="22843" end="22850" title="Carly Colón" label="Carlito"/>
<link wikidata="Q28932" start="22870" end="22881" title="Matt Morgan (wrestler)" label="Matt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631997" start="22912" end="22924" title="Judgment Day (2005)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605050" start="23049" end="23071" title="2005 WWE Draft Lottery" label="2005 WWE draft lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q445716" start="23216" end="23228" title="Gene Snitsky" label="Gene Snitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="23339" end="23348" title="Squash (professional wrestling)" label="squashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611054" start="23545" end="23550" title="Maria Kanellis" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296956" start="23716" end="23726" title="Unforgiven (2005)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707048" start="23865" end="23877" title="Hardcore wrestling" label="Street Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="23985" end="23989" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="24024" end="24036" title="opinion poll" label="opinion poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="24073" end="24082" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326581" start="24151" end="24164" title="Taboo Tuesday (2005)" label="Taboo Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="24200" end="24214" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="24270" end="24297" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490059" start="24353" end="24382" title="Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch" label="Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80391" start="24444" end="24459" title="Survivor Series (2005)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797029" start="24528" end="24531" title="Raw (WWE brand)" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797348" start="24536" end="24546" title="SmackDown (WWE brand)" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="24662" end="24669" title="Dave Batista" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183240" start="24846" end="24849" title="MNM (wrestling)" label="MNM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24995" end="25011" title="Professional wrestling double-team maneuvers#Double chokeslam" label="double chokeslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693" start="25021" end="25031" title="windshield" label="windshield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="25037" end="25040" title="Automobile" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q314837" start="25087" end="25100" title="Chris Masters" label="Chris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q44152" start="25188" end="25200" title="Rey Mysterio" label="Rey Mysterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q317370" start="25202" end="25215" title="Bobby Lashley" label="Bobby Lashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="25217" end="25228" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q721051" start="25792" end="25799" title="Referee (professional wrestling)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="26101" end="26123" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWE Tag Team Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597023" start="26128" end="26138" title="Armageddon (2005)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921364" start="26348" end="26367" title="Elimination Chamber" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365619" start="26377" end="26403" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution (2006)" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26474" end="26490" title="Professional wrestling#Disqualification" label="disqualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="26497" end="26505" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981947" start="26927" end="26939" title="sledgehammer" label="sledgehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526584" start="27004" end="27008" title="Orthopedic cast" label="cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q50916" start="27539" end="27554" title="WrestleMania 22" label="WrestleMania 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q44628" start="27754" end="27765" title="Rob Van Dam" label="Rob Van Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089296" start="28378" end="28390" title="Spirit Squad" label="Spirit Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q956773" start="28399" end="28404" title="Kenny Dykstra" label="Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257408" start="28409" end="28414" title="Michael Brendli" label="Mikey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472830" start="28522" end="28528" title="Johnny Jeter" label="Johnny"/>
<link wikidata="Q310683" start="28533" end="28538" title="Dolph Ziggler" label="Nicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000047" start="28764" end="28772" title="Backlash (2006)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017504" start="28869" end="28893" title="WWE vs. ECW Head-to-Head" label="WWE vs. ECW Head-to-Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589622" start="28914" end="28920" title="2006 WWE brand extension draft" label="joined"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798668" start="28939" end="28942" title="ECW (WWE brand)" label="ECW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028718" start="29205" end="29224" title="ECW One Night Stand (2006)" label="ECW One Night Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q549808" start="29247" end="29253" title="Yoshihiro Tajiri" label="Tajiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375092" start="29255" end="29266" title="Super Crazy" label="Super Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467901" start="29271" end="29296" title="The Full Blooded Italians" label="The Full Blooded Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q776675" start="29357" end="29360" title="WWE ECW" label="ECW"/>
<link wikidata="Q666074" start="29409" end="29443" title="ECW World Heavyweight Championship" label="ECW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q818735" start="29447" end="29459" title="Wells Fargo Center (Philadelphia)" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29494" end="29508" title="Professional wrestling authority figures#ECW brand authorities" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q721668" start="29599" end="29620" title="Frog splash" label="Five Star Frog Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670548" start="30404" end="30427" title="The Great American Bash (2006)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="30457" end="30477" title="Punjabi Prison Match" label="Punjabi Prison match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44482" start="30489" end="30504" title="The Great Khali" label="The Great Khali"/>
<link wikidata="Q445365" start="30695" end="30699" title="Sabu (wrestler)" label="Sabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q59389" start="30721" end="30731" title="SummerSlam (2006)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="30904" end="30918" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089968" start="31080" end="31094" title="Hell in a Cell" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296821" start="31104" end="31114" title="Unforgiven (2006)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q42165" start="31218" end="31226" title="buttocks" label="buttocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q937627" start="31278" end="31290" title="Cyber Sunday (2006)" label="Cyber Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="31335" end="31346" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="King Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="31419" end="31449" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q215497" start="31588" end="31603" title="Kevin Federline" label="Kevin Federline"/>
<link wikidata="Q80528" start="31669" end="31684" title="Survivor Series (2006)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q317370" start="31861" end="31874" title="Bobby Lashley" label="Bobby Lashley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31993" end="32020" title="Elimination Chamber#Variations" label="Extreme Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315996" start="32030" end="32051" title="December to Dismember (2006)" label="December to Dismember"/>
<link wikidata="Q345019" start="32596" end="32608" title="Jerry Lawler" label="Jerry Lawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119738" start="32690" end="32710" title="PMG Clash of Legends" label="PMG Clash of Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312750" start="33087" end="33097" title="No Way Out (2008)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q44152" start="33186" end="33198" title="Rey Mysterio" label="Rey Mysterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="33209" end="33239" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="33251" end="33255" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="33299" end="33304" title="Boxing" label="boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q318204" start="33305" end="33325" title="Floyd Mayweather Jr." label="Floyd Mayweather Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7623885" start="33463" end="33483" title="Striking combination" label="punching combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q50985" start="33516" end="33533" title="WrestleMania XXIV" label="WrestleMania XXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q459414" start="33587" end="33601" title="brass knuckles" label="brass knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856193" start="33634" end="33649" title="One Night Stand (2008)" label="One Night Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="33679" end="33686" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q259180" start="33688" end="33701" title="John Morrison (wrestler)" label="John Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q44683" start="33703" end="33717" title="Chavo Guerrero Jr." label="Chavo Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q313706" start="33723" end="33736" title="Tommy Dreamer" label="Tommy Dreamer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33742" end="33762" title="Professional wrestling match types#Hardcore match" label="Singapore Cane match"/>
<link wikidata="Q310073" start="34090" end="34100" title="Mark Henry" label="Mark Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231381" start="34104" end="34122" title="Night of Champions (2008)" label="Night of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q231501" start="34292" end="34307" title="Vickie Guerrero" label="Vickie Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="34333" end="34347" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244149" start="34368" end="34378" title="Unforgiven (2008)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479800" start="34525" end="34533" title="No Mercy (2008)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="34604" end="34627" title="Last Man Standing match" label="Last Man Standing match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407119" start="34631" end="34643" title="Cyber Sunday (2008)" label="Cyber Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q80682" start="34680" end="34695" title="Survivor Series (2008)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="34876" end="34885" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q50988" start="34957" end="34972" title="WrestleMania 25" label="WrestleMania 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="35040" end="35070" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983930" start="35190" end="35204" title="2009 WWE draft" label="2009 WWE draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555369" start="35209" end="35217" title="Backlash (2009)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241042" start="35507" end="35519" title="Judgment Day (2009)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q52728" start="35548" end="35561" title="Extreme Rules (2009)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231425" start="35698" end="35716" title="Night of Champions (2009)" label="Night of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q44349" start="35781" end="35794" title="Kofi Kingston" label="Kofi Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q278256" start="35799" end="35810" title="Evan Bourne" label="Evan Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="35923" end="35941" title="Triple Threat match" label="six-pack challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="36015" end="36028" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="36064" end="36068" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070409" start="36205" end="36214" title="Jeri-Show" label="Jeri-Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q721427" start="36294" end="36304" title="The Legacy (professional wrestling)" label="The Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q599364" start="36357" end="36367" title="Cryme Tyme" label="Cryme Tyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q59409" start="36371" end="36381" title="SummerSlam (2009)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44638" start="36396" end="36399" title="Montel Vontavious Porter" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058847" start="36418" end="36432" title="WWE Breaking Point" label="Breaking Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201348" start="36481" end="36495" title="Hell in a Cell (2009)" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367640" start="36513" end="36528" title="Bragging Rights (2009)" label="Bragging Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076763" start="36771" end="36786" title="Survivor Series (2009)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="36990" end="37004" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q60617" start="37015" end="37047" title="Tables, Ladders and Chairs match" label="Tables, Ladders and Chairs match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44379" start="37514" end="37521" title="The Miz" label="The Miz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37527" end="37540" title="professional wrestling match types#Basic elimination matches" label="Triple Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11316150" start="37541" end="37567" title="Elimination tag team match" label="Tag Team Elimination match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428781" start="37593" end="37614" title="Straight Edge Society" label="Straight Edge Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q946637" start="37628" end="37640" title="Drew Hankinson" label="Luke Gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q438383" start="37742" end="37753" title="Yoshi Tatsu" label="Yoshi Tatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q314657" start="37758" end="37765" title="Goldust" label="Goldust"/>
<link wikidata="Q50990" start="37904" end="37921" title="WrestleMania XXVI" label="WrestleMania XXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q310690" start="37983" end="37990" title="Ron Killings" label="R-Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52733" start="38022" end="38035" title="Extreme Rules (2010)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q869538" start="38178" end="38184" title="ShoMiz" label="ShoMiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320770" start="38466" end="38482" title="The Hart Dynasty" label="The Hart Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665093" start="38707" end="38721" title="2010 WWE Draft" label="2010 WWE draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="38756" end="38765" title="WWE SmackDown" label="SmackDown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="38907" end="38937" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q313087" start="39004" end="39016" title="Jack Swagger" label="Jack Swagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232808" start="39468" end="39482" title="Over the Limit (2010)" label="Over the Limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139998" start="39666" end="39677" title="WWE Fatal 4-Way" label="Fatal 4-Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139998" start="39787" end="39798" title="WWE Fatal 4-Way" label="Fatal 4-Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428781" start="40349" end="40370" title="Straight Edge Society" label="Straight Edge Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q59266" start="40416" end="40433" title="WWE Money in the Bank" label="Money in the Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8947374" start="40519" end="40549" title="Money in the Bank ladder match" label="Money in the Bank ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q382154" start="40645" end="40657" title="Adam Birch" label="Joey Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q59417" start="40774" end="40784" title="SummerSlam (2010)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231692" start="40800" end="40818" title="Night of Champions (2010)" label="Night of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q59915" start="40872" end="40887" title="Bragging Rights (2010)" label="Bragging Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q222039" start="40989" end="40996" title="Sheamus" label="Sheamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407160" start="41126" end="41141" title="Survivor Series (2010)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115253" start="41277" end="41293" title="King of the Ring (2010)" label="King of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q79231" start="41327" end="41342" title="Alberto Del Rio" label="Alberto Del Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370915" start="41411" end="41428" title="Ricardo Rodriguez (wrestler)" label="Ricardo Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q203269" start="41661" end="41673" title="Wade Barrett" label="Wade Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q349625" start="41764" end="41776" title="Heath Slater" label="Heath Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q176123" start="41781" end="41795" title="Justin Gabriel" label="Justin Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q317721" start="41824" end="41839" title="Ezekiel Jackson" label="Ezekiel Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q614716" start="41975" end="41984" title="the Corre" label="the Corre"/>
<link wikidata="Q50795" start="42096" end="42115" title="Elimination Chamber (2011)" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454947" start="42522" end="42539" title="Big Show and Kane" label="Big Show and Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q51025" start="42579" end="42597" title="WrestleMania XXVII" label="WrestleMania XXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q44669" start="42629" end="42644" title="Santino Marella" label="Santino Marella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="42806" end="42831" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWE Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052978" start="42934" end="42948" title="2011 WWE draft" label="2011 WWE draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q52739" start="43074" end="43087" title="Extreme Rules (2011)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q314920" start="43104" end="43114" title="Mason Ryan" label="Mason Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232966" start="43118" end="43132" title="Over the Limit (2011)" label="Over the Limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370915" start="43361" end="43378" title="Ricardo Rodriguez (wrestler)" label="Ricardo Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139834" start="43815" end="43833" title="WWE Capitol Punishment" label="Capitol Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q59274" start="44371" end="44388" title="Money in the Bank (2011)" label="Money in the Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="44464" end="44470" title="fibula" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="44683" end="44713" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q284536" start="44747" end="44756" title="chokeslam" label="chokeslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232231" start="44796" end="44805" title="Vengeance (2011)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q59928" start="45204" end="45219" title="Survivor Series (2011)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q299355" start="45575" end="45587" title="Bryan Danielson" label="Daniel Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q624017" start="46223" end="46225" title="AJ Lee" label="AJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="46240" end="46249" title="kayfabe" label="storyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q36945" start="46296" end="46313" title="Royal Rumble (2012)" label="2012 Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q50798" start="46483" end="46502" title="Elimination Chamber (2012)" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q299222" start="46644" end="46655" title="Cody Rhodes" label="Cody Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51026" start="46863" end="46882" title="WrestleMania XXVIII" label="WrestleMania XXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="46920" end="46949" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q52791" start="47345" end="47358" title="Extreme Rules (2012)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q357032" start="47607" end="47623" title="John Laurinaitis" label="John Laurinaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233034" start="47777" end="47791" title="Over the Limit (2012)" label="Over the Limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="47961" end="47965" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074679" start="48176" end="48193" title="Yellow-dog contract" label="ironclad contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q949392" start="48333" end="48344" title="Brodus Clay" label="Brodus Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q431615" start="48346" end="48356" title="Alex Riley" label="Alex Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q139880" start="48384" end="48394" title="Zack Ryder" label="Zack Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="48533" end="48546" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192247" start="48628" end="48638" title="No Way Out (2012)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q59280" start="48762" end="48779" title="Money in the Bank (2012)" label="Money in the Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8947374" start="48842" end="48889" title="Money in the Bank ladder match" label="WWE Championship Money in the Bank ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q568252" start="48956" end="48976" title="WWE Raw 1000" label="&amp;quot;Raw 1000&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q59439" start="49387" end="49397" title="SummerSlam (2012)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q349030" start="49600" end="49606" title="Matt Bloom" label="Tensai"/>
<link wikidata="Q676464" start="49830" end="49844" title="Hell in a Cell (2012)" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114753" start="49953" end="49968" title="Survivor Series (2012)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q36959" start="51134" end="51146" title="Royal Rumble (2013)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916593" start="51363" end="51382" title="Elimination Chamber (2013)" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q275971" start="51481" end="51493" title="Roman Reigns" label="Roman Reigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q247125" start="51497" end="51507" title="The Shield (professional wrestling)" label="The Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="51981" end="51993" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q51027" start="52166" end="52181" title="WrestleMania 29" label="WrestleMania 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q438691" start="52203" end="52209" title="Ryback (wrestler)" label="Ryback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707048" start="53216" end="53235" title="Hardcore wrestling" label="Extreme Rules match"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017445" start="53249" end="53262" title="Extreme Rules (2013)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q15691681" start="53898" end="53911" title="The Authority (professional wrestling)" label="the Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q361235" start="54063" end="54075" title="Dusty Rhodes" label="Dusty Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182288" start="54093" end="54105" title="Battleground (2013)" label="Battleground"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052637" start="54343" end="54358" title="Survivor Series (2013)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44152" start="54404" end="54416" title="Rey Mysterio" label="Rey Mysterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15094024" start="54445" end="54468" title="Gold and Stardust" label="Cody Rhodes and Goldust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="54477" end="54502" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWE Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q438691" start="54548" end="54554" title="Ryback" label="Ryback"/>
<link wikidata="Q438400" start="54559" end="54570" title="Curtis Axel" label="Curtis Axel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123969" start="54597" end="54611" title="Antonio Cesaro" label="Antonio Cesaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q313087" start="54616" end="54628" title="Jack Swagger" label="Jack Swagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15255409" start="54706" end="54718" title="Royal Rumble (2014)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q28200846" start="54778" end="54815" title="André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal" label="André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879177" start="54819" end="54835" title="WrestleMania XXX" label="WrestleMania XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q123969" start="54880" end="54886" title="Antonio Cesaro" label="Cesaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833189" start="54971" end="54976" title="Rusev (wrestler)" label="Rusev"/>
<link wikidata="Q17561879" start="55072" end="55086" title="Hell in a Cell (2014)" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17562073" start="55139" end="55154" title="Survivor Series (2014)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804337" start="55224" end="55257" title="Survivor Series elimination match" label="Survivor Series elimination match"/>
<link wikidata="Q579136" start="55355" end="55366" title="Erick Rowan" label="Erick Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="55472" end="55484" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q275971" start="55512" end="55524" title="Roman Reigns" label="Roman Reigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985316" start="55673" end="55685" title="Royal Rumble (2015)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640777" start="55822" end="55830" title="Fastlane (2015)" label="Fastlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320207" start="55987" end="56002" title="WrestleMania 31" label="WrestleMania 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="56042" end="56065" title="Last Man Standing match" label="Last Man Standing match"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763309" start="56069" end="56082" title="Extreme Rules (2015)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q44379" start="56188" end="56195" title="The Miz" label="The Miz"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="56211" end="56236" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q438691" start="56237" end="56243" title="Ryback" label="Ryback"/>
<link wikidata="Q19015602" start="56289" end="56306" title="Money in the Bank (2015)" label="Money in the Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q18915187" start="56429" end="56439" title="SummerSlam (2015)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="56714" end="56719" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="56853" end="56865" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="56879" end="56888" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="57055" end="57067" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20986656" start="57089" end="57120" title="WWE Live from Madison Square Garden" label="Live from Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="57224" end="57254" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845407" start="57307" end="57319" title="Royal Rumble (2016)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q196166" start="57394" end="57411" title="Titus O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Titus O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679732" start="57439" end="57453" title="Braun Strowman" label="Braun Strowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q113384" start="57561" end="57573" title="Dean Ambrose" label="Dean Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q13951097" start="57621" end="57637" title="The Wyatt Family" label="The Wyatt Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863890" start="57676" end="57684" title="Fastlane (2016)" label="Fastlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q579136" start="57736" end="57747" title="Erick Rowan" label="Erick Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679732" start="57752" end="57766" title="Braun Strowman" label="Braun Strowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18820013" start="57920" end="57935" title="WrestleMania 32" label="WrestleMania 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="58044" end="58065" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25934585" start="58433" end="58447" title="2016 WWE draft" label="2016 WWE draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058850" start="58604" end="58616" title="Royal Rumble (2017)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598822" start="58754" end="58762" title="Fastlane (2017)" label="Fastlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015782" start="58824" end="58839" title="WrestleMania 33" label="WrestleMania 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293072" start="58991" end="59000" title="superplex" label="superplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232231" start="59121" end="59125" title="Vengeance (2011)" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q769073" start="59193" end="59201" title="Big Cass" label="Big Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q29581935" start="59229" end="59239" title="SummerSlam (2017)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="59482" end="59489" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q310073" start="59589" end="59599" title="Mark Henry" label="Mark Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="59609" end="59625" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637304" start="59635" end="59639" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2018)" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017693" start="59781" end="59824" title="List of WWE SmackDown special episodes" label="the 1000th episode of &amp;quot;SmackDown&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q29788303" start="59870" end="59877" title="The Bar (professional wrestling)" label="The Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q123969" start="59879" end="59885" title="Cesaro (wrestler)" label="Cesaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q222039" start="59890" end="59897" title="Sheamus" label="Sheamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637043" start="59922" end="59933" title="The New Day (professional wrestling)" label="The New Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q26689574" start="59942" end="59973" title="WWE SmackDown Tag Team Championship" label="SmackDown Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q196002" start="60214" end="60223" title="hamstring" label="hamstring"/>
<link wikidata="Q381825" start="60414" end="60423" title="Samoa Joe" label="Samoa Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q26404555" start="60451" end="60454" title="The Authors of Pain" label="AOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q63128265" start="60501" end="60516" title="WrestleMania 36" label="WrestleMania 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q311944" start="60666" end="60679" title="Drew McIntyre" label="Drew McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834238" start="60797" end="60815" title="The Street Profits" label="The Street Profits"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096932" start="60820" end="60838" title="The Viking Raiders" label="The Viking Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9402" start="60861" end="60866" title="ninja" label="ninja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829075" start="60875" end="60887" title="Akira Tozawa" label="Akira Tozawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q100280765" start="61084" end="61099" title="Survivor Series (2020)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017656" start="61244" end="61257" title="List of WWE Raw special episodes" label="Legends Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="61617" end="61626" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="61708" end="61727" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823364" start="61878" end="61892" title="Tony Schiavone" label="Tony Schiavone"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="61907" end="61914" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61928" end="61947" title="AEW Dark: Elevation" label="AEW Dark: Elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65684241" start="62172" end="62184" title="AEW Dynamite" label="AEW Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q96140098" start="62198" end="62212" title="List of AEW Dynamite special episodes" label="The Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621997" start="62286" end="62298" title="Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081322" start="62363" end="62373" title="Revolution (2021)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="62399" end="62413" title="Christian Cage" label="Christian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q30070246" start="62472" end="62486" title="Q. T. Marshall" label="Q. T. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q107053308" start="62490" end="62497" title="All Out (2021)" label="All Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195235" start="62644" end="62655" title="Kenny Omega" label="Kenny Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325473" start="62692" end="62713" title="The Don Callis Family" label="The Don Callis Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q108761177" start="62790" end="62803" title="Kyle Fletcher" label="Kyle Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q125428389" start="63005" end="63014" title="Full Gear (2024)" label="Full Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q30070246" start="63097" end="63110" title="Q.T. Marshall" label="Q.T. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q44368" start="63186" end="63201" title="André the Giant" label="André the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="63251" end="63261" title="acromegaly" label="acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="63638" end="63660" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="63719" end="63732" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="63747" end="63754" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q327029" start="63913" end="63921" title="mechanic" label="mechanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="64018" end="64023" title="Turn (professional wrestling)" label="turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="64032" end="64036" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="64041" end="64045" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469546" start="64098" end="64109" title="running gag" label="running gag"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="64629" end="64635" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195241" start="64644" end="64657" title="Kenny Wallace" label="Kenny Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094254" start="64662" end="64674" title="Scott Wimmer" label="Scott Wimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="64683" end="64697" title="Xfinity Series" label="Xfinity Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148758" start="64705" end="64719" title="Elliott Sadler" label="Elliott Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q77625" start="64747" end="64757" title="Fox Sports" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204826" start="64770" end="64782" title="Jeff Hammond (sports broadcaster)" label="Jeff Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="64829" end="64841" title="Tony Stewart" label="Tony Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207026" start="64884" end="64894" title="Thong Song" label="Thong Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="64907" end="64912" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q730108" start="64922" end="64927" title="Sisqó" label="Sisqó"/>
<link wikidata="Q242620" start="64932" end="64942" title="Foxy Brown (rapper)" label="Foxy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="64970" end="64979" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q674110" start="64986" end="65020" title="Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader?" label="Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="65068" end="65096" title="United Service Organizations" label="United Service Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q163569" start="65284" end="65320" title="Nickelodeon Kids&amp;#x27; Choice Awards" label="Nickelodeon Kids&amp;#x27; Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q44379" start="65332" end="65339" title="The Miz" label="The Miz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135204" start="65418" end="65438" title="Wizards of the Coast" label="Wizards of the Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="65452" end="65474" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="65481" end="65487" title="streaming media" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q470005" start="65556" end="65571" title="Joe Manganiello" label="Joe Manganiello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403592" start="65573" end="65590" title="Travis Willingham" label="Travis Willingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847978" start="65627" end="65638" title="Mike Mearls" label="Mike Mearls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773301" start="65642" end="65656" title="Dungeon Master" label="Dungeon Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="66012" end="66028" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056133" start="66194" end="66222" title="Special Olympics World Games" label="Special Olympics World Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815857" start="66387" end="66412" title="Memphis Police Department" label="Memphis Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="66514" end="66532" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="66646" end="66653" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918608" start="66775" end="66804" title="Marriott Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Marriott Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q985341" start="66808" end="66827" title="Uniondale, New York" label="Uniondale, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="67068" end="67093" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67097" end="67115" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Rookie of the Year" label="Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67126" end="67146" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Wrestler of the Year" label="Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67226" end="67245" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated#PWI 500" label="&amp;quot;PWI 500&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="67321" end="67330" title="PWI Years" label="PWI Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="67347" end="67375" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="67379" end="67413" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="67415" end="67422" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="67427" end="67458" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603664" start="67460" end="67467" title="List of WCW World Tag Team Champions" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="67476" end="67485" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="67491" end="67496" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="67506" end="67516" title="Scott Hall" label="Scott Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453378" start="67524" end="67542" title="World War 3 (1996)" label="World War 3 (1996)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="67545" end="67605" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation/World Wrestling Entertainment/WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="67609" end="67627" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF/E Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331393" start="67629" end="67636" title="List of WWE Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="67641" end="67671" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339517" start="67673" end="67680" title="List of World Heavyweight Champions (WWE)" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q666074" start="67685" end="67707" title="ECW World Heavyweight Championship" label="ECW World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658122" start="67709" end="67715" title="List of ECW World Heavyweight Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="67720" end="67753" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="WWE Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600413" start="67755" end="67761" title="List of WWE Intercontinental Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q74322" start="67766" end="67793" title="WWE Hardcore Championship" label="WWF/E Hardcore Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644308" start="67795" end="67802" title="List of WWE Hardcore Champions" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="67807" end="67837" title="WWE United States Championship" label="WWE United States Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944330" start="67839" end="67845" title="List of WWE United States Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="67849" end="67874" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWE Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981031" start="67876" end="67883" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE)" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="67892" end="67905" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q44379" start="67911" end="67918" title="The Miz" label="The Miz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="67928" end="67932" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="67939" end="67970" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF/World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823152" start="67972" end="67979" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="5 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="67988" end="68002" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68056" end="68068" title="WWE_in_Australia#Brisbane_Cup" label="Brisbane Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q28200846" start="68079" end="68110" title="André the Giant Memorial Trophy" label="André the Giant Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320207" start="68112" end="68116" title="WrestleMania 31" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q59915" start="68121" end="68150" title="Bragging Rights (2010)" label="Bragging Rights Trophy (2010)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="68158" end="68172" title="WWE SmackDown" label="Team SmackDown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68177" end="68203" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)#List of WWE Men&amp;#x27;s Triple Crown winners" label="24th Triple Crown Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68207" end="68231" title="Grand Slam (professional wrestling)#List of WWE Grand Slam winners" label="12th Grand Slam Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="68235" end="68247" title="Slammy Award" label="Slammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68284" end="68288" title="Slammy Award#2009 Slammy Awards" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68325" end="68329" title="Slammy Award#2011 Slammy Awards" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68360" end="68364" title="Slammy Award#2012 Slammy Awards" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68421" end="68425" title="Slammy Award#2013 Slammy Awards" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68453" end="68457" title="Slammy Award#2014 Slammy Awards" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="68464" end="68493" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68497" end="68523" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Most Embarrassing Wrestler" label="Most Embarrassing Wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68534" end="68552" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Rookie of the Year" label="Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68563" end="68575" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Best Gimmick" label="Best Gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68592" end="68608" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Feud of the Year" label="Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68620" end="68642" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Feud of the Year" label="Worst Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68654" end="68676" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Feud of the Year" label="Worst Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68688" end="68702" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Wrestler" label="Worst Wrestler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578156" wikidata="Q4891933" url="?curid=578156" title="Wing commander">
<text>Wing commander (Wg Cdr or W/C) is a senior officer rank used by some air forces, with origins from the Royal Air Force. The rank is used by air forces of many countries that have historical British influence.

Wing commander is immediately senior to squadron leader and immediately below group captain. It is usually equivalent to the rank of commander in the navy and the rank of lieutenant colonel in other services.

The equivalent rank in the Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force and the Women&#x27;s Royal Air Force (until 1968) and in Princess Mary&#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service (until 1980) was wing officer. The equivalent rank in the Royal Observer Corps (until 1995) was observer commander, which had a similar rank insignia.

==Canada==

The rank was used in the Royal Canadian Air Force until the 1968 unification of the Canadian Forces, when army-type rank titles were adopted. Canadian wing commanders then became lieutenant colonels. In official Canadian French usage, the rank title was .

In the 1990s, the Canadian Forces Air Command (the post-1968 RCAF) altered the structure of those bases under its control, redesignating them as wings. The commander of such an establishment was re-designated as the &quot;wing commander&quot; (or &quot;Wg Comd&quot;). Like the United States Air Force usage, the term &quot;wing commander&quot; (as used in the Canadian Forces and again in the RCAF) is an appointment, not a rank. A wing commander usually holds the rank of colonel.

On 16 August 2011, the Government of Canada announced that the name &quot;Air Command&quot; was being changed to the air force&#x27;s original historic name of Royal Canadian Air Force. Though traditional insignia for the RCAF was restored in 2015, there has been no restoration of the traditional RCAF officer rank structure that paralleled the RAF.

== United Kingdom ==
===Origins===
On 1 April 1918, the newly created RAF adopted its officer rank titles from the British Army, with Royal Naval Air Service captains and Royal Flying Corps colonels officially becoming colonels in the RAF. In practice, there was some inconsistency, with some former naval officers using their former ranks unofficially. In response to the proposal that the RAF should use its own rank titles, it was suggested that the RAF might use the Royal Navy&#x27;s officer ranks, with the word &quot;air&quot; inserted before the naval rank title. For example, the rank that later became wing commander would have been &quot;air commander&quot;. Although the Admiralty objected to this simple modification of their rank titles, it was agreed that the RAF might base many of its officer rank titles on naval officer ranks with differing pre-modifying terms. It was also suggested that RAF lieutenant colonels might be entitled reeves or wing-leaders. However, the rank title wing commander was chosen as wings were typically commanded by RAF lieutenant colonels, and the term wing commander had been used in the Royal Naval Air Service. The rank of wing commander was introduced in August 1919 and has been used continuously since then.

===Usage===
In the early years of the RAF, a wing commander commanded a flying wing, typically a group of three or four aircraft squadrons. In current usage a wing commander is more likely to command a wing which is an administrative sub-division of an RAF station. A flying squadron is normally commanded by a wing commander but is occasionally commanded by a squadron leader for small units. In the Air Training Corps, a wing commander is usually the officer commanding of a wing.

===Insignia and command flag===

The rank insignia is based on the three gold bands of commanders in the Royal Navy and consists of three narrow light blue bands over slightly wider black bands. This is worn on both the lower sleeves of the tunic or on the shoulder of the flight suit or the casual uniform.

The command pennant is two triangular command pennants used in the RAF. Two thin red lines differentiate this one from the other.

During 1941-45 RAF Fighter Command&#x27;s wing leaders (of wing commander rank) were also allowed to use their own initials as aircraft identification letters on their personal aircraft, e.g., Wing Commander Roland Beamont&#x27;s personal Hawker Tempest, &quot;JN751&quot;, was coded &quot;R-B&quot;, Wing Commander John Robert Baldwin&#x27;s personal Hawker Typhoon was coded &quot;J-B&quot;.

==United States==
===United States Air Force===
In the United States Air Force (USAF), a wing commander is a command billet, not a rank. The position is most often filled by a colonel (some USAF wings are commanded by a brigadier general) who typically has command of an air wing with several group commanders (also a position, not a USAF rank) reporting to him/her.

===United States Navy===
In the United States Navy (USN), a wing commander is also a command billet, not a rank. The equivalent USN rank is a captain. Navy wing commanders are either Naval Aviators or Naval Flight Officers who typically have command of a carrier air wing or a &quot;functional&quot; air wing or air group such as a strike fighter wing, a patrol and reconnaissance wing, a tactical air control group, or a training air wing, with several squadron commanding officers reporting to him/her. Those officers commanding carrier air wings are called &quot;CAG,&quot; dating back to when carrier air wings were called carrier air groups. Those officers commanding functional air wings and air groups are called &quot;commodore.&quot; Unlike USAF, &quot;group&quot; commands in USN are either equal to or senior to an air wing.

===Civil Air Patrol (United States Air Force Auxiliary)===
The Civil Air Patrol, the volunteer auxiliary of the USAF, follows the USAF rank structure. The CAP divides the nation into 52 wings (each corresponding to a state, territory, and District of Columbia). Each wing is headed by a CAP colonel, who holds the position of wing commander.

== Gallery ==

==Notable wing commanders==


* Douglas BaderWorld War II fighter pilot and double amputee, was the first commander to lead formations of three or more squadrons during the Battle of Britain.
* Roland BeamontWorld War II fighter pilot and post-war test pilot
* Abdel Latif Boghdadipilot in the Egyptian Air Force turned politician
* Pierre ClostermannWorld War II fighter pilot and author of &quot;The Big Show&quot;
* Linda Corbouldfirst woman to command a RAAF flying squadron
* Roald DahlWorld War II fighter pilot, and famous novelist. His record of five aerial victories has been confirmed by post-war research and cross-referenced in Axis records. (He ended the war with the temporary rank of wing commander; substantive rank was squadron leader.)
* Roly Falktest pilot on the maiden flight of the Avro Vulcan
* Brendan &quot;Paddy&quot; Finucanetop ranking RAF World War II ace with 32 kills. A native of Rathmines, Dublin, Ireland (who emigrated to Britain with his family in 1936), he was the youngest wing commander in the history of the RAF. He was promoted to the rank in 1942 at age 21 and was shot down and killed soon afterwards.
* Preller Geldenhuyscombat pilot in the Rhodesian Air Force, survivor of the Rhodesian Bush War and author of &quot;Rhodesian Air Force Operations&quot;
* Guy Gibsoncommanding officer of 617 Squadron and leader of the &quot;Dam Busters&quot; raid
* Andy Greencurrent holder of the land speed record and first person to break the sound barrier on land
* M. Hamidullah Khan TJ, SH, BP Fought two wars in South Asia, 1965 Indo Pak War, Bangladesh War of Independence 1971. First and third provost marshal and commander of Ground Defense Command of the Bangladesh Air Force.
* Walter &quot;Taffy&quot; Holden (Holden%27s Lightning flight) Commander of No. 33 Maintenance Unit RAF; inadvertently took off in an English Electric Lightning during ground testing; landed safely despite his only prior experience being with light training aircraft.
* Humphrey de Verd Leighinventor of the Leigh light which was developed to spotlight U-boats as they surfaced at night. The Leigh light is reputed to have changed the course of the Battle of the Atlantic in World War II
* Norman MacmillanAviation author and pilot of the first attempt to fly around the world in 1922.
* Mervyn Middlecoatfighter pilot who served in the Pakistan Air Force.
* Nouman Ali KhanWing Commander of the Pakistan Air Force who downed an Indian Air Force MiG-21 piloted by Abhinandan Varthamanand and crashed in Pakistan administered Kashmir on 27 February 2019. He was conferred with Sitar-e-Jurat for his bravery
* Peter OvertonA news presenter &amp; journalist for the 9 Network Australia and 60 Minutes Australia. He is a Wing Commander in the Royal Australian Air Force as a specialist reserve public affairs officer.
* Michael Sutton OBE - led the first Typhoon deployment on operations over Iraq and Syria. The only typhoon pilot to have used the aircraft&#x27;s gun in combat. Author of bestselling memoir &quot;Typhoon&quot;.
*Charlotte Joanne Thompson-Edgar ARRC is a British nurse. She served as the United Kingdom&#x27;s Officer Commanding Medical Emergency Response Teams in Afghanistan and in 2015, while holding the rank of Squadron Leader, was awarded an Associate of the Royal Red Cross (ARRC) for her services to the Princess Mary&#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service. 
* Abhinandan VarthamanWing Commander of the Indian Air Force. His aircraft was shot down in an aerial dogfight and he was held captive for 60 hours in Pakistan.
* Ken WallisWorld War II fighter pilot, aircraft engineer, and multiple world record holder in autogyro aircraft flight
* Adrian Warburtonlegendary for his role as a reconnaissance aviator in the defence of Malta; shot down over Germany on 12 April 1944, aged 26. It was only in 2002 that his remains were found in the wreckage of his plane.
* Dennis Wheatleythe popular historical novelist and thriller writer was granted a commission and brought into Whitehall&#x27;s World War II Joint Planning Staff.
* Russell Williams British-born Canadian convicted rapist and murderer and former Colonel in the Canadian Forces

==See also==

* Air force officer rank insignia
* British and U.S. military ranks compared
* Comparative military ranks
* RAF officer ranks
* Ranks of the RAAF
* &quot;Wing Commander&quot;, a popular computer game series

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="0" end="14" title="Wing commander" label="Wing commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="16" end="22" title="Wing commander" label="Wg Cdr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="26" end="29" title="Wing commander" label="W/C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053745" start="36" end="50" title="senior officer" label="senior officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="103" end="118" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="159" end="207" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="countries that have historical British influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="250" end="265" title="squadron leader" label="squadron leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="288" end="301" title="group captain" label="group captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="343" end="352" title="commander" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="381" end="399" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="447" end="479" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108612" start="488" end="516" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244744" start="537" end="589" title="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service" label="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374637" start="648" end="668" title="Royal Observer Corps" label="Royal Observer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="779" end="803" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884903" start="819" end="853" title="Unification of the Canadian Armed Forces" label="unification of the Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="933" end="951" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="966" end="981" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="1029" end="1056" title="Canadian Forces Air Command" label="Canadian Forces Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886620" start="1109" end="1114" title="Canadian Forces Bases" label="bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="1485" end="1492" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="1655" end="1679" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="2530" end="2539" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q553041" start="2797" end="2803" title="Reeve (England)" label="reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q45364" start="2874" end="2879" title="Wing (air force unit)" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="3237" end="3246" title="Squadron (aviation)" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="3361" end="3372" title="RAF station" label="RAF station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698217" start="3509" end="3527" title="Air Training Corps" label="Air Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="3561" end="3579" title="officer commanding" label="officer commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434634" start="3865" end="3876" title="flight suit" label="flight suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="4047" end="4066" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360160" start="4240" end="4254" title="Roland Beamont" label="Roland Beamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q723612" start="4271" end="4285" title="Hawker Tempest" label="Hawker Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182372" start="4348" end="4367" title="John Robert Baldwin" label="John Robert Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q662123" start="4384" end="4398" title="Hawker Typhoon" label="Hawker Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="4482" end="4505" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="4603" end="4610" title="Colonel (United States)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="4647" end="4664" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4827" end="4845" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="4937" end="4944" title="Captain (United States O-6)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="4978" end="4991" title="Naval Aviator" label="Naval Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981815" start="4996" end="5016" title="Naval Flight Officer" label="Naval Flight Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q477983" start="5050" end="5066" title="carrier air wing" label="carrier air wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844242" start="5515" end="5537" title="Commodore (United States)" label="&amp;quot;commodore.&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q781210" start="5695" end="5711" title="Civil Air Patrol" label="Civil Air Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="6022" end="6035" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360160" start="6184" end="6198" title="Roland Beamont" label="Roland Beamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q618694" start="6211" end="6224" title="fighter pilot" label="fighter pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4054450" start="6251" end="6271" title="Abdel Latif Boghdadi (politician)" label="Abdel Latif Boghdadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351405" start="6284" end="6302" title="Egyptian Air Force" label="Egyptian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q49452" start="6323" end="6341" title="Pierre Clostermann" label="Pierre Clostermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551499" start="6409" end="6423" title="Linda Corbould" label="Linda Corbould"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595960" start="6448" end="6468" title="List of Royal Australian Air Force aircraft squadrons" label="RAAF flying squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="6471" end="6481" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="6726" end="6741" title="squadron leader" label="squadron leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360227" start="6746" end="6755" title="Roly Falk" label="Roly Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q218931" start="6794" end="6805" title="Avro Vulcan" label="Avro Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579846" start="6808" end="6842" title="Brendan Finucane" label="Brendan &amp;quot;Paddy&amp;quot; Finucane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672384" start="6902" end="6911" title="Rathmines" label="Rathmines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="6913" end="6919" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="6921" end="6928" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q187668" start="6934" end="6943" title="Emigration" label="emigrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206405" start="7137" end="7155" title="Preller Geldenhuys" label="Preller Geldenhuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429609" start="7175" end="7194" title="Rhodesian Air Force" label="Rhodesian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444955" start="7212" end="7230" title="Rhodesian Bush War" label="Rhodesian Bush War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7251" end="7281" title="Rhodesian Air Force Operations" label="Rhodesian Air Force Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385145" start="7290" end="7300" title="Guy Gibson" label="Guy Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q525965" start="7384" end="7394" title="Andy Green (RAF officer)" label="Andy Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q913270" start="7416" end="7433" title="land speed record" label="land speed record"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932478" start="7488" end="7506" title="M. Hamidullah Khan" label="M. Hamidullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252814" start="7621" end="7636" title="provost marshal" label="provost marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454639" start="7684" end="7704" title="Bangladesh Air Force" label="Bangladesh Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7708" end="7739" title="Walter &amp;quot;Taffy&amp;quot; Holden" label="Walter &amp;quot;Taffy&amp;quot; Holden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7741" end="7768" title="Holden%27s Lightning flight" label="Holden%27s Lightning flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595945" start="7783" end="7810" title="No. 33 Maintenance Unit RAF" label="No. 33 Maintenance Unit RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q19381" start="7841" end="7867" title="English Electric Lightning" label="English Electric Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941693" start="7977" end="7999" title="Humphrey de Verd Leigh" label="Humphrey de Verd Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q665523" start="8015" end="8026" title="Leigh light" label="Leigh light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812047" start="8197" end="8213" title="Norman Macmillan (RAF officer)" label="Norman Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820929" start="8295" end="8312" title="Mervyn Middlecoat" label="Mervyn Middlecoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="8344" end="8362" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="8403" end="8421" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="8436" end="8452" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="8453" end="8459" title="MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8583" end="8596" title="Sitar-e-Jurat" label="Sitar-e-Jurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176249" start="8615" end="8628" title="Peter Overton" label="Peter Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="8746" end="8772" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8823" end="8837" title="Michael Sutton (aviator)" label="Michael Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q27839487" start="9034" end="9065" title="Charlotte Thompson-Edgar" label="Charlotte Joanne Thompson-Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q94340" start="9066" end="9070" title="Royal Red Cross" label="ARRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="9237" end="9252" title="Squadron Leader" label="Squadron Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q94340" start="9269" end="9301" title="Associate of the Royal Red Cross" label="Associate of the Royal Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244744" start="9333" end="9385" title="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service" label="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q61926955" start="9390" end="9410" title="Abhinandan Varthaman" label="Abhinandan Varthaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="9432" end="9448" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388659" start="9551" end="9561" title="Ken Wallis" label="Ken Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q374538" start="9671" end="9687" title="Adrian Warburton" label="Adrian Warburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q682452" start="9756" end="9761" title="Siege of Malta (1940)" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189595" start="9893" end="9908" title="Dennis Wheatley" label="Dennis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176976" start="10056" end="10072" title="Russell Williams (criminal)" label="Russell Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="10184" end="10215" title="Air force officer rank insignia" label="Air force officer rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="10218" end="10258" title="British and U.S. military ranks compared" label="British and U.S. military ranks compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="10261" end="10287" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275704" start="10290" end="10307" title="RAF officer ranks" label="RAF officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293360" start="10310" end="10327" title="Ranks of the RAAF" label="Ranks of the RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q13390015" start="10336" end="10350" title="Wing Commander (computer game)" label="Wing Commander"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578160" wikidata="Q10975529" url="?curid=578160" title="Group captain">
<text>Group captain (Gp Capt or G/C) is a senior officer rank used by some air forces, with origins from the Royal Air Force. The rank is used by air forces of many countries that have historical British influence.

Group captain is immediately senior to wing commander and immediately below air commodore. It is usually equivalent to the rank of captain in the navy and of colonel in other services.

The equivalent rank in the Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force, Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force, Women&#x27;s Royal Air Force (until 1968) and Princess Mary&#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service (until 1980) was &quot;group officer&quot;.

==Canada==

The rank was used in the Royal Canadian Air Force until the 1968 unification of the Canadian Forces, when army-type rank titles were adopted. Canadian group captains then became colonels. In official Canadian French usage, the rank title was .

==India==
== United Kingdom ==
===History===
On 1 April 1918, the newly created RAF adopted its officer rank titles from the British Army, with Royal Naval Air Service captains and Royal Flying Corps colonels becoming colonels in the RAF. In response to the proposal that the RAF should use its own rank titles, it was suggested that the RAF might use the Royal Navy&#x27;s officer ranks, with the word &quot;air&quot; inserted before the naval rank title. For example, the rank that later became group captain would have been &quot;air captain&quot;. Although the Admiralty objected to this simple modification of their rank titles, it was agreed that the RAF might base many of its officer rank titles on naval officer ranks with differing pre-modifying terms. It was also suggested that RAF colonels might be entitled &quot;bannerets&quot; or &quot;leaders&quot;. However, the rank title based on the Navy rank was preferred and as RAF colonels typically commanded groups the rank title group captain was chosen. The rank of group captain was introduced in August 1919 and has been used continuously since then.

Although in the early years of the RAF groups were normally commanded by group captains, by the mid-1920s they were usually commanded by an air officer.

In the post-World War II period the commander of an RAF flying station or a major ground training station has typically been a group captain. More recently, expeditionary air wings have also been commanded by group captains.

===Insignia and command pennant===
The rank insignia is based on the four gold bands of captains in the Royal Navy, comprising four narrow light blue bands over slightly wider black bands. This is worn on both the lower sleeves of the tunic or on the shoulders of the flying suit or the casual uniform. Group captains are the first rank in the RAF hierarchy to wear gold braid on the peak of their cap, informally known as &#x27;scrambled egg&#x27;; however, they still wear the standard RAF officer&#x27;s cap badge.

The command pennant for a group captain is similar to the one for a wing commander except that there is one broad red band in the centre. Only the wing commander and group captain command pennants are triangular in shape.

== Gallery ==

==Notable group captains==

* Sir Douglas Bader World War II fighter pilot and double amputee
* Clive Robertson &quot;Killer&quot; Caldwell , Cross of Valor (Poland)Australia&#x27;s highest-scoring fighter ace, also the highest-scoring P-40 pilot from any air force and the highest-scoring Allied pilot in North Africa. Became one of a small group of pilots throughout history to become an &quot;ace in a day&quot;.
* Leonard Cheshire World War II bomber pilot and charity worker
* Walter Churchill World War II ace fighter pilot, who also evaluated various makes of fighter aircraft for the RAF, and played a key role in getting Spitfire aircraft to the defence of Malta
* Hugh DundasWorld War II fighter pilot and the youngest person to hold this rank, aged 24 years
* Thomas Loel GuinnessWorld War II fighter pilot, politician and businessman
* Hamish Mahaddie Scotsman who flew in Bomber Command and became a key member of the Pathfinder Force as chief procurer of aircrew talent, often referred to as Don Bennett&#x27;s &quot;horse thief&quot;
* Sailor Malan DSO &amp; Bar, DFC &amp; Bar – Royal Air Force flying ace who led No. 74 Squadron RAF during the Battle of Britain, authored the &quot;Ten Simple Rules for Fighter Pilots&quot; and under whose leadership No. 74 Squadron RAF changed outmoded RAF tactics and formations, changes later adopted by all of Fighter Command. In the 1969 cinema film &quot;Battle of Britain&quot;, the character of the &quot;Squadron Leader” nicknamed Skipper played by Robert Shaw was based on Malan
* Herbert Masseyas a POW was Senior British Officer (SBO) at Stalag Luft III. He was portrayed in the movie &quot;The Great Escape&quot; (1963) as Group Captain Ramsey, and played by James Donald. Massey was crippled and walked with a stick, as did his character in the movie
* Virendera Singh Pathania, VrC, VM Indian Air force fighter pilot reputed for making first confirmed kill in aerial dogfight during Indo-Pakistani War of 1965.
* Percy Charles Pickard World War II bomber pilot and captain of &quot;F for Freddie&quot; 
* Alan Rawlinson ,Australian RAAF World War II fighter ace and later commissioned into RAF
* Stanisław SkarżyńskiWorld War II bomber pilot. Commanding Officer RAF Lindholme. Polish Air Force. Transatlantic World Record Holder. Awarded Blériot Medal 1936
* James StaggRAF meteorologist involved in the planning of the D-Day invasion
* Clare Stevenson Director WAAAF
* Peter TownsendWorld War II pilot and suitor of Princess Margaret

=== Honorary ===
* Sally Bridgeland – Non executive director, adviser and trustee. Investment consultant, actuary, and former CEO of the BP Pension Fund
* Bruce DickinsonFrontman of Iron Maiden. Honorary Gp. Capt. of 601 (County of London) Squadron RAF
* Sir Christopher Andrew Hoy Honorary Gp. Capt. as former Ambassador to the Royal Air Force Air Cadets
* Sachin TendulkarHonorary Indian Air Force group captain for his achievements in cricket
* Carol Vorderman Honorary Gp. Capt. as current Ambassador to the Royal Air Force Air Cadets

===Fictional characters===
* Ian Gilmore, a fictional character in &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* Group Captain Tennant James, a fictional character in &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* Captain Jack Harkness, a fictional character in &quot;Doctor Who&quot; and its spin-off &quot;Torchwood&quot; 
* Group Captain Lionel Mandrake, a fictional character and exchange officer in the film &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;, played by Peter Sellers
* Group Captain Rodney Crittendon, a fictional character in the television show &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Heroes&quot;, played by Bernard Fox (Crittendon was titled on the show as the equivalent rank of colonel to avoid confusion with the American audience.)

==See also==

* Air force officer rank insignia
* British and U.S. military ranks compared
* Comparative military ranks
* RAF officer ranks
* Ranks of the RAAF

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="0" end="13" title="Group captain" label="Group captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="15" end="22" title="Group captain" label="Gp Capt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="26" end="29" title="Group captain" label="G/C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053745" start="36" end="50" title="senior officer" label="senior officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="103" end="118" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="159" end="207" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="countries that have historical British influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="249" end="263" title="Wing commander (rank)" label="wing commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="286" end="299" title="air commodore" label="air commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="341" end="348" title="Captain (naval)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="368" end="375" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="423" end="455" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569759" start="457" end="500" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108612" start="502" end="530" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244744" start="548" end="600" title="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service" label="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="683" end="707" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884903" start="723" end="757" title="Unification of the Canadian Armed Forces" label="unification of the Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="836" end="843" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="858" end="873" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1028" end="1040" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="1047" end="1070" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="1084" end="1102" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1259" end="1269" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="1468" end="1477" title="Admiralty (United Kingdom)" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040374" start="1871" end="1877" title="Group (air force unit)" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040374" start="2058" end="2064" title="group (air force unit)" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="2159" end="2170" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2236" end="2243" title="RAF station" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420978" start="2330" end="2353" title="Expeditionary Air Wing" label="expeditionary air wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438719" start="2828" end="2841" title="Scrambled egg (uniform)" label="scrambled egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="3190" end="3203" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249338" start="3252" end="3295" title="Clive Caldwell" label="Clive Robertson &amp;quot;Killer&amp;quot; Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828751" start="3546" end="3570" title="Aviators who became ace in a day" label="&amp;quot;ace in a day&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486701" start="3574" end="3590" title="Leonard Cheshire" label="Leonard Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964556" start="3638" end="3654" title="Walter Churchill" label="Walter Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q682452" start="3811" end="3827" title="Siege of Malta (World War II)" label="defence of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11803262" start="3830" end="3841" title="Hugh Dundas" label="Hugh Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786818" start="3927" end="3947" title="Thomas Loel Guinness" label="Thomas Loel Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q33157739" start="4004" end="4019" title="Hamish Mahaddie" label="Hamish Mahaddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209265" start="4041" end="4055" title="Bomber Command" label="Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q442038" start="4087" end="4103" title="Pathfinder Force" label="Pathfinder Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292214" start="4162" end="4173" title="Don Bennett" label="Don Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538748" start="4207" end="4219" title="Sailor Malan" label="Sailor Malan"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="4220" end="4223" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="DSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537204" start="4230" end="4233" title="Medal bar" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229534" start="4235" end="4238" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United Kingdom)" label="DFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537204" start="4245" end="4248" title="Medal bar" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="4251" end="4266" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="4267" end="4277" title="flying ace" label="flying ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664006" start="4286" end="4305" title="No. 74 Squadron RAF" label="No. 74 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="4317" end="4334" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664006" start="4424" end="4443" title="No. 74 Squadron RAF" label="No. 74 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q714989" start="4562" end="4591" title="Battle of Britain (film)" label="&amp;quot;Battle of Britain&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q313727" start="4665" end="4676" title="Robert Shaw (British actor)" label="Robert Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q15968399" start="4698" end="4712" title="Herbert Massey" label="Herbert Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q110354" start="4810" end="4826" title="The Great Escape (film)" label="The Great Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q151567" start="4879" end="4891" title="James Donald" label="James Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q107720670" start="4974" end="4998" title="Virendera Singh Pathania" label="Virendera Singh Pathania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640487" start="5000" end="5003" title="VrC" label="VrC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917587" start="5005" end="5007" title="Vayu Sena Medal" label="VM"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="5008" end="5024" title="Indian Air force" label="Indian Air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="5089" end="5097" title="dogfight" label="dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q233583" start="5105" end="5131" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1965" label="Indo-Pakistani War of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167277" start="5135" end="5156" title="Percy Charles Pickard" label="Percy Charles Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q27909264" start="5227" end="5241" title="Alan Rawlinson" label="Alan Rawlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="5254" end="5258" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="5272" end="5283" title="flying ace" label="fighter ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599224" start="5318" end="5338" title="Stanisław Skarżyński" label="Stanisław Skarżyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853500" start="5460" end="5473" title="List of Louis Blériot medal winners" label="Blériot Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161421" start="5481" end="5492" title="James Stagg" label="James Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="5496" end="5509" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="5542" end="5547" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126256" start="5559" end="5574" title="Clare Stevenson" label="Clare Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569759" start="5584" end="5589" title="WAAAF" label="WAAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314412" start="5592" end="5606" title="Peter Townsend (Group Captain)" label="Peter Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="5639" end="5656" title="Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q190151" start="5813" end="5828" title="Bruce Dickinson" label="Bruce Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="5840" end="5851" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043664" start="5875" end="5910" title="No. 601 Squadron RAF" label="601 (County of London) Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q310383" start="5913" end="5939" title="Chris Hoy" label="Sir Christopher Andrew Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373595" start="5987" end="6013" title="Royal Air Force Air Cadets" label="Royal Air Force Air Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9488" start="6016" end="6032" title="Sachin Tendulkar" label="Sachin Tendulkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="6041" end="6057" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939864" start="6106" end="6121" title="Carol Vorderman" label="Carol Vorderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="6271" end="6281" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q561140" start="6369" end="6390" title="Captain Jack Harkness" label="Captain Jack Harkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q390120" start="6463" end="6472" title="Torchwood" label="Torchwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419605" start="6539" end="6555" title="exchange officer" label="exchange officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="6574" end="6589" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr. Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="6607" end="6620" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q431917" start="6707" end="6726" title="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Heroes" label="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q707734" start="6744" end="6755" title="Bernard Fox (actor)" label="Bernard Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="6817" end="6824" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="6890" end="6921" title="Air force officer rank insignia" label="Air force officer rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="6924" end="6964" title="British and U.S. military ranks compared" label="British and U.S. military ranks compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="6967" end="6993" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275704" start="6996" end="7013" title="RAF officer ranks" label="RAF officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293360" start="7016" end="7033" title="Ranks of the RAAF" label="Ranks of the RAAF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578163" wikidata="Q391802" url="?curid=578163" title="Das Bohnenspiel">
<text>Bohnenspiel (&quot;the bean game&quot;) is a German mancala game described in the 1937 &quot;Deutsche Spielhandbuch&quot;.

== Rules ==
&quot;Starting position for &quot;Das Bohnenspiel
The field consists of two rows of six pits each. The game starts with six beans in each pit.

Each player &quot;owns&quot; the six pits closest to himself. The player whose turn it is to play chooses any one of his pits which contains at least one bean. He removes all the beans from this pit and &quot;sows&quot; them counterclockwise. Sowing is accomplished by selecting a pit, removing all the pieces from that pit, and dropping them one by one in each subsequent pit (leaving out the stores), until all have been used.

If the last bean ends up in a pit which, after sowing, contains exactly two, four, or six beans (but no other number), all beans in this pit are captured. If any capture is made, the preceding pit is checked (and its beans possibly captured) according to the same rule, and so forth.

If the player whose turn it is to move cannot move, the game ends and all beans on the board go to the other player.

The goal is to capture more beans than the opponent.

==History==

The &quot;Bohnenspiel&quot; was first mentioned by Fritz Jahn his book &quot;Old German Games&quot; (1917). In it he describes a 1908 trip to Estonia to visit Baron von Stackelberg. There he discovered a replica of a game board which to this day is kept in the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg. The original board had been a gift from the Shah of Persia to Empress Catherine the Great.

The game spread in German-Baltic and Prussian noble families until it was popularized by Jahn in the entire German-speaking world and in all population strata. Jahn also pursued adult-pedagogical goals with the game: He wanted to educate the working class and improve the lives of wounded German World War I veterans. His variant of the game is also called Baltic bean game, while another variant, which used a bigger board, is called German bean game.

A detailed analysis of the rules of the game shows the bean game to be very similar to Central Asian and Arab mancala games, such as Turkish mangala, Palestinian Al-manqala, and Iraqi Halusa. This fits very well with the likely origin of the game. The resemblance to African mancala games on the other hand is probably coincidence.

In the 19th century, the game was most popular in the Baltic States, East and West Prussia and Pomerania. In the Baltics, the game disappeared after the October Revolution, due to the expropriation, expulsion, and execution of the German noble families in 1917. In East Germany, several books were written about the game. Plastic game boards were made in the 1980s, with the name of the game changed to &quot;Sabo&quot; or &quot;Badari&quot;.

== Further reading ==
* B. Arbeiter, W. Ruhnke: &quot;Brettspiele (4. Ergänzungsband zum Deutschen Spielhandbuch).&quot; Ludwig Voggenreiter Verlag, Potsdam (Deutschland) 1937, 10-12.
* Erwin Glonnegger: &quot;Das Spiele-Buch: Brett- und Legespiele aus aller Welt.&quot; Ravensburger Buchverlag &amp; Heinrich Hugendubel Verlag, Ravensburg &amp; München (Deutschland) 1988, 214.
* W. Hirte: &quot;Unsere Spiele: 1000 und mehr.&quot; Verlag für die Frau, Leipzig (Deutschland) 1971, 307-309.
* F. Jahn: &quot;Die Pflege des Spiels in Krieg und Frieden als Aufgabe des Vaterländischen Frauen-Vereins.&quot; Vaterländischer Frauen-Verein 1916.
* F. Jahn: &quot;Alte deutsche Spiele.&quot; Furche-Verlag, Berlin 1917, 14-15.
* K.-H. Koch: &quot;Spiele für Zwei.&quot; Hugendubel, München (Deutschland) 1986, 59-63.
* H. Machatscheck: &quot;Zug um Zug: Die Zauberwelt der Brettspiele.&quot; Verlag Neues Leben, Berlin (Deutschland) 1972, 157-158.
* T. Müller-Alfeld: &quot;Brettspiele.&quot; Verlag Ullstein GmbH, Frankfurt/Main &amp; Berlin (Deutschland) 1963, 153-156.
* B. Rüger: &quot;Du bist dran: 42 Spiele am Tisch.&quot; VEB Friedrich Hofmeister, Leipzig (Deutschland) 1962, 34-37.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q391802" start="0" end="11" title="Das Bohnenspiel" label="Bohnenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q267989" start="52" end="59" title="mancala" label="mancala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93" end="115" title="Deutsche Spielhandbuch" label="Deutsche Spielhandbuch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1231" end="1241" title="Fritz Jahn" label="Fritz Jahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="1322" end="1329" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132783" start="1441" end="1457" title="Hermitage Museum" label="Hermitage Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="1521" end="1525" title="Shah" label="Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="1547" end="1566" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1865" end="1876" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2156" end="2163" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817622" start="2164" end="2171" title="mangala (game)" label="mangala"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="2173" end="2184" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817622" start="2185" end="2195" title="Al-manqala" label="Al-manqala"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2201" end="2205" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2207" end="2213" title="Halusa" label="Halusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="2439" end="2446" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="2451" end="2460" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="2509" end="2527" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="2621" end="2633" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578169" wikidata="Q407033" url="?curid=578169" title="Air commodore">
<text>Air commodore (Air Cdre or Air Cmde) is an air officer rank used by some air forces, with origins from the Royal Air Force. The rank is also used by the air forces of many countries which have historical British influence and it is sometimes used as the English translation of an equivalent rank in countries which have a non-English air force-specific rank structure.

Air commodore is immediately senior to group captain and immediately subordinate to air vice-marshal. It is usually equivalent to a commodore or a brigadier/brigadier general.

The equivalent rank in the Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force, Women&#x27;s Royal Air Force (until 1968) and Princess Mary&#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service (until 1980) was &quot;air commandant&quot;.

==Canada==

The rank was used in the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) until the 1968 unification of the Canadian Forces, when army-type rank titles were adopted. Canadian air commodores then became brigadier-generals. In official Canadian French usage, the rank title was . The position of honorary air commodore still exists in the Royal Canadian Air Cadets.

==India==
== United Kingdom ==

In the present-day RAF, air commodores typically hold senior appointments within groups, acting directly in support of the air officer commanding. However, during the inter-war period, and in the case of the contemporary No. 83 Expeditionary Air Group, the air officer commanding held or holds air commodore rank. In the Air Training Corps, an appointed air commodore holds ultimate authority over the cadet organisation as the Commandant Air Cadets.

===Origins===
On 1 April 1918, the newly created RAF adopted its officer rank titles from the British Army, with officers at what is now air commodore holding the rank of brigadier-general. In response to the proposal that the RAF should use its own rank titles, it was suggested that the RAF might use the Royal Navy&#x27;s officer ranks, with the word &quot;air&quot; inserted before the naval rank title. Although the Admiralty objected to this simple modification of their rank titles, it was agreed that the RAF might base many of its officer rank titles on Navy officer ranks with differing pre-modifying terms. It was also suggested that air-officer ranks could be based on the term &quot;ardian&quot;, which was derived from a combination of the Gaelic words for &quot;chief&quot; (&quot;ard&quot;) and &quot;bird&quot; (&quot;eun&quot;), with the term &quot;fourth ardian&quot; or &quot;flight ardian&quot; being used for the equivalent to brigadier-general and commodore. However, the rank title based on the Navy rank was preferred and air commodore was adopted in August 1919.

===RAF insignia, command flag and star plate===
The rank insignia is a light-blue band on a broad black band worn on both the lower sleeves of the tunic or on the shoulders of the flying suit or the casual uniform. On the mess uniform, air commodores wear a broad gold ring on both lower sleeves.

The command flag of an air commodore has one narrow red band running through the centre and is rectangular with a cut-away section giving it two tails. It is the only RAF command flag of this shape and it is similar in shape to that of a Royal Navy commodore&#x27;s broad pennant. The vehicle star plate for an air commodore depicts a single white star (air commodore is equivalent to a one-star rank) on an air force blue background. RAF air commodores are classed as air officers and as such have two rows of gold oak leaves on the peak of their service dress hats.

===Honorary air commodores, air commodores-in-chief and air commandants===
The reigning monarch may appoint honorary air commodores for RAF flying squadrons and stations. For example, King Charles III is RAF Valley&#x27;s honorary air commodore and Winston Churchill was 615 Squadron&#x27;s honorary air commodore. As the title suggests, this is an honorary position bestowed by the reigning monarch and it does not grant the recipient command of a unit or formation. It is designed to strengthen the bond between the military unit and the individual and promote the role of the air force amongst the public.

Serving officers may be granted an equivalent appointment to the honorary rank. In such cases the individual is made an honorary air commandant and they retain their regular rank.

Larger air force organisations or formations may be honoured by having an air commodore-in-chief appointed in their name. These RAF appointments are rare and to date (2020) have been given to just five senior members of the royal family, of whom three were reigning or future monarchs of the United Kingdom. Air commodore-in-chief is not a rank and such an appointment does not convey the rank of air commodore upon the recipient.

== Gallery ==

==See also==

* Air force officer rank insignia
* Comparison of United Kingdom and United States military ranks
* List of comparative military ranks
* RAF officer ranks
* Ranks of the Royal Australian Air Force

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="0" end="13" title="Air commodore" label="Air commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="15" end="23" title="Air commodore" label="Air Cdre"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="27" end="35" title="Air commodore" label="Air Cmde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="43" end="54" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="107" end="122" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="172" end="221" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="countries which have historical British influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="409" end="422" title="group captain" label="group captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106078" start="454" end="470" title="air vice-marshal" label="air vice-marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q506249" start="502" end="511" title="Commodore (rank)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q41685" start="517" end="526" title="brigadier" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="527" end="544" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="574" end="606" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108612" start="608" end="636" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244744" start="654" end="706" title="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service" label="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="790" end="814" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884903" start="837" end="871" title="Unification of the Canadian Armed Forces" label="unification of the Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="950" end="967" title="brigadier-general" label="brigadier-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="982" end="997" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932687" start="1085" end="1110" title="Royal Canadian Air Cadets" label="Royal Canadian Air Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040374" start="1226" end="1232" title="Group (air force)" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698125" start="1268" end="1290" title="air officer commanding" label="air officer commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043834" start="1366" end="1396" title="No. 83 Expeditionary Air Group (United Kingdom)" label="No. 83 Expeditionary Air Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698217" start="1466" end="1484" title="Air Training Corps" label="Air Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152136" start="1573" end="1594" title="Commandant Air Cadets" label="Commandant Air Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1691" end="1703" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="1768" end="1785" title="brigadier-general" label="brigadier-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774110" start="1904" end="1935" title="Royal Navy officer rank insignia" label="Royal Navy&amp;#x27;s officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="2018" end="2027" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="2242" end="2253" title="air officer" label="air-officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="2351" end="2357" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278236" start="2909" end="2921" title="Mess dress" label="mess uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527659" start="3251" end="3264" title="broad pennant" label="broad pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="3454" end="3465" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438719" start="3496" end="3511" title="Scrambled egg (uniform)" label="gold oak leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="3633" end="3649" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="reigning monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="3738" end="3754" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194324" start="3758" end="3768" title="RAF Valley" label="RAF Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="3803" end="3820" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043685" start="3825" end="3837" title="No. 615 Squadron RAF" label="615 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697819" start="4419" end="4441" title="air commodore-in-chief" label="air commodore-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="4614" end="4620" title="Prince of Wales" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="4808" end="4839" title="Air force officer rank insignia" label="Air force officer rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="4842" end="4903" title="Comparison of United Kingdom and United States military ranks" label="Comparison of United Kingdom and United States military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="4906" end="4940" title="List of comparative military ranks" label="List of comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275704" start="4943" end="4960" title="RAF officer ranks" label="RAF officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293360" start="4963" end="5002" title="Ranks of the Royal Australian Air Force" label="Ranks of the Royal Australian Air Force"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578171" wikidata="Q1649147" url="?curid=578171" title="Sandy River">
<text>Sandy River may refer to:

==Rivers in the United States==
* Sandy River (Chandler Bay), Jonesport, Maine
* Sandy River (Kennebec River) in Maine
* Sandy River (Mississippi River), a tributary of the Mississippi River in Minnesota
* Sandy River (Red Lake), a tributary of Lower Red Lake in Minnesota
* Sandy River (Oregon)
* Sandy River (South Carolina)
* Sandy River (Bush River tributary), Virginia
* Sandy River (Dan River tributary), Virginia
* Upper Sandy River, in the Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge

==Settlements in the United States==
* Sandy River Plantation, Maine, a municipality in Maine
* Sandy River, Virginia, Pittsylvania County

==See also==
* Big Sandy River (disambiguation)
* Little Sandy River (disambiguation)
* Sandy River Airport, Sandy, Oregon
* Sandy Rivers
* Sandy Creek (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1649147" start="0" end="11" title="Sandy River" label="Sandy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417441" start="61" end="87" title="Sandy River (Chandler Bay)" label="Sandy River (Chandler Bay)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417442" start="108" end="136" title="Sandy River (Kennebec River)" label="Sandy River (Kennebec River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417443" start="148" end="179" title="Sandy River (Mississippi River)" label="Sandy River (Mississippi River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417444" start="233" end="255" title="Sandy River (Red Lake)" label="Sandy River (Red Lake)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584481" start="302" end="322" title="Sandy River (Oregon)" label="Sandy River (Oregon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417445" start="325" end="353" title="Sandy River (South Carolina)" label="Sandy River (South Carolina)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417440" start="356" end="390" title="Sandy River (Bush River tributary)" label="Sandy River (Bush River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417446" start="403" end="436" title="Sandy River (Dan River tributary)" label="Sandy River (Dan River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="449" end="466" title="Upper Sandy River" label="Upper Sandy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q258559" start="475" end="516" title="Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417450" start="557" end="586" title="Sandy River Plantation, Maine" label="Sandy River Plantation, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417439" start="614" end="635" title="Sandy River, Virginia" label="Sandy River, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q859216" start="673" end="705" title="Big Sandy River (disambiguation)" label="Big Sandy River (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627757" start="708" end="743" title="Little Sandy River (disambiguation)" label="Little Sandy River (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="746" end="765" title="Sandy River Airport" label="Sandy River Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q785864" start="783" end="795" title="Sandy Rivers" label="Sandy Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q439502" start="798" end="826" title="Sandy Creek (disambiguation)" label="Sandy Creek (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578173" wikidata="Q3106078" url="?curid=578173" title="Air vice-marshal">
<text>Air vice-marshal (Air Vce Mshl or AVM) is an air officer rank used by some air forces, with origins from the Royal Air Force. The rank is also used by the air forces of many countries which have historical British influence and it is sometimes used as the English translation of an equivalent rank in countries which have a non-English air force-specific rank structure. 

Air vice-marshal is usually equivalent to the naval rank of rear admiral or a rank of major general in an army. The rank of Air Vice-Marshal is immediately senior to the rank Air Commodore and immediately subordinate to the rank of Air Marshal. Since before the Second World War it has been common for air officers commanding RAF groups to hold the rank of Air Vice-Marshal. In small air forces such as the Royal New Zealand Air Force and the Ghana Air Force, the head of the air force holds the rank of Air Vice-Marshal.

The equivalent rank in the Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force, Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force, Women&#x27;s Royal Air Force (until 1968) and Princess Mary&#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service (until 1980) was &quot;air chief commandant&quot;.

==Australia ==
The Australian Air Corps adopted the RAF rank system on 9 November 1920 and this usage was continued by its successor, the Royal Australian Air Force. However, the rank of air vice-marshal was not used by the Australian Armed Forces until 1935 when Richard Williams, the Australian Chief of the Air Staff, was promoted. Margaret Staib of the Royal Australian Air Force served in the rank of air vice-marshal from 2009 to 2012 when she retired from the Australian Defence Force.

==Canada==

In 1920, Sir Willoughby Gwatkin, the former Canadian Chief of the General Staff, was granted the rank of air vice-marshal and appointed the inspector-general of the newly established Canadian Air Force. The rank was used until the 1968 unification of the Canadian Forces, when army-type rank titles were adopted. Canadian air vice-marshals then became major-generals. In official Canadian French usage, the rank title was .

==India==
== United Kingdom ==
===Origins===
On 1 April 1918, the newly created RAF adopted its officer rank titles from the British Army, with officers at what is now air vice-marshal level holding the rank of major-general. In response to the proposal that the RAF should use its own rank titles, it was suggested that the RAF might use the Royal Navy&#x27;s officer ranks, with the word &quot;air&quot; inserted before the naval rank title. For example, the rank that later became air vice-marshal would have been air rear-admiral. The Admiralty objected to any use of their rank titles, including this modified form, and so an alternative proposal was put forward: air officer ranks would be based on the term &quot;ardian&quot;, which was derived from a combination of the Gaelic words for &quot;chief&quot; (&quot;ard&quot;) and &quot;bird&quot; (&quot;eun&quot;), with the term &quot;third ardian&quot; or &quot;squadron ardian&quot; being used for the equivalent to rear admiral and major general. However, air vice-marshal was preferred and was adopted in August 1919. The following officers were the first to be appointed to the rank, and their former service ranks are also shown:

===RAF insignia, command flag and star plate===

The rank insignia consists of a narrow light blue band (on a slightly wider black band) over a light blue band on a broad black band. This is worn on both the lower sleeves of the dress uniform or on the shoulders of the flying suit or working uniform.

The command flag of an air vice-marshal has two narrow red bands running through the centre.

The vehicle star plate for an air vice-marshal depicts two white stars (air vice-marshal is a two-star rank) on an air force blue background.

, air vice-marshal was the highest uniformed military rank currently held by a woman in the British Armed Forces when Air Vice-Marshal Elaine West was awarded the position in August 2013.

== Gallery ==

== See also ==

* Air force officer rank insignia
* Air vice marshal (Australia)
* British and U.S. military ranks compared
* Comparative military ranks
* RAF officer ranks
* Ranks of the RAAF

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3106078" start="0" end="16" title="Air vice-marshal" label="Air vice-marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106078" start="18" end="30" title="Air vice-marshal" label="Air Vce Mshl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106078" start="34" end="37" title="Air vice-marshal" label="AVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="45" end="56" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="109" end="124" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="174" end="223" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="countries which have historical British influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="433" end="445" title="rear admiral" label="rear admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="459" end="472" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="548" end="561" title="Air Commodore" label="Air Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="605" end="616" title="Air Marshal" label="Air Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698125" start="675" end="698" title="air officers commanding" label="air officers commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040374" start="703" end="709" title="Group (air force)" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="780" end="807" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137368" start="816" end="831" title="Ghana Air Force" label="Ghana Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="923" end="955" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569759" start="957" end="1000" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108612" start="1002" end="1030" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244744" start="1048" end="1100" title="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service" label="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768837" start="1172" end="1192" title="Australian Air Corps" label="Australian Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="1291" end="1317" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q982586" start="1417" end="1433" title="Richard Williams (RAAF officer)" label="Richard Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097000" start="1439" end="1472" title="Chief of Air Force (Australia)" label="Australian Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759912" start="1488" end="1502" title="Margaret Staib" label="Margaret Staib"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="1510" end="1536" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q625657" start="1620" end="1644" title="Australian Defence Force" label="Australian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022219" start="1672" end="1690" title="Willoughby Gwatkin" label="Willoughby Gwatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961992" start="1703" end="1738" title="Commander of the Canadian Army" label="Canadian Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="1842" end="1860" title="Canadian Air Force" label="Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884903" start="1895" end="1929" title="Unification of the Canadian Armed Forces" label="unification of the Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="2011" end="2024" title="major-general" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="2039" end="2054" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="2209" end="2221" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2427" end="2437" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="2623" end="2632" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="2753" end="2764" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="2862" end="2868" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434634" start="3547" end="3558" title="flying suit" label="flying suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="3909" end="3929" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q15969861" start="3952" end="3963" title="Elaine West" label="Elaine West"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="4039" end="4070" title="Air force officer rank insignia" label="Air force officer rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182693" start="4073" end="4101" title="Air vice marshal (Australia)" label="Air vice marshal (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="4104" end="4144" title="British and U.S. military ranks compared" label="British and U.S. military ranks compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="4147" end="4173" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275704" start="4176" end="4193" title="RAF officer ranks" label="RAF officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293360" start="4196" end="4213" title="Ranks of the RAAF" label="Ranks of the RAAF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578179" wikidata="Q3046560" url="?curid=578179" title="Eastern College Athletic Conference">
<text>The Eastern College Athletic Conference (ECAC) is a college athletic conference comprising schools that compete in 15 sports (13 men&#x27;s and 13 women&#x27;s). It has 220 member institutions in NCAA Divisions I, II, and III, ranging in location from Maine to South Carolina and west to Missouri. Most or all members belong to at least one other athletic conference.

The ECAC was founded as the Central Office for Eastern Intercollegiate Athletics in 1938, largely through the efforts of James Lynah of Cornell University. In 1983, the Eastern Association of Intercollegiate Athletics for Women (EAIAW) was consolidated into the ECAC. Most member schools are in other conferences as well, but through the ECAC they are able to participate in sports that their main conferences do not offer. Its headquarters are located in Danbury, Connecticut. The ECAC also now offers esports competitions to its member schools.

==Membership==

===Division I===
As of fall 2023, there are 78 Division I members.

===Division II===
As of fall 2023, there are 7 Division II members.

===Division III===
As of spring 2018, there are 79 Division III members.

==Affiliates==
The ECAC has several affiliated single-sport leagues:
*Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges
*Eastern Association of Women&#x27;s Rowing Colleges
*ECAC Equestrian
*Eastern Intercollegiate Gymnastics League
*Intercollegiate Rowing Association
*Intercollegiate Association of Amateur Athletes in America
*ECAC Lacrosse League (defunct)
*ECAC Division II Lacrosse League (defunct)
*ECAC Hockey (independent since 2004)

==Sports==
==ECAC men&#x27;s basketball tournaments==
At various times, the ECAC has organized regional college basketball championship tournaments at the end of the regular season for teams playing at the NCAA Division I, Division II, and Division III levels. It held the Division I tournaments from 1975 to 1982 to provide independent colleges and universities in the northeastern United States with a means of participating in end-of-season tournaments that resulted in the winning team receiving an automatic bid to the NCAA Division I men&#x27;s basketball tournament, similar to the end-of-season tournaments held by conventional athletic conferences. The Division I ECAC tournaments were discontinued after all participating schools joined conferences of their own during the late 1970s and early 1980s.

The ECAC also held combined Division II/III regional end-of- season tournaments from 1973 to 1980 and a single Division II-only tournament after the regular season from 1988 to 2006 and in 2007, 2008, and 2014. Since 1981, it has organized regional Division III-only men&#x27;s basketball tournaments annually at the end of each regular season.

==ECAC Division III football bowls==
In football, the ECAC organizes four NCAA Division III bowl games each year. The bowl games are as follow:
* ECAC Asa S. Bushnell Bowl
* ECAC Clayton Chapman Bowl
* ECAC James Lynah Bowl
* ECAC Scotty Whitelaw Bowl

==Awards==
:&quot;See footnotes&quot;
*Div. I FBS Football Major Awards 
*Div. I FCS Football Major Awards
*Div II Football Major Awards
*Div. III Football Major Awards
*Robbins Scholar-Athletes
*Award of Merit (for student-athletes)
*Award of Valor (for student-athletes)
*ECAC Rowing Trophy

==See also==
* ECAC Hockey, a Division I ice hockey conference previously affiliated with the ECAC
* Mountain Pacific Sports Federation, a similar Division I conference in the western U.S.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3046560" start="4" end="39" title="Eastern College Athletic Conference" label="Eastern College Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046560" start="41" end="45" title="Eastern College Athletic Conference" label="ECAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246291" start="52" end="79" title="List of college athletic conferences in the United States" label="college athletic conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="118" end="124" title="sports" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="196" end="200" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="201" end="212" title="NCAA Division I" label="Divisions I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="214" end="216" title="NCAA Division II" label="II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="222" end="225" title="NCAA Division III" label="III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992826" start="347" end="366" title="athletic conference" label="athletic conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138314" start="490" end="501" title="James Lynah" label="James Lynah"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="505" end="523" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49198" start="825" end="845" title="Danbury, Connecticut" label="Danbury, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329995" start="1214" end="1252" title="Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges" label="Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329996" start="1254" end="1305" title="Eastern Association of Women&amp;#x27;s Rowing Colleges" label="Eastern Association of Women&amp;#x27;s Rowing Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1307" end="1322" title="ECAC Equestrian" label="ECAC Equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330222" start="1324" end="1365" title="Eastern Intercollegiate Gymnastics League" label="Eastern Intercollegiate Gymnastics League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045810" start="1367" end="1401" title="Intercollegiate Rowing Association" label="Intercollegiate Rowing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653159" start="1403" end="1461" title="IC4A" label="Intercollegiate Association of Amateur Athletes in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322627" start="1463" end="1483" title="ECAC Lacrosse League" label="ECAC Lacrosse League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322624" start="1495" end="1527" title="ECAC Division II Lacrosse League" label="ECAC Division II Lacrosse League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274040" start="1539" end="1550" title="ECAC Hockey" label="ECAC Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="1681" end="1699" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="1788" end="1798" title="NCAA Division I" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="1800" end="1811" title="NCAA Division II" label="Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="1817" end="1829" title="NCAA Division III" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="2101" end="2149" title="NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="2775" end="2783" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="2809" end="2826" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922711" start="2827" end="2836" title="bowl game" label="bowl game"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673326" start="3027" end="3046" title="NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision" label="Div. I FBS Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q86660967" start="3062" end="3081" title="Division I FCS" label="Div. I FCS Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="3096" end="3111" title="NCAA Division II" label="Div II Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="3126" end="3143" title="NCAA Division III" label="Div. III Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274040" start="3297" end="3308" title="ECAC Hockey" label="ECAC Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974360" start="3383" end="3417" title="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation" label="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578181" wikidata="Q733299" url="?curid=578181" title="Ned Rorem">
<text>Ned Miller Rorem (October 23, 1923 – November 18, 2022) was an American composer of contemporary classical music and a writer. Best known for his art songs, which number over 500, Rorem was considered the leading American of his time writing in the genre. Frequently described as a neoromantic composer, he showed limited interest in the emerging modernist aesthetic of his lifetime. As a writer, he kept—and later published—numerous diaries in which he spoke candidly of his exchanges and relationships with many cultural figures of America and France.

Born in Richmond, Indiana, Rorem found an early interest in music, studying with Margaret Bonds and Leo Sowerby. He developed a strong enthusiasm for French music and received mentorship from Aaron Copland and Virgil Thomson, among others. After two productive years in Morocco, Rorem was hosted by the arts patron Marie-Laure de Noailles in Paris, where he was influenced by the neoclassicist group Les Six, particularly Francis Poulenc and Darius Milhaud. He returned to America in around 1957, establishing himself as a prominent composer and receiving regular commissions. For the American Bicentennial, he worked on seven different commissions concurrently, among which was &quot;Air Music: Ten Etudes for Orchestra&quot;, which won a Pulitzer Prize for Music in 1976.

Much of Rorem&#x27;s life was spent with his lifelong partner James Holmes, between his apartment in New York and house in Nantucket. From 1980 onwards he taught at the Curtis Institute, where his students included Daron Hagen and Jennifer Higdon. He wrote the large-scale song cycle &quot;Evidence of Things Not Seen&quot; (1997) to 36 texts by 24 writers, for the New York Festival of Song. It is considered by commentators and Rorem himself to be his &quot;magnum opus&quot;. Much of his later compositions were devoted to concertante and his final major work was the opera &quot;Our Town&quot; (2006).
==Life and career==
===1923–1940: Childhood and youth===

Ned Miller Rorem was born in Richmond, Indiana, US on October 23, 1923. Born to parents of Norwegian descent, he was their second child after his sister Rosemary. His father Clarence Rufus Rorem was a medical economist at Earlham College whose work later inspired the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, while his mother Gladys Miller Rorem was active in antiwar movements and the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers). Ned described his background as &quot;upper middle-class, semi-bohemian but with a strong Quaker emphasis&quot;. He later explained that his family was more culturally but not religiously Quaker; throughout his life he described himself as a &quot;Quaker atheist&quot;. The family moved to Chicago a few months after Rorem&#x27;s birth, where he attended the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools. Though not musicians themselves, his parents were enthusiastic about the arts, and brought their children to numerous concerts by the famous pianists and dancers.

Rorem showed an early talent and interest in music, learning piano in his youth with Nuta Rothschild. Though he had other teachers before Rothschild, she was his first to make a lasting impression: she inaugurated his life-long enthusiasm for French music and culture, especially Impressionists such as Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel. By age 12, Rorem began piano lessons with Margaret Bonds, who helped foster his interest in music composition and introduced him to both American jazz and American classical music by composers such as Charles Tomlinson Griffes and John Alden Carpenter. The music of Igor Stravinsky and songs of Billie Holiday were also particularly impressionable. He began piano study with Belle Tannenbaum in 1938, under whom he learned and performed the first movement of Edvard Grieg&#x27;s Piano Concerto. Throughout his youth he also studied music theory at the American Conservatory of Music with Leo Sowerby, a well known church music composer of the time. He graduated high school in 1940, around when he began a close friendship with the future-writer Paul Goodman, whose poems he would later set to music. Rorem also found interest in literary activities, having kept a diary since his youth.

===1940–1948: Emerging composer===
Rorem attended the School of Music of Northwestern University in 1940, studying composition with Alfred Nolte and piano with Harold Van Horne. Under the latter he focused on standard repertoire by Bach, Beethoven and Chopin, but transferred to the Curtis Institute of Music in 1942. There, he studied composition and orchestration under Gian Carlo Menotti and counterpoint under Rosario Scalero. He had numerous compositions premiered, including &quot;The 70th Psalm&quot; (1943), a choral piece with orchestral accompaniment, and a Piano Sonata for Four Hands. Considering Scalero unprogressive, he left Curtis after a year; his parents disagreed with the decision and ceased providing him a regular allowance. Moving to New York in late 1943, to support himself he took a job as copyist for the composer Virgil Thomson, with whom he also studied orchestration and prosody. Via a mutual friend, he became acquainted with the conductor and composer Leonard Bernstein, and Bernstein introduced him to Aaron Copland. Rorem later attended two of the Tanglewood Music Center&#x27;s summer sessions to study with Copland. Rorem later remarked in an article of &quot;The New York Times&quot;: &quot;Well, I took the job with Virgil, became an instant fan of Aaron and Lenny, and for the next 42 years with many an up and a down I&#x27;ve remained staunch friends with all three men. Some weekend!&quot;

Later in 1943 he enrolled in the Juilliard School and studied composition with Bernard Wagenaar. Rorem graduated from Juilliard with a Bachelor of Arts in 1946 and a Master of Music in 1948. While a student he worked as a piano accompanist for performers such as the dancer Martha Graham and the singer Éva Gauthier. Due to his interest in literature he became increasingly interested in composing art songs, and also wrote incidental music, ballet music and music for a puppet show. In 1948, his song &quot;The Lordly Hudson&quot; on a poem by Goodman won the Music Library Association&#x27;s published song of the year award. That same year, his orchestral &quot;Overture in C&quot; won a Gershwin Prize and was premiered by New York Philharmonic under in May 1948. The positive reception of both these compositions was an important milestone in his career as an emerging composer.

===1949–1957: France and Morocco===
Rorem later remarked that the 1940s were formative for charting his future career and by 1950 he was certain of being a composer. With money from the Gershwin Prize, he left for France in early 1949, though spent much of the next two years in Morocco. He was hugely productive in the comparatively quieter Morocco, and produced a variety of compositions in rapid succession. He later explained that &quot;The best influence for a composer is four walls. The light must come from inside. When it comes from outside, the result is postcard music.&quot; Among his earliest large-scale works, he wrote the ballet &quot;Melos&quot; in 1949, and both his Piano Concerto No. 2 and Symphony No. 1 1950. The ballet won the Prix de Biarritz in 1951, while the Symphony was premiered in Vienna in February 1951 by Jonathan Sternberg and the piano concerto in 1954 by Julius Katchen via French Radio. During this period he wrote numerous song cycles dedicated to a single textual source: &quot;Flight for Heaven&quot; (1950) to Robert Herrick; &quot;Six Irish Poems&quot; (1950) to George Darley; &quot;Cycle of Holy Songs&quot; (1951) to biblical texts; and &quot;To a Young Girl&quot; to W. B. Yeats. He composed his first opera, &quot;A Childhood Miracle&quot;, to Elliott Stein&#x27;s libretto based on &quot;The Snow-Image, and Other Twice-Told Tales&quot; by Nathaniel Hawthorne. Though written in 1951, the opera was not premiered until May 10, 1955, in New York. He later received two further honors: the Lili Boulanger Memorial Fund Award in 1950 and a Fulbright Scholarship in 1951.

On the Fulbright Scholarship, in 1951 Rorem settled in Paris to study with Arthur Honegger, a representative from the Les Six group of neoclassicist music. Unlike most young American musicians in the city, he did not study with Nadia Boulanger, as she opined that her instruction might tarnish his already individual style. He became associated with the wealthy arts patron Marie-Laure de Noailles, at whose mansion he resided. Through her influence, he met with the leading Parisian cultural figures of his time, including other composers of Les Six, Francis Poulenc, Georges Auric and Darius Milhaud. Their proximity solidified the French influence of his style and he set numerous medieval French poems in the 1953 song cycle &quot;Poémes pour la paix&quot;. Other compositions written in Paris include: Piano Sonata No. 2 (1950); two ballets, &quot;Ballet for Jerry&quot; (1951) and &quot;Dorian Gray&quot; (1952); &quot;Design for Orchestra&quot; (1953); &quot;The Poet&#x27;s Requiem&quot; (1955); and Symphony No. 2. A Paris concert in 1953 featured solely Rorem&#x27;s compositions.

===1957–1973: Return to the US===

Rorem returned to the US in either 1957 or 1958 to further pursue composition. By now, his music had attracted the attention of several important American musicians and ensembles, and most of his compositions from the 1960s onwards were commissions. In 1959, the Philadelphia Orchestra under Eugene Ormandy premiered Rorem&#x27;s &quot;Eagles&quot;, a Whitman-inspired and dreamlike tone poem. His Symphony No. 3 (1958) was premiered by Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic in 1959 to critical praise; the New York Herald Tribune&#x27;s music editor Jay S. Harrison called it &quot;lavish, luscious, and luxe&quot;. Conversely, his first full-length opera, &quot;Miss Julie&quot;, was not well received at its 1965 premiere at the New York City Opera. Rorem received commissions from organizations such as the Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge Foundation, Ford Foundation and Koussevitzky Foundation among others. By this time, he was established as a neoromantic composer, who largely rejected a strict application of modernist techniques or emerging genres such as electroacoustic music.

Rorem held his first teaching position at the University of Buffalo from 1959 to 1960, during which he wrote &quot;11 Studies for 11 Players&quot;. A few years later he taught composition at the University of Utah from 1965 to 1967. His short tenures were because he believed that &quot;this is the kind of assignment that should not last more than two years as a teacher begins to believe what he says after that long a time and becomes sterile&quot;. His compositions of the time included more instrumental music, although songs remained a central aspect of his activities. These songs were largely set to 20th-century American poets, though copyright issues sometimes prevented their immediate publication. Among these was the song cycle for mezzo-soprano and piano, &quot;Poems of Love and Rain&quot; (1963), written to texts by W. H. Auden, Emily Dickinson, Howard Moss and Theodore Roethke. Premiered by Regina Sarfaty and Rorem at the piano on April 12, 1964, it included two different musicals settings for each of the poems.

Throughout the 1950s and 60s, Rorem struggled with alcoholism. He commented that &quot;The minute a drop of wine touches my lips I begin to be this other person—an infantile regression takes place&quot;, though he insisted that he &quot;not be categorized as an alcoholic because [he had] such a puritanical sense of order&quot;. Although he scheduled it carefully, he admitted to feeling a strong sense of guilt when drinking, which he considered detrimental to his artistic creativity. Rorem attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings and used Antabuse, with little success. In late 1967, he became partners with the organist James Roland Holmes; their relationship offered enough stability for Rorem to abandon alcohol completely.

===1974–1999: Pulitzer and Curtis===
In 1974 Rorem and Holmes bought a summer house in Nantucket, Massachusetts. His time there was generally peaceful and he later remarked that &quot;I wrote &quot;Air Music&quot;, made pies, felt no competition, was content&quot;. There Rorem worked on seven different commissions concurrently between 1974 and 1975 for the American Bicentennial. One of these was &quot;Air Music: Ten Etudes for Orchestra&quot; for Thomas Schippers with the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, where each movement was limited to different combinations of instruments. &quot;Air Music&quot; would win the Pulitzer Prize for Music in 1976; Rorem later noted his surprise from the award, having been convinced that his music would not be accepted by &quot;those stuffy Pulitzer people&quot;. Other major works of this time include the 1977 orchestral suite &quot;Sunday Morning&quot;, inspired by the poem of the same name by Wallace Stevens.

Rorem accepted his third teaching post in 1980 at the Curtis Institute, his alma mater, where he headed the composition department with David Loeb until 2001. His students at Curtis included Daron Hagen, Jennifer Higdon, and Roger Briggs. During this time, Rorem&#x27;s pace of composition did not diminish. He wrote compositions for varied genres, including &quot;The Santa Fe Songs&quot; (1980) song cycle for baritone and piano quartet and the &quot;String Symphony&quot; (1985), a recording of which by the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra won the 1989 Grammy Award for Best Orchestral Recording.

In 1993, Rorem wrote the Piano Concerto No. 4 for Left Hand and Orchestra for his Curtis colleague with an injured right hand, Gary Graffman. The following year, his earlier opera &quot;Miss Julie&quot; was revived at the Manhattan School of Music Opera Theater. For the 1997 New York Festival of Song, Rorem wrote the large-scale song cycle &quot;Evidence of Things Not Seen&quot;, described as his &quot;masterwork&quot; by Daniel Lewis in the &quot;Times&quot;. A deeply personal work, the composition included settings of 36 texts by 24 poets, split into three larger sections: &quot;Beginnings&quot; for optimistic and forward-looking songs, &quot;Middles&quot; exploring coming of age and the devastation of war, as well as the final &quot;Ends&quot; that concerns death, particularly Rorem&#x27;s friends killed by AIDS. With an hour and a half duration, it called for a soprano, mezzo-soprano, tenor, and baritone with piano accompaniment. The music critic Peter G. Davis called it &quot;one of the musically richest, most exquisitely fashioned, most voice-friendly collections of songs&quot;, while Rorem himself lauded it as his best work. His partner Holmes died in 1999, after having lived with Rorem for 32 years.

===2000–2022: Later years===
In the &quot;Times&quot;, Daniel Lewis noted that &quot;Well into the 21st century, when quite a few of his modernist critics had passed into irrelevance, Mr. Rorem was still going strong. Admirers turned up at concerts to help celebrate his 80th birthday, his 85th, his 90th, his 95th; the audiences looked that much older each time around, while he looked pretty much as always&quot;. The music critic Steve Smith furthered that compared to the birthday anniversaries of Britten, Verdi and Wagner, &quot;Mr. Rorem&#x27;s birthday has occasioned less fanfare, seemingly confirming his oft-repeated assertions about the invisibility of living composers&quot;. This latter sentiment would be a focus of his tenure while president of the American Academy of Arts and Letters from 2000 to 2003. During this time he engaged in a series of larger works, beginning with &quot;Aftermath&quot; (2002) a ten-part song cycle written in response to the September 11 attacks. Set to English-language poets from the 18th-century to present day, it was written for medium voice accompanied by violin, cello and piano. What followed next was concertante: a Cello Concerto (2002) and Flute Concerto (2002), both written in memory of Thomas Schippers. His next concerto, the 2003 Mallet Concerto, was compared by the writer Bret Johnson in its evocation and sparseness to his first two symphonies. In 2006, his opera &quot;Our Town&quot; premiered at the Indiana University Opera Theater, Bloomington.

From 2010 onwards, Rorem essentially ceased composing, explaining that &quot;I&#x27;ve kind of said everything I have to say, better than anyone else&quot;. Two exceptions were the 2013 song &quot;How Like a Winter&quot;, based on Shakespeare&#x27;s Sonnet 97, as well as his final work, &quot;Recalling Nadia&quot;, a brief organ piece written in 2014. Regardless, Rorem himself noted that by then he didn&#x27;t receive commissions, &quot;but then, nobody I know does&quot;. His last years were instead spent in the care of his niece, playing piano, doing crossword puzzles and walking through Central Park. Rorem died at home in Manhattan on November 18, 2022, at age 99.

==Music==
Although Rorem wrote works for piano, orchestra and chamber ensemble and solo instruments, he considered all of his music vocal and song-like in nature. Often described as a neoromantic composer, Rorem generally rejecting the emergence of strict modernist aesthetics. He wrote in a generally tonal manner, &quot;Grove Music Online&quot; asserts that he did so with considerable diversity, complexity and potency.

===Songs===

He is best known for his art songs, of which he wrote more than 500. Many are coupled into some thirty or so song cycles, written from the early 1940s to 2000s. Rorem stressed the importance of a cycle&#x27;s overall structure, paying close attention to the song order, progression of keys and transition between songs. He also emphasized theatricality, aiming to convey an overarching message via a unified emotional affect or mood. Like in other genres, the musicologist Philip Lieson Miller remarked that &quot;Rorem&#x27;s chosen field of song is not for the avant garde and he must be classified as... conservative&quot;, and that &quot;he has never striven for novelty&quot;. Rorem&#x27;s strict definitions of what constitutes a song has molded them to be typically be single-voice and piano settings of lyrical poems of moderate length. He named songs by Monteverdi, Schumann, Poulenc and the Beatles as particular favorites. To obtain certain effects, however, Rorem has occasionally experimented with more modernist sentiments, such as intense chromaticism, successive modulations and alternating time signatures.

Rorem&#x27;s main interest in the art song is the setting of poetry, rather than the sound of the human voice. Numerous commentators have lauded his abilities in prosody, with &quot;Grove Music Online&quot; noting that he &quot;sets words with naturalness and clarity, without compromising the range and scope of vocal lines&quot;. The vast majority of Rorem&#x27;s songs are set in English and he has criticized American colleagues who prioritize setting other languages over English. In his early years, he was particularly devoted to the poems of his friend Paul Goodman, and later set many works by Theodore Roethke. Rorem often composed entire cycles to the poetry of a single writer: John Ashbery, Witter Bynner, Demetrios Capetanakis, George Darley, Frank O&#x27;Hara, Robert Herrick, Kenneth Koch, Howard Moss, Sylvia Plath, Wallace Stevens, Alfred, Lord Tennyson, and Walt Whitman, to whom he dedicated three cycles. His few settings in other languages include French poems by Jean-Antoine de Baïf, Jean Daurat, , Henri de Régnier, Pierre de Ronsard, as well as ancient Greek texts by Plato.

Many of Rorem&#x27;s songs are accompanied by piano, though some have mixed instrumental ensemble or orchestral accompaniment. A pianist himself, his accompaniment parts for the instrument are not completely secondary to the voice and more a &quot;full complement to the melody&quot;. They include motives to emphasize textual elements—such as rain and clouds—and are wildly diverse in function, sometimes responding to the voice in counterpoint or simply doubling the vocal line. He sometimes uses the Renaissance-derived ground bass technique of a slow and repeated bassline in the left hand. Reflecting on his piano accompaniments, the writer Bret Johnson describes Rorem&#x27;s musical hallmarks as &quot;chiming piano, rushing triplets, sumptuous harmonies&quot;.

===Operas===

Only two full-length operas were written by Rorem: &quot;Miss Julie&quot; (1965) and &quot;Our Town&quot; (2005). &quot;Miss Julie&quot; was not well-received; the music critic Harold C. Schonberg commented that his melodies were bland and lacked individuality. Holmes explained that Rorem himself &quot;contends that song specialists cannot automatically turn out good operas any more than opera composers can turn out true songs: a gift for tune and a gift for tragedy do not always join hands&quot;. The opera&#x27;s libretto was written by Kenward Elmslie, itself based on the play of the same name by August Strindberg. Rorem revised it for a more successful revival in 1979; it was again revived again in 1994 at the Manhattan School of Music Opera.

His second full-length opera, &quot;Our Town&quot;, was written 40 years later on the play of the same name by Thornton Wilder. It received a successful 2006 premiere at the Indiana University Opera Theater and was later performed at the Juilliard Opera Center, New York (2008) and the Central City Opera, Denver (2013). The music critic Joshua Barone noted that it is &quot;a tastefully restrained echo of the play&#x27;s text that has found a home on smaller stages but deserves bigger ones&quot;. The play&#x27;s already small-scale set and condense narrative was matched by Rorem&#x27;s setting as a chamber opera and Johnson explained that &quot;the economy of resources may well be the key to the opera&#x27;s mobility and then its success&quot;. The work&#x27;s final monologue-aria from the character Emily Webb is particularly well-regarded and often standard repertoire for soprano singers.

Throughout his career Rorem wrote some 6 small one-act operas, many of which do not fit squarely into the genre. The first of these was &quot;A Childhood Miracle&quot; of 1951, which had to wait three years for its premiere in New York 1955. Rorem wrote his own libretto for his 1958 opera based on Chaucer&#x27;s &quot;The Pardoner&#x27;s Tale&quot;, &quot;The Robbers&quot;. His 1961 two-act opera &quot;The Anniversary&quot; was never performed. It included a libretto by Jascha Kessler and was, unusually for Rorem, based on the serialist tone row which he included on the title page. Rorem wrote the one-act &quot;Bertha&quot; (1968) to a libretto by Kenneth Koch. The same year he wrote the three-act &quot;Three Sisters who are Not Sisters&quot; (1971), his second collaboration with Stein as the librettist. The 1970s saw his two final short operas: &quot;Fables&quot; (1971), 5 brief scene based on La Fontaine&#x27;s &quot;Fables&quot;; and &quot;Hearing&quot; (1976) on a libretto by Holmes based on Rorem&#x27;s song cycles.

===Orchestral works===

Rorem&#x27;s three numbered symphonies were written in a span of eight years during the 1950s. They have remained relatively &quot;ostracized&quot;, even during the late 20th-century revival of neoromanticism. The music critic David Hurwitz remarked that &quot;Ned Rorem&#x27;s symphonies are shot through with long, lyrical melodies that some observers might relate to his gifts as a songwriter, but strike me as more likely inspired by the &quot;Sunrise&quot; sequence from Ravel&#x27;s &quot;Daphnis et Chloë&quot;–music so strikingly lovely that the beauty it describes can only exist in the world of fantasy and make-believe.&quot;

Rorem&#x27;s Symphony No. 1 (1950) is cast in four fairly brief movements: I: Maestoso, II: Andantino, III: Largo, and IV: Allegro; the composer himself noted that it &quot;could easily be called a Suite&quot;. The AllMusic critic Blair Sanderson considered it the most lyrical and gentle of his symphonies. His Symphony No. 2 (1956) is cast in 3 movements, I: Broad, Moderate; II: Tranquillo; III: Allegro. They are of highly unequal proportion—the second movement and the third movement combined being less than half the length of the first movement—akin to the structure of Symphony No. 6 by Dmitri Shostakovich. Both the first and second symphonies are infrequently performed; the second in particularly had not been performed since 1959 until, as the composer puts it, &quot;José Serebrier resurrected&quot; it 43 years later. The Third Symphony (1958) is cast in five movements: I: Passacaglia, II: Allegro molto vivace, III: Largo, IV: Andante, V: Allegro molto. It is the best known of Rorem&#x27;s numbered symphonies, described by Sanderson as &quot;the most fully realized, [with] resilient rhythms and cogent structures&quot;. Hurwitz opines that it should be among the &quot;great American symphonies&quot;. Rorem later arranged the Scherzo movement for wind orchestra in 2002.

===Piano music===
From 1948 onwards, Rorem wrote numerous pieces for solo piano, usually dedicated to relatives or close friends. Many of these were written for his partner Holmes, and others are named for their recipient, such as &quot;For Shirley&quot; (1989) and &quot;For Ben&quot; (1999). Johnson described most of them as brief sketches that contained precedents for his later works. His earliest published piano work was the 1948 set &quot;A Quiet Afternoon&quot;, written for his sister&#x27;s children.

Among his main piano compositions are three sonatas written in his early years 1948, 1949 and 1954. Barone singles out the &quot;sparking Toccata&quot; third movement from the First Sonata, noting that it is a common encore for pianists. A few months after its publication, Rorem published the Toccata as a separate piece.

==Legacy==
Rorem&#x27;s reputation primarily revolves around art songs, during a time when the genre lacked interest from other American composers. Since the 1950s, he has been described as the &quot;America&#x27;s foremost composer of art songs&quot;, a designation echoed by the choral conductor Robert Shaw. Miller ranks him highly with the British song composers Ralph Vaughan Williams, Peter Warlock, Gerald Finzi and Benjamin Britten. His mentor Thomson characterized him as &quot;an American Poulenc&quot;, explained by &quot;Grove Music Online&quot; as due to his expression of &quot;restraint, wit, elegance and direct yet unsentimental expressivity&quot; Although his music for orchestra, piano and chamber ensemble is substantial, it less known than his art songs. In light of his renown for small-scale works, Barone concludes that &quot;You would be hard-pressed to find greatness in Mr. Rorem&#x27;s vast oeuvre. But he has never aimed to be a Beethoven.&quot;

Rorem was called &quot;an icon of gay history&quot; by Barone, who cited his confidence and openness towards his sexuality. Barone furthered that although his writings were not central Gay liberation texts, they offered impetus for the movement. Rorem himself frequently commented as to the general unremarkability of both homosexuality and heterosexuality. In an interview with Rorem, the physician and writer Lawrence D. Mass compared Rorem&#x27;s indifference to the writer William Hoffman—who &quot;is similarly defensive about being called a gay writer&quot;—and contrasted it to Lou Harrison—who is &quot;proud to be a gay composer and interested in talking about what that might mean&quot;. Rorem similarly rejected any connection between a composer&#x27;s music and sexuality, ridiculing the proposal that Schubert&#x27;s supposed homosexuality had any effect on his music.

A dedicated diarist, Rorem wrote candidly on his and other men&#x27;s sexuality, describing his relationships with Leonard Bernstein, John Cheever, Noël Coward and Tennessee Williams. Rorem&#x27;s writings estimate his total romantic and sexual relationships as 3,000. He wrote extensively about music as well, collected the anthologies &quot;Music from Inside Out&quot; (1967), &quot;Music and People&quot; (1968), &quot;Pure Contraption&quot; (1974), &quot;Setting the Tone&quot; (1983), &quot;Settling the Score&quot; (1988), and &quot;Other Entertainment&quot; (1996). In 2005, Rorem was the subject of a documentary film, &quot;Ned Rorem: Word And Music&quot;, co-directed by James Dowell and John Kolomvakis.

==Writings==
Books
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Articles
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Recordings==

==Awards and honors==
* 1950: Lili Boulanger Memorial Fund Award
* 1951: Fulbright Fellowship
* 1957: Guggenheim Fellowship
* 1968: Award from the National Institute of Arts and Letters
* 1976: Pulitzer Prize for Music
* 1977: Honorary doctorate from Northwestern University
* 1977: Guggenheim Fellowship
* 2003: ASCAP&#x27;s Lifetime Achievement Award
* 2004: Chevalier de l&#x27;Ordre des Arts et des Lettres

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
====Primary====
:&quot;This list identifies each item&#x27;s location in Rorem&#x27;s writings.&quot;
====Secondary====
===Sources===
:Books
* 
* 
* 
:Articles
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
:Online
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
:&quot;See for an extensive bibliography&quot;
* 
* Dufallo, Richard (1989). &quot;Trackings: Composers Speak with Richard Dufallo&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. 0-19-505816-X
* Gagne, Cole (1993). &quot;Soundpieces 2: Interviews with American Composers&quot;. Metuchen, N.J.: The Scarecrow Press. 0-8108-2710-7
* 
* 
==External links==
* Profile for Ned Rorem at Boosey &amp; Hawkes
* Interview with Ned Rorem on WNIB Classical 97, Chicago, April 24, 1986
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q733299" start="0" end="16" title="Ned Rorem" label="Ned Miller Rorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q612024" start="84" end="112" title="contemporary classical music" label="contemporary classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797274" start="146" end="154" title="art song" label="art song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901958" start="282" end="293" title="Neoromanticism (music)" label="neoromantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426218" start="347" end="356" title="modernism (music)" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q548664" start="563" end="580" title="Richmond, Indiana" label="Richmond, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894804" start="636" end="650" title="Margaret Bonds" label="Margaret Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q733341" start="655" end="666" title="Leo Sowerby" label="Leo Sowerby"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="747" end="760" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="765" end="779" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="825" end="832" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q275785" start="870" end="893" title="Marie-Laure de Noailles" label="Marie-Laure de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q535611" start="935" end="948" title="Neoclassicism (music)" label="neoclassicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q841212" start="955" end="962" title="Les Six" label="Les Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="977" end="992" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Francis Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="997" end="1011" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="1140" end="1161" title="American Bicentennial" label="American Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405237" start="1240" end="1275" title="Air Music" label="Air Music: Ten Etudes for Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783509" start="1295" end="1319" title="Pulitzer Prize for Music" label="Pulitzer Prize for Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="1453" end="1462" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q60450" start="1499" end="1515" title="Curtis Institute" label="Curtis Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061310" start="1545" end="1556" title="Daron Hagen" label="Daron Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q289468" start="1561" end="1576" title="Jennifer Higdon" label="Jennifer Higdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013504" start="1696" end="1721" title="New York Festival of Song" label="New York Festival of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="1790" end="1801" title="magnum opus" label="magnum opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="1856" end="1867" title="concerto" label="concertante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111217" start="1913" end="1921" title="Our Town (opera)" label="Our Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q548664" start="2023" end="2040" title="Richmond, Indiana" label="Richmond, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="2085" end="2094" title="Norwegian people" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31218" start="2195" end="2212" title="medical economics" label="medical economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326502" start="2216" end="2231" title="Earlham College" label="Earlham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929017" start="2262" end="2296" title="Blue Cross Blue Shield Association" label="Blue Cross Blue Shield Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2375" end="2403" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Religious Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="2478" end="2485" title="bohemia" label="bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551351" start="2774" end="2814" title="University of Chicago Laboratory Schools" label="University of Chicago Laboratory Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q837182" start="3260" end="3274" title="Impressionism in music" label="Impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="3283" end="3297" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="3302" end="3315" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894804" start="3359" end="3373" title="Margaret Bonds" label="Margaret Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="3409" end="3426" title="music composition" label="music composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q477571" start="3518" end="3543" title="Charles Tomlinson Griffes" label="Charles Tomlinson Griffes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699111" start="3548" end="3568" title="John Alden Carpenter" label="John Alden Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="3583" end="3598" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="3612" end="3626" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="3776" end="3788" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44261" start="3796" end="3810" title="Piano Concerto (Grieg)" label="Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="3849" end="3861" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743519" start="3869" end="3899" title="American Conservatory of Music" label="American Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q733341" start="3905" end="3916" title="Leo Sowerby" label="Leo Sowerby"/>
<link wikidata="Q943567" start="4063" end="4075" title="Paul Goodman" label="Paul Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904546" start="4260" end="4275" title="Bienen School of Music" label="School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="4279" end="4302" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="4438" end="4442" title="Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="4444" end="4453" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="4458" end="4464" title="Chopin" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60450" start="4489" end="4514" title="Curtis Institute of Music" label="Curtis Institute of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="4558" end="4571" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q270662" start="4578" end="4596" title="Gian Carlo Menotti" label="Gian Carlo Menotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="4601" end="4613" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q354187" start="4620" end="4635" title="Rosario Scalero" label="Rosario Scalero"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="5047" end="5061" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250675" start="5107" end="5114" title="Prosody (music)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="5190" end="5207" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="5241" end="5254" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4467307" start="5288" end="5311" title="Tanglewood Music Center" label="Tanglewood Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5402" end="5420" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="5460" end="5466" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="5493" end="5498" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="5503" end="5508" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Lenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="5672" end="5688" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q822760" start="5718" end="5734" title="Bernard Wagenaar" label="Bernard Wagenaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401337" start="5805" end="5820" title="Master of Music" label="Master of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q487604" start="5913" end="5926" title="Martha Graham" label="Martha Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041717" start="5942" end="5954" title="Éva Gauthier" label="Éva Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797274" start="6037" end="6046" title="art songs" label="art songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147752" start="6063" end="6079" title="incidental music" label="incidental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="6110" end="6121" title="puppet show" label="puppet show"/>
<link wikidata="Q116205014" start="6174" end="6191" title="The Lordly Hudson" label="a poem by Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13651280" start="6200" end="6225" title="Music Library Association" label="Music Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422622" start="6330" end="6344" title="Gershwin Prize" label="Gershwin Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="6366" end="6387" title="New York Philharmonic" label="New York Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="6803" end="6810" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274528" start="7363" end="7381" title="Jonathan Sternberg" label="Jonathan Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328764" start="7416" end="7430" title="Julius Katchen" label="Julius Katchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q553554" start="7576" end="7590" title="Robert Herrick (poet)" label="Robert Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450149" start="7630" end="7643" title="George Darley" label="George Darley"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="7738" end="7749" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051502" start="7816" end="7829" title="Elliott Stein" label="Elliott Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765012" start="7861" end="7903" title="The Snow-Image, and Other Twice-Told Tales" label="The Snow-Image, and Other Twice-Told Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="7913" end="7932" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="8110" end="8131" title="Fulbright Scholarship" label="Fulbright Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q123164" start="8217" end="8232" title="Arthur Honegger" label="Arthur Honegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q841212" start="8260" end="8267" title="Les Six" label="Les Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q535611" start="8277" end="8290" title="Neoclassicism (music)" label="neoclassicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q140619" start="8370" end="8385" title="Nadia Boulanger" label="Nadia Boulanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q275785" start="8516" end="8539" title="Marie-Laure de Noailles" label="Marie-Laure de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="8694" end="8709" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Francis Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q251818" start="8711" end="8724" title="Georges Auric" label="Georges Auric"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="8729" end="8743" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q659181" start="9532" end="9554" title="Philadelphia Orchestra" label="Philadelphia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q344023" start="9561" end="9575" title="Eugene Ormandy" label="Eugene Ormandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="9652" end="9661" title="tone poem" label="tone poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="9724" end="9745" title="New York Philharmonic" label="New York Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="9778" end="9801" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="New York Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6876884" start="9935" end="9945" title="Miss Julie (Rorem opera)" label="Miss Julie"/>
<link wikidata="Q181813" start="10003" end="10022" title="New York City Opera" label="New York City Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q443559" start="10082" end="10108" title="Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge" label="Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="10121" end="10136" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q353449" start="10141" end="10164" title="Koussevitzky Foundation" label="Koussevitzky Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901958" start="10217" end="10228" title="Neoromanticism (music)" label="neoromantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426218" start="10284" end="10293" title="modernism (music)" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326777" start="10332" end="10353" title="electroacoustic music" label="electroacoustic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q681025" start="10402" end="10423" title="University of Buffalo" label="University of Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q168515" start="10551" end="10569" title="University of Utah" label="University of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="11189" end="11200" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4441" start="11202" end="11217" title="Emily Dickinson" label="Emily Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920463" start="11219" end="11230" title="Howard Moss" label="Howard Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151763" start="11235" end="11251" title="Theodore Roethke" label="Theodore Roethke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308534" start="11266" end="11280" title="Regina Sarfaty" label="Regina Sarfaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18231" start="11894" end="11914" title="Alcoholics Anonymous" label="Alcoholics Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q409665" start="11933" end="11941" title="Antabuse" label="Antabuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="12209" end="12218" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="12481" end="12502" title="American Bicentennial" label="American Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405237" start="12527" end="12562" title="Air Music" label="Air Music: Ten Etudes for Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q558987" start="12573" end="12589" title="Thomas Schippers" label="Thomas Schippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287274" start="12599" end="12628" title="Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra" label="Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783509" start="12740" end="12764" title="Pulitzer Prize for Music" label="Pulitzer Prize for Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639465" start="13034" end="13055" title="Sunday Morning (poem)" label="poem of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q166835" start="13059" end="13074" title="Wallace Stevens" label="Wallace Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236734" start="13213" end="13223" title="David Loeb (composer)" label="David Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061310" start="13268" end="13279" title="Daron Hagen" label="Daron Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q289468" start="13281" end="13296" title="Jennifer Higdon" label="Jennifer Higdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357913" start="13302" end="13314" title="Roger Briggs" label="Roger Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746025" start="13502" end="13515" title="piano quartet" label="piano quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120551" start="13588" end="13614" title="Atlanta Symphony Orchestra" label="Atlanta Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593848" start="13628" end="13670" title="Grammy Award for Best Orchestral Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Orchestral Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454999" start="13698" end="13746" title="Piano Concerto No. 4 (Rorem)" label="Piano Concerto No. 4 for Left Hand and Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494874" start="13800" end="13813" title="Gary Graffman" label="Gary Graffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702106" start="13895" end="13920" title="Manhattan School of Music" label="Manhattan School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013504" start="13949" end="13974" title="New York Festival of Song" label="New York Festival of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="14350" end="14363" title="coming of age" label="coming of age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174126" start="14638" end="14652" title="Peter G. Davis" label="Peter G. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="15403" end="15410" title="Britten" label="Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="15412" end="15417" title="Verdi" label="Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="15422" end="15428" title="Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="15666" end="15702" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="15872" end="15892" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454997" start="16072" end="16086" title="Cello Concerto (Rorem)" label="Cello Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454994" start="16098" end="16112" title="Flute Concerto (Rorem)" label="Flute Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404657" start="16193" end="16208" title="Mallet Concerto" label="Mallet Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111217" start="16336" end="16344" title="Our Town (opera)" label="Our Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="16368" end="16386" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490614" start="16666" end="16675" title="Sonnet 97" label="Sonnet 97"/>
<link wikidata="Q83207" start="16974" end="16990" title="crossword puzzle" label="crossword puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="17012" end="17024" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="17394" end="17399" title="tonality" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="17414" end="17432" title="Grove Music Online" label="Grove Music Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797274" start="17554" end="17562" title="art song" label="art song"/>
<link wikidata="Q893466" start="17638" end="17648" title="song cycle" label="song cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q845391" start="17814" end="17817" title="key signature" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065736" start="17868" end="17881" title="theatricality" label="theatricality"/>
<link wikidata="Q53068" start="18392" end="18402" title="Monteverdi" label="Monteverdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="18404" end="18412" title="Schumann" label="Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="18414" end="18421" title="Poulenc" label="Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="18426" end="18437" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="18583" end="18595" title="Chromatic scale" label="chromaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q750240" start="18608" end="18619" title="Modulation (music)" label="modulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="18636" end="18650" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="18836" end="18854" title="Grove Music Online" label="Grove Music Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q943567" start="19215" end="19227" title="Paul Goodman" label="Paul Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151763" start="19257" end="19273" title="Theodore Roethke" label="Theodore Roethke"/>
<link wikidata="Q29418" start="19344" end="19356" title="John Ashbery" label="John Ashbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586777" start="19358" end="19371" title="Witter Bynner" label="Witter Bynner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558913" start="19373" end="19394" title="Demetrios Capetanakis" label="Demetrios Capetanakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450149" start="19396" end="19409" title="George Darley" label="George Darley"/>
<link wikidata="Q951010" start="19411" end="19428" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q553554" start="19430" end="19444" title="Robert Herrick (poet)" label="Robert Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708628" start="19446" end="19458" title="Kenneth Koch" label="Kenneth Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920463" start="19460" end="19471" title="Howard Moss" label="Howard Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="19473" end="19485" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q166835" start="19487" end="19502" title="Wallace Stevens" label="Wallace Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="19504" end="19525" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="19531" end="19543" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q379941" start="19640" end="19660" title="Jean-Antoine de Baïf" label="Jean-Antoine de Baïf"/>
<link wikidata="Q714921" start="19662" end="19673" title="Jean Daurat" label="Jean Daurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q561510" start="19677" end="19693" title="Henri de Régnier" label="Henri de Régnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q49752" start="19695" end="19712" title="Pierre de Ronsard" label="Pierre de Ronsard"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="19748" end="19753" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20212" end="20220" title="Voicing (music)#Doubling" label="doubling"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="20259" end="20270" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q216745" start="20279" end="20290" title="ground bass" label="ground bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="20324" end="20332" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111217" start="20631" end="20639" title="Our Town (opera)" label="Our Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656164" start="20717" end="20736" title="Harold C. Schonberg" label="Harold C. Schonberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392487" start="21084" end="21099" title="Kenward Elmslie" label="Kenward Elmslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q658557" start="21121" end="21142" title="Miss Julie" label="play of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724" start="21146" end="21163" title="August Strindberg" label="August Strindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702106" start="21263" end="21288" title="Manhattan School of Music" label="Manhattan School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755219" start="21383" end="21404" title="Our Town" label="play of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q155087" start="21408" end="21423" title="Thornton Wilder" label="Thornton Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119774" start="21471" end="21503" title="Indiana University Opera Theater, Bloomington" label="Indiana University Opera Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="21535" end="21557" title="Juilliard Opera Center" label="Juilliard Opera Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q915591" start="21901" end="21914" title="chamber opera" label="chamber opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116798" start="22519" end="22543" title="The Pardoner&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Pardoner&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q245258" start="22742" end="22750" title="tone row" label="tone row"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339862" start="22776" end="22786" title="title page" label="title page"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895463" start="22818" end="22824" title="Bertha (opera)" label="Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748292" start="23107" end="23144" title="La Fontaine&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="La Fontaine&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Fables&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152265" start="23488" end="23501" title="David Hurwitz (music critic)" label="David Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201123" start="23756" end="23772" title="Daphnis et Chloé" label="Daphnis et Chloë"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="24114" end="24122" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q246530" start="24476" end="24490" title="Symphony No. 6 (Shostakovich)" label="Symphony No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="24494" end="24513" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275680" start="24679" end="24693" title="José Serebrier" label="José Serebrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454998" start="24735" end="24749" title="Symphony No. 3 (Rorem)" label="Third Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="25166" end="25180" title="wind orchestra" label="wind orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q140544" start="25842" end="25849" title="Toccata" label="Toccata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363276" start="25921" end="25927" title="encore" label="encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915908" start="26326" end="26337" title="Robert Shaw (conductor)" label="Robert Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="26395" end="26417" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q934413" start="26419" end="26432" title="Peter Warlock" label="Peter Warlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q713025" start="26434" end="26446" title="Gerald Finzi" label="Gerald Finzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="26451" end="26467" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11076311" start="27189" end="27203" title="Gay liberation" label="Gay liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503972" start="27415" end="27431" title="Lawrence D. Mass" label="Lawrence D. Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012391" start="27481" end="27496" title="William Hoffman (author)" label="William Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q590911" start="27589" end="27601" title="Lou Harrison" label="Lou Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="27818" end="27826" title="Schubert" label="Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="28002" end="28019" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q336151" start="28021" end="28033" title="John Cheever" label="John Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="28035" end="28046" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="28051" end="28069" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="28764" end="28784" title="Fulbright Fellowship" label="Fulbright Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="28793" end="28814" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="28838" end="28876" title="National Institute of Arts and Letters" label="National Institute of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783509" start="28885" end="28909" title="Pulitzer Prize for Music" label="Pulitzer Prize for Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="29004" end="29009" title="ASCAP" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="29052" end="29101" title="Chevalier de l&amp;#x27;Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Chevalier de l&amp;#x27;Ordre des Arts et des Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325294" start="29440" end="29456" title="Dufallo, Richard" label="Dufallo, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q33057" start="29561" end="29574" title="ISBN" label="0-19-505816-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q33057" start="29697" end="29710" title="ISBN" label="0-8108-2710-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948571" start="29813" end="29817" title="WNIB (defunct)" label="WNIB"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578183" wikidata="Q407517" url="?curid=578183" title="Air marshal">
<text>Air marshal (Air Mshl or AM) is an air-officer rank used by some air forces, with origins from the Royal Air Force. The rank is used by the air forces of many countries which have historical British influence, including many Commonwealth nations. The rank is usually equivalent to a vice admiral or a lieutenant general.

Air marshal is immediately senior to the rank of air vice-marshal and immediately subordinate to the rank of air chief marshal. Officers in the rank of air marshal typically hold very senior appointments such as commander-in-chief of an air force or a large air force formation. Officers in the ranks of air chief marshal and air vice-marshal are also referred to generically as air marshals. Occasionally, air force officers of marshal rank are considered to be air marshals.

== Australia ==
The Australian Air Corps adopted the RAF rank system on 9 November 1920 and this usage was continued by its successor, the Royal Australian Air Force. However, the rank of air marshal was not used by the Australian Armed Forces until 1940 when Richard Williams, an RAAF officer, was promoted.

In Australia, there are four appointments available for air marshals: the Chief of Air Force and, at times when they are occupied by an air force officer, the Vice Chief of Defence Force, the Chief of Joint Operations, and the Chief of Capability Development Group.

== Canada ==
The Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) used the rank until the 1968 unification of the Canadian Forces, when army-type rank titles were adopted and an air marshal became a lieutenant-general. In official Canadian French usage, the rank title was . The Canadian Chief of the Air Staff ordinarily held the rank of air marshal. The following RCAF officers held the rank (dates in rank in parentheses):

* Billy Bishop (1938 to 1944), rank retained on retirement
* George Croil (c. 1940 to 1944), rank retained on retirement
* Lloyd Samuel Breadner (1941 to 1945), subsequently promoted to air chief marshal
* Gus Edwards (1942 to 1944), rank retained on retirement
* Albert Cuffe (1942 to 1944), rank retained on retirement
* Robert Leckie (1944 to 1947), rank retained on retirement
* George Owen Johnson (to 1947), rank retained on retirement
* Wilfred Curtis (c. 1947 to 1953), rank retained on retirement
* Roy Slemon (c. 1953 to 1964), rank retained on retirement
* Frank Robert Miller (1955 to 1961), subsequently promoted to air chief marshal
* Hugh Campbell (1957 to 1962), rank retained on retirement
* Clare Annis (1962 to 1966), rank retained on retirement
* Clarence Dunlap (1962 to 1968), rank retained on retirement
* William Ross MacBrien (1958 to 1968), rank retained on retirement
* Edwin Reyno (1966 to 1968), later regraded to lieutenant-general

== India ==

The rank of air marshal was the highest in the Indian Air Force (IAF), held by the Chief of the Air Staff (CAS), from 1947 to 1966. In 1966, the rank of CAS was upgraded to air chief marshal and ACM Arjan Singh became the first CAS to hold the four-star rank.

== Namibia ==
The Namibian Air Force adopted the RAF rank system in 2010 previously having been using army ranks and insignia. However the rank of air marshal was not used until 1 April 2020 when Martin Pinehas was promoted to that rank and appointed as Chief of the Namibian Defence Force.

== New Zealand ==
In New Zealand, the head of the air force holds the lower rank of air vice-marshal. However, when an air force officer holds the country&#x27;s senior military appointment, Chief of the New Zealand Defence Force, he is granted the rank of air marshal. The current Chief of Defence Force is an RNZAF officer, Air Marshal Tony Davies.

Other officers to hold the air marshal rank in New Zealand are:

* Sir Richard Bolt, promoted 1976, retired 1980
* Sir Ewan Jamieson, promoted 1983
* David Crooks, promoted 1986
* Carey Adamson
* Sir Bruce Ferguson, promoted 2001

== Pakistan ==
== United Kingdom ==

=== Origins ===
Prior to the adoption of RAF-specific rank titles in 1919, it was suggested that the RAF might use the Royal Navy&#x27;s officer ranks, with the word &quot;air&quot; inserted before the naval rank title. For example, the rank that later became air marshal would have been air vice-admiral. The Admiralty objected to any use of their rank titles, including this modified form, and so an alternative proposal was put forward: air-officer ranks would be based on the term &quot;ardian&quot;, which was derived from a combination of the Gaelic words for &quot;chief&quot; () and &quot;bird&quot; (), with the term &quot;second ardian&quot; or &quot;wing ardian&quot; being used specifically for the rank equivalent to a vice-admiral and lieutenant-general. However, air marshal was preferred and has been used since its adoption in August 1919. Sir Hugh Trenchard, the incumbent Chief of the Air Staff when the rank was introduced, became the first air marshal on 11 August 1919.

=== RAF insignia, command flag and star plate ===
The rank insignia consists of two narrow light blue bands (each on a slightly wider black band) over a light blue band on a broad black band. This is worn on the lower sleeves of the dress uniform or on shoulders of the flying suit or working uniform.

The command flag for an air marshal is defined by the single broad red band running in the centre of the flag.

The vehicle star plate for an air marshal depicts three white stars (air marshal is equivalent to a three-star rank) on an air force blue background.

==Other language variants==
In the Brazilian Air Force, the highest rank is , a five-star officer, which can be translated as &quot;air marshal&quot; or &quot;marshal of the air&quot;. The rank is equivalent to in the Brazilian Army or marshal of the air force elsewhere.

In 1927, the rank of () was proposed by Christian Førslev as a rank for the potential Chief of the Royal Danish Air Force. The rank would have been equivalent to a major general.

== Gallery ==

== See also ==

* Air force officer rank insignia
* British and U.S. military ranks compared
* Comparative military ranks
* RAF officer ranks
* Ranks of the RAAF

== References ==
== External links ==
*Air Marshal – &quot;Merriam-Webster&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="0" end="11" title="Air marshal" label="Air marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="13" end="21" title="Air marshal" label="Air Mshl"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="25" end="27" title="Air marshal" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="35" end="46" title="air officer" label="air-officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="99" end="114" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="225" end="245" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q214443" start="283" end="295" title="vice admiral" label="vice admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="301" end="319" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106078" start="371" end="387" title="air vice-marshal" label="air vice-marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="431" end="448" title="air chief marshal" label="air chief marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="534" end="552" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055070" start="751" end="763" title="Marshal of the air force" label="marshal rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768837" start="820" end="840" title="Australian Air Corps" label="Australian Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="939" end="965" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q982586" start="1060" end="1076" title="Richard Williams (RAAF officer)" label="Richard Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097000" start="1184" end="1202" title="Chief of Air Force (Australia)" label="Chief of Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925024" start="1269" end="1296" title="Vice Chief of the Defence Force (Australia)" label="Vice Chief of Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097027" start="1302" end="1327" title="Chief of Joint Operations (Australia)" label="Chief of Joint Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096681" start="1337" end="1374" title="Chief of Capability Development Group" label="Chief of Capability Development Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="1394" end="1418" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="1474" end="1489" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544388" start="1559" end="1577" title="Lieutenant-General (Canada)" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="1591" end="1606" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961993" start="1639" end="1670" title="Chief of the Air Staff (Canada)" label="Canadian Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035406" start="1789" end="1801" title="Billy Bishop" label="Billy Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538232" start="1848" end="1860" title="George Croil" label="George Croil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998200" start="1910" end="1931" title="Lloyd Samuel Breadner" label="Lloyd Samuel Breadner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20167253" start="1993" end="2004" title="Gus Edwards (RCAF officer)" label="Gus Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006550" start="2051" end="2063" title="Albert Cuffe" label="Albert Cuffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346781" start="2110" end="2123" title="Robert Leckie (RCAF officer)" label="Robert Leckie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543075" start="2170" end="2189" title="George Owen Johnson" label="George Owen Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001772" start="2231" end="2245" title="Wilfred Curtis" label="Wilfred Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373370" start="2295" end="2305" title="Roy Slemon" label="Roy Slemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489236" start="2355" end="2374" title="Frank Robert Miller" label="Frank Robert Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931466" start="2436" end="2449" title="Hugh Lester Campbell" label="Hugh Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2496" end="2507" title="Clare Annis" label="Clare Annis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126483" start="2554" end="2569" title="Clarence Dunlap" label="Clarence Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017782" start="2616" end="2637" title="William Ross MacBrien" label="William Ross MacBrien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346772" start="2684" end="2695" title="Edwin Reyno" label="Edwin Reyno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097002" start="2846" end="2868" title="Chief of the Air Staff (India)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740207" start="2936" end="2953" title="Air Chief Marshal (India)" label="air chief marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791529" start="2962" end="2973" title="Arjan Singh" label="Arjan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953793" start="3007" end="3021" title="four-star rank" label="four-star rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q41531164" start="3220" end="3234" title="Martin Pinehas" label="Martin Pinehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q514711" start="3291" end="3313" title="Namibian Defence Force" label="Namibian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097016" start="3507" end="3545" title="Chief of Defence Force (New Zealand)" label="Chief of the New Zealand Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324245" start="3739" end="3751" title="Richard Bolt (RNZAF officer)" label="Richard Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967718" start="3787" end="3800" title="Ewan Jamieson" label="Ewan Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921587" start="3818" end="3830" title="David Crooks (RNZAF officer)" label="David Crooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266539" start="3848" end="3861" title="Carey Adamson" label="Carey Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977464" start="3868" end="3882" title="Bruce Ferguson (RNZAF officer)" label="Bruce Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="4376" end="4387" title="air officer" label="air-officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="4485" end="4491" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="4793" end="4811" title="Hugh Trenchard, 1st Viscount Trenchard" label="Sir Hugh Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="4827" end="4849" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United_Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q634542" start="5530" end="5549" title="Brazilian Air Force" label="Brazilian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292358" start="5713" end="5727" title="Brazilian Army" label="Brazilian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055070" start="5731" end="5755" title="marshal of the air force" label="marshal of the air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q48925570" start="5808" end="5825" title="Christian Førslev" label="Christian Førslev"/>
<link wikidata="Q60524634" start="5854" end="5889" title="Chief of the Royal Danish Air Force" label="Chief of the Royal Danish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="5932" end="5945" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="5981" end="6012" title="Air force officer rank insignia" label="Air force officer rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="6015" end="6055" title="British and U.S. military ranks compared" label="British and U.S. military ranks compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="6058" end="6084" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275704" start="6087" end="6104" title="RAF officer ranks" label="RAF officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293360" start="6107" end="6124" title="Ranks of the RAAF" label="Ranks of the RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="6185" end="6200" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578186" wikidata="Q1584481" url="?curid=578186" title="Sandy River (Oregon)">
<text>The Sandy River is a tributary of the Columbia River in northwestern Oregon in the United States. The Sandy joins the Columbia about upstream of Portland.

==Course==
Issuing from Reid Glacier on the southwest flanks of Mount Hood in the Cascade Range, the Sandy River flows generally west and then north for through Clackamas County and Multnomah County to the Columbia River at Troutdale. In its first , the Sandy River flows across Old Maid Flat, north of Zigzag Mountain in the Mount Hood Wilderness of the Mount Hood National Forest. In this initial stretch near the headwaters, it receives Rushing Water Creek from the left, Muddy Fork from the right, then Lost Creek and Horseshoe Creek from the left, and crosses under Lolo Pass Road just before receiving Clear Creek from the right. At about from the mouth, the Zigzag River enters from the left near the unincorporated community of Zigzag. From here the river runs roughly parallel to U.S. Route 26, which is on its left for about the next . Just below Zigzag, the Sandy River passes the unincorporated community of Wemme on the left.

At about from the mouth, the river receives Hackett Creek from the right, passes the unincorporated community of Brightwood shortly thereafter, and receives North Boulder Creek from the right. Barlow Trail County Park and remnants of the Barlow Road lie to the right along this stretch of the river. Between and from the mouth, the Salmon River enters from the left. Roughly later, Wildcat Creek enters from the left and then Alder Creek and Whiskey Creek, also from the left. The river passes the Marmot gauging station operated by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) in cooperation with Portland General Electric at river mile (RM) 29.8 (river kilometer (RK) 48.0). The unincorporated community of Marmot lies to the right of the river on a ridge—the Devil&#x27;s Backbone—separating the Sandy River from the Little Sandy River to the north.

About below the Marmot gauge, the river receives Badger Creek from the left. It passes under Ten Eyck Road about from the mouth, flowing by the city of Sandy on the left, shortly thereafter and receiving Cedar Creek, home of the Sandy Fish Hatchery, from the left. At about from the mouth, the river turns away from Highway 26 and flows generally north-northwest for the rest of its course. About further downstream, the river passes Dodge Park on the right, receives the Bull Run River from the right and passes a second USGS gauge at RM 18.4 (RK 29.6). Shortly thereafter, Walker Creek enters from the right. Between and from the mouth, the Sandy River enters Multnomah County, curves back into Clackamas County, and re-enters Multnomah County. About further downstream, Bear Creek enters from the left, and the river flows around Indian John Island.

Soon Trout Creek, Gordon Creek, and Buck Creek all enter from the right as the river winds through Oxbow Regional Park between and from the mouth. Passing Camp Collins about later, the river receives Big Creek from the right. Dabney State Recreation Area is on the right about later. Lewis and Clark State Recreation Site is on the right and Troutdale on the left at about from the mouth, where Beaver Creek enters from the left. Shortly thereafter, the river passes under Interstate 84 and flows by Portland-Troutdale Airport, which is on the left about from the mouth. The Sandy River then joins the Columbia River about from where the larger river enters the Pacific Ocean. The confluence is about east of Portland, near the lower end of the Columbia River Gorge.

===Discharge===
Measured by a United States Geological Survey (USGS) gauge downstream of the Sandy&#x27;s confluence with the Bull Run River, from the mouth, the river&#x27;s average discharge is . The maximum daily recorded flow is , and the minimum is .

==History==

Archeological evidence suggests that Native Americans lived along the lower Columbia River as early as 10,000 years ago. The area near what later became The Dalles, on the Columbia east of the mouth of the Sandy River, eventually became an important trading center. The Indians established villages on floodplains and traveled seasonally to gather huckleberries and other food on upland meadows, to fish for salmon, and to hunt elk and deer. Although no direct evidence exists that these lower-Columbia Indians traveled up the Sandy, it is likely that they did. Traces of these people include petroglyphs carved into the rocks of the Columbia River Gorge. More recently, within the past few thousand years, Indians created trails across the Cascade Range around Mount Hood. The trail network linked the trading center at Wascopam, near The Dalles, to settlements in the Willamette Valley. One popular trail crossed over Lolo Pass and another, which later became the Barlow Road, met the Lolo Pass trail roughly where the Zigzag and Salmon rivers enter the Sandy. Indians from villages along the Columbia, Clackamas, and other rivers also traveled by water to the lower Sandy River area to fish for salmon and to gather berries, nuts and roots.

In 1792 William Robert Broughton of the Vancouver Expedition explored the lower Columbia River. He named the Sandy River &quot;Baring River&quot;, but noted the existence of a large sand bank that nearly blocked the Columbia River at the mouth of the Sandy River. In 1805 and again in 1806, members of the Lewis and Clark Expedition explored the lower stretches of the Sandy River as they traveled down the Columbia to the Pacific Ocean. Mount Hood, at the river&#x27;s headwaters, had erupted a few years earlier, causing loose sediment to collect at the river&#x27;s mouth. On November 3, 1805, William Clark wrote: &quot;I arrived at the entrance of a river which appeared to Scatter over a Sand bar, the bottom of which I could See quite across and did not appear to be 4 Inches deep in any part; I attempted to wade this Stream and to my astonishment found the bottom a quick Sand, and impassable ...&quot;.

One of the first documented visits by European-Americans to the upper Sandy River basin occurred in 1838, when Daniel Lee, the nephew of missionary Jason Lee, used the Indian trail over Lolo Pass to drive cattle from a Methodist mission in the Willamette Valley to a mission in Wascopam. Other pioneers later used the trail to drive livestock over the mountains. The first wagons came over the Cascades in 1840, and in 1843 the great east-west migration of settlers to the Oregon Territory began. The Barlow Road, along the Indian trail leading west from the Lolo Trail, opened in 1846 and became popular with new settlers. A branch of this road followed the Devil&#x27;s Backbone between the Sandy and the Little Sandy watersheds.

==Hydroelectric decommissioning==
 Until October 2007, the river was dammed and the flow rate regulated. The Bull Run Hydroelectric Project diverted water from the Sandy River at Marmot Dam to Little Sandy Dam on the Little Sandy River. From there the water flowed to Roslyn Lake, an artificial creation, through a wood box flume. The lake supplied the 22-megawatt Bull Run hydroelectric powerhouse and emptied into the Bull Run River.

In 2007, engineers demolished Marmot Dam with of explosives. When in 2008 they demolished Little Sandy Dam, Roslyn Lake ceased to exist. After Marmot Dam was gone, the Sandy flowed freely for the first time since 1912, and the subsequent alterations restored the Little Sandy River to steelhead and salmon runs for the first time in a hundred years. Portland General Electric, the dams&#x27; owner, donated of land in the vicinity to a nature reserve. With the Marmot Dam removal and other habitat restoration in the Sandy River Basin Salmon, Steelhead, and Pacific lamprey are making a comeback. The Lower Salmon River upstream of the former Marmot Dam in recent years has undergone extensive riparian and river restoration. Engineered log jams and the opening of former side channels blocked by the Army Corps of Engineers since the devastating 1964 floods have taken place.

==Recreation==
In 1988, Congress added about of the Sandy to the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System. The designation applies to two separate segments. One, administered by the U.S. Forest Service, covers from the headwaters to the Mount Hood National Forest boundary. The other, administered by the Bureau of Land Management, covers between Dodge Park and Dabney Park. Of the total, were designated &quot;wild&quot;, &quot;scenic&quot;, and &quot;recreational&quot;.

A wide variety of recreational activities occur along the Sandy. Hiking, fishing, backpacking, and camping are popular along the upper river. Hikes include the trail to Ramona Falls, a well-known waterfall. Other uses of the upper river and its surrounds include kayaking and cross-country skiing. Fishing, picnicking, non-motorized boating and floating are among popular activities on the lower river.

Parks along the river include Dodge Park, Oxbow Regional Park, Dabney State Recreation Area, Lewis and Clark State Recreation Site, Glenn Otto Park and the Sandy River Delta nature preserve.

==See also==
* List of rivers of Oregon
* List of longest streams of Oregon
* Oxbow Regional Park
* List of National Wild and Scenic Rivers

== References ==
==External links==
* National Wild and Scenic Rivers System</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1584481" start="4" end="15" title="Sandy River (Oregon)" label="Sandy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="38" end="52" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="69" end="75" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="145" end="153" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309952" start="180" end="192" title="Reid Glacier (Oregon)" label="Reid Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q275662" start="220" end="230" title="Mount Hood" label="Mount Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="238" end="251" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q484404" start="317" end="333" title="Clackamas County, Oregon" label="Clackamas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q450374" start="338" end="354" title="Multnomah County, Oregon" label="Multnomah County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="362" end="376" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q426942" start="380" end="389" title="Troutdale, Oregon" label="Troutdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071820" start="459" end="474" title="Zigzag Mountain" label="Zigzag Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q636483" start="482" end="503" title="Mount Hood Wilderness" label="Mount Hood Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427290" start="511" end="537" title="Mount Hood National Forest" label="Mount Hood National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931657" start="631" end="641" title="Muddy Fork (Oregon)" label="Muddy Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258812" start="727" end="736" title="Lolo Pass (Oregon)" label="Lolo Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071824" start="821" end="833" title="Zigzag River" label="Zigzag River"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="864" end="888" title="unincorporated community" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071816" start="892" end="898" title="Zigzag, Oregon" label="Zigzag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494411" start="945" end="958" title="U.S. Route 26 in Oregon" label="U.S. Route 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473362" start="1076" end="1081" title="Wemme, Oregon" label="Wemme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478013" start="1209" end="1219" title="Brightwood, Oregon" label="Brightwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443993" start="1334" end="1345" title="Barlow Road" label="Barlow Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433812" start="1428" end="1440" title="Salmon River (Clackamas County, Oregon)" label="Salmon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="1633" end="1664" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231939" start="1692" end="1717" title="Portland General Electric" label="Portland General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434106" start="1721" end="1731" title="river mile" label="river mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772185" start="1803" end="1809" title="Marmot, Oregon" label="Marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651851" start="1914" end="1932" title="Little Sandy River (Oregon)" label="Little Sandy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416599" start="2100" end="2105" title="Sandy, Oregon" label="Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927978" start="2420" end="2434" title="Bull Run River (Oregon)" label="Bull Run River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115142" start="2901" end="2920" title="Oxbow Regional Park" label="Oxbow Regional Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156574" start="3028" end="3056" title="Dabney State Recreation Area" label="Dabney State Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822186" start="3086" end="3123" title="Lewis and Clark State Recreation Site" label="Lewis and Clark State Recreation Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q94900" start="3275" end="3288" title="Interstate 84 (west)" label="Interstate 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231859" start="3302" end="3328" title="Portland-Troutdale Airport" label="Portland-Troutdale Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="3511" end="3519" title="Portland (Oregon)" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112581" start="3547" end="3567" title="Columbia River Gorge" label="Columbia River Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="3600" end="3631" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927978" start="3696" end="3710" title="Bull Run River (Oregon)" label="Bull Run River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="3753" end="3762" title="discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3877" end="3893" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q985271" start="3993" end="4003" title="The Dalles, Oregon" label="The Dalles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="4142" end="4153" title="floodplains" label="floodplains"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="4433" end="4443" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703681" start="4710" end="4727" title="Willamette Valley" label="Willamette Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443993" start="4806" end="4817" title="Barlow Road" label="Barlow Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310768" start="4945" end="4954" title="Clackamas River" label="Clackamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333687" start="5093" end="5117" title="William Robert Broughton" label="William Robert Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044451" start="5125" end="5145" title="Vancouver Expedition" label="Vancouver Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="5391" end="5417" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="6037" end="6054" title="European-American" label="European-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q195572" start="6147" end="6156" title="Jason Lee (missionary)" label="Jason Lee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6427" end="6452" title="Oregon Trail#Great Migration of 1843" label="great east-west migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="6472" end="6488" title="Oregon Territory" label="Oregon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996612" start="6841" end="6871" title="Bull Run Hydroelectric Project" label="Bull Run Hydroelectric Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q68530" start="7056" end="7061" title="flume" label="flume"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="7106" end="7119" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="7454" end="7463" title="Rainbow trout" label="steelhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="7468" end="7474" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846385" start="8112" end="8150" title="National Wild and Scenic Rivers System" label="National Wild and Scenic Rivers System"/>
<link wikidata="Q37605" start="8688" end="8700" title="Ramona Falls (Oregon)" label="Ramona Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="8795" end="8815" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150860" start="9055" end="9070" title="Glenn Otto Park" label="Glenn Otto Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806709" start="9079" end="9096" title="Sandy River Delta" label="Sandy River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121741" start="9130" end="9154" title="List of rivers of Oregon" label="List of rivers of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626729" start="9157" end="9190" title="List of longest streams of Oregon" label="List of longest streams of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115142" start="9193" end="9212" title="Oxbow Regional Park" label="Oxbow Regional Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591598" start="9215" end="9254" title="List of National Wild and Scenic Rivers" label="List of National Wild and Scenic Rivers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578190" wikidata="Q2828191" url="?curid=578190" title="Air chief marshal">
<text>Air chief marshal (Air Chf Mshl or ACM) is a high-ranking air officer rank used by some air forces, with origins from the Royal Air Force. The rank is used by air forces of many countries that have historical British influence. This rank is also equivalent to an Admiral in a navy or a full general in an army or other nations&#x27; air forces.

The rank of air chief marshal is immediately senior to the rank of air marshal but subordinate to marshal of the air force. Air chief marshals are sometimes generically considered to be air marshals.

== Australia ==

In the Royal Australian Air Force, this rank is only used when the Chief of the Defence Force is an Air Force officer. When this is not the case, the senior ranking Air Force officer is the Chief of Air Force, holding the rank of air marshal.

With the establishment of the Australian Air Board on 9 November 1920, Australian Air Corps officers dropped their army ranks in favour of those based on the Royal Air Force. However, it was not until 1965 when Sir Frederick Scherger became Chairman of the Australian Chiefs of Staff Committee, and was promoted to air chief marshal that an RAAF officer attained the rank. Throughout the history of the RAAF, only four of its officers have held the rank. Apart from Scherger, they are Sir Neville McNamara (promoted 1982), Sir Angus Houston (promoted 2005) and Mark Binskin (promoted 2014). McNamara, Houston and Binskin are former Australian Defence Force chiefs; as of November 2024, Admiral David Johnston is the current chief of the Australian Defence Force.

== Bangladesh ==

In 2016 the Bangladeshi Chief of Air Staff position was upgraded from air marshal to air chief marshal rank. Since then the rank has been held by Abu Esrar, Masihuzzaman Serniabat, Shaikh Abdul Hannan, and Hasan Mahmood Khan.

== Canada ==
Throughout the 20th century history of the Royal Canadian Air Force, only two officers held the rank of air chief marshal. They were: Lloyd Samuel Breadner (promoted 1945) and Frank Robert Miller (promoted 1961). The rank existed on paper until the 1968 unification of the Canadian Forces, when Army-type rank titles were adopted and the rank of air chief marshal was replaced by that of full general. As no serving officers held the rank in 1968, no Canadian air chief marshals were regraded to general and Miller, the then only living retired air chief marshal, retained his rank. When Miller died in 1997 the Canadian rank of air chief marshal effectively passed into history. The 21st century re-creation of the Royal Canadian Air Force has not seen the rank revived and as of 2014 there are no plans for such a change. Army-style rank titles continue to be used although a return to the former insignia has been enacted. In official Canadian French usage, the rank title was .

== India ==
In the Indian Air Force, the Chief of Air Staff (CAS) (currently ACM Amar Preet Singh) holds the rank of Air Chief Marshal. The position of the CAS was upgraded from Air Marshal to Air Chief Marshal in 1966. The first IAF officer to hold this rank was Air Chief Marshal Arjan Singh (later promoted to the five-star rank of marshal of the Indian Air Force) who was promoted to the rank in 1966 while he served as the CAS. Post 1966, all the Indian air chiefs have held the rank. As of 2014, 19 Indian chiefs of the air staff have held the rank. In the Indian Air Force the honorary promotion of Arjan Singh to marshal of the Indian Air Force in 2002 resulted in Indian air chief marshals no longer being the most senior IAF officers until Singh&#x27;s death in 2017.

==Namibia==
In the Namibian Air Force, the rank is known as chief air marshal.

== Nigeria ==
The Nigerian air chief marshal is the second highest-ranking officer in the Nigerian Air Force, below Marshal of the air force. Only the Chief of the Defence Staff holds four-star rank. The first Nigerian Air Force officer to attain the rank of air chief marshal was Paul Dike upon his appointment as the Nigerian Chief of Defence Staff in 2008. Dike was succeeded as Chief of the Defence Staff in 2010 by Air Chief Marshal Oluseyi Petinrin. In 2014, Alex Sabundu Badeh was appointed Chief of Defence Staff and promoted to air chief marshal. The Nigerian Chief of Air Staff is normally a three-star air marshal.

== Pakistan ==
In March 1976, as part of a Pakistani Defence Ministry reorganization, the post of Chief of Air Staff, the head of the Pakistan Air Force, was upgraded from air marshal to air chief marshal rank. To date all Pakistani air chief marshals have been members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee. However, only Air Chief Marshal Farooq Feroze Khan has served as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee, the supreme commandant of Pakistan Armed Forces.

Originally, a Pakistani air chief marshal&#x27;s rank insignia was essentially the same as the RAF insignia. In 2006 the Pakistan Air Force changed the rank insignia for its officers, abandoning the ring insignia in favor of a Turkish Air Force-style featuring four stars and a crossed swords and laurel device.

== Sri Lanka ==
In Sri Lanka, only the Chief of Defence Staff holds an active four-star rank. Retiring Commanders of the Sri Lanka Air Force are promoted to the rank of air chief marshal as an outgoing honour. Air Chief Marshal Donald Perera was the first CDS appointed from the Air Force and Air Chief Marshal Roshan Goonetileke became the first serving Air Force Commander to be appointed to the rank of air chief marshal as part of the victory celebrations.

== Thailand ==

The officer appointed to command the Royal Thai Air Force has been promoted to the rank of air chief marshal () since . The present commander is Air Chief Marshal Alongkorn Wannarot who is supported by the Deputy Commander-in-Chief (currently Air Chief Marshal Chanon Mungthanya) and the Assistant Commander-in-Chief (currently Air Chief Marshal Punpakdee Pattanakul). If an air force officer is appointed to the position of Chief of Defence Forces (formerly Supreme Commander), then he has always held the rank of air chief marshal. The last air chief marshal to be appointed Supreme Commander was Air Chief Marshal Voranat Aphichari who retired in 1994.

In November 2007 it became known that Crown Prince Vajiralongkorn (now king of Thailand) had granted the title of Air Chief Marshal to his pet poodle Fufu. The dog died in 2015.

== United Kingdom ==
===Origins===
Prior to the adoption of RAF-specific rank titles in 1919, it was suggested that the RAF might use the Royal Navy&#x27;s officer ranks, with the word &quot;air&quot; inserted before the naval rank title. For example, the rank that later became air chief marshal would have been air admiral. The Admiralty objected to any use of their rank titles, including this modified form, and so an alternative proposal was put forward: air-officer ranks would be based on the term &quot;ardian&quot;, which was derived from a combination of the Gaelic words for &quot;chief&quot; (&quot;ard&quot;) and &quot;bird&quot; (&quot;eun&quot;), with the unmodified word &quot;ardian&quot; being used specifically for the equivalent to full admiral and general. However, air chief marshal was preferred and was adopted in August 1919. The rank was first used on 1 April 1922 with the promotion of Sir Hugh Trenchard. With Trenchard&#x27;s promotion to marshal of the RAF on 1 January 1927, no officer held the rank until Sir John Salmond was promoted on 1 January 1929. It has been used continuously ever since.

In the RAF, the rank of air chief marshal is held by the serving Chief of the Air Staff (currently Sir Richard Knighton). Additionally, RAF officers appointed to four-star tri-service posts hold the rank of air chief marshal. Throughout the history of the RAF, 141 RAF officers have held the rank and it has also been awarded in an honorary capacity to senior members of the British Royal Family and allied foreign monarchs.

Although no serving RAF officer has been promoted to marshal of the Royal Air Force since the British defence cuts of the 1990s, British air chief marshals are not the most senior officers in the RAF as several officers continue to retain the RAF&#x27;s highest rank. Additionally, Lord Stirrup was granted an honorary promotion to marshal of the Royal Air Force in 2014. The marshals are still to be found on the RAF&#x27;s active list even though they have for all practical purposes retired.

===RAF insignia, command flag and star plate===
The rank insignia consists of three narrow light blue bands (each on a slightly wider black band) over a light blue band on a broad black band. This is worn on the lower sleeves of the service dress jacket or on the shoulders of the flying suit or working uniform. The command flag for an RAF air chief marshal is defined by the two broad red bands running through the centre of the flag. The vehicle star plate for an RAF air chief marshal depicts four white stars (air chief marshal is a four-star rank) on an air force blue background.

==Gallery==

==See also==

* Air force officer rank insignia
* British and U.S. military ranks compared
* Comparative military ranks

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="0" end="17" title="Air chief marshal" label="Air chief marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="19" end="31" title="Air chief marshal" label="Air Chf Mshl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="35" end="38" title="Air chief marshal" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="58" end="69" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="122" end="137" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="178" end="226" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="countries that have historical British influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="263" end="270" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q737867" start="276" end="280" title="List of navies" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="286" end="298" title="full general" label="full general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834087" start="305" end="309" title="List of armies by country" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="413" end="424" title="air marshal" label="air marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055070" start="444" end="468" title="marshal of the air force" label="marshal of the air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="571" end="597" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985706" start="631" end="657" title="Chief of the Defence Force (Australia)" label="Chief of the Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097000" start="754" end="772" title="Chief of Air Force (Australia)" label="Chief of Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4283252" start="794" end="805" title="air marshal (Australia)" label="air marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498709" start="1019" end="1041" title="Frederick Scherger" label="Sir Frederick Scherger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004789" start="1293" end="1313" title="Neville McNamara" label="Sir Neville McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849811" start="1331" end="1348" title="Angus Houston" label="Sir Angus Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766742" start="1369" end="1381" title="Mark Binskin" label="Mark Binskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730377" start="1502" end="1516" title="David Johnston (admiral)" label="David Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q24949255" start="1614" end="1632" title="Chief of Air Staff (Bangladesh)" label="Chief of Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25587546" start="1736" end="1745" title="Abu Esrar" label="Abu Esrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55084246" start="1747" end="1769" title="Masihuzzaman Serniabat" label="Masihuzzaman Serniabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q107213763" start="1771" end="1790" title="Shaikh Abdul Hannan" label="Shaikh Abdul Hannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116873419" start="1796" end="1814" title="Hasan Mahmood Khan" label="Hasan Mahmood Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="1873" end="1897" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998200" start="1964" end="1985" title="Lloyd Samuel Breadner" label="Lloyd Samuel Breadner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489236" start="2006" end="2025" title="Frank Robert Miller" label="Frank Robert Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="2103" end="2118" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531647" start="2223" end="2230" title="general (Canada)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="2768" end="2783" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="2832" end="2848" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097002" start="2854" end="2872" title="Chief of Air Staff (India)" label="Chief of Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q113351555" start="2894" end="2910" title="Amar Preet Singh" label="Amar Preet Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="2991" end="3002" title="Air Marshal" label="Air Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791529" start="3095" end="3106" title="Arjan Singh" label="Arjan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897084" start="3130" end="3144" title="five-star rank" label="five-star rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055070" start="3148" end="3179" title="Marshal of the Air Force" label="marshal of the Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055070" start="3434" end="3465" title="Marshal of the air force" label="marshal of the Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961783" start="3611" end="3629" title="Namibian Air Force" label="Namibian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707397" start="3762" end="3780" title="Nigerian Air Force" label="Nigerian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055070" start="3788" end="3812" title="Marshal of the air force" label="Marshal of the air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097054" start="3823" end="3849" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (Nigeria)" label="Chief of the Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953793" start="3856" end="3870" title="four-star rank" label="four-star rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420311" start="3953" end="3962" title="Paul Dike" label="Paul Dike"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186835" start="4110" end="4126" title="Oluseyi Petinrin" label="Oluseyi Petinrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097420" start="4137" end="4155" title="Alex Sabundu Badeh" label="Alex Sabundu Badeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097003" start="4397" end="4415" title="Chief of Air Staff (Pakistan)" label="Chief of Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820991" start="4576" end="4607" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee, Pakistan" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436141" start="4641" end="4659" title="Farooq Feroze Khan" label="Farooq Feroze Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068077" start="4674" end="4721" title="Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee (Pakistan)" label="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697979" start="4921" end="4955" title="Air Force ranks and insignia of Pakistan" label="the rank insignia for its officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097053" start="5125" end="5147" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (Sri Lanka)" label="Chief of Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953793" start="5164" end="5178" title="four-star rank" label="four-star rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152211" start="5189" end="5226" title="Commander of the Air Force (Sri Lanka)" label="Commanders of the Sri Lanka Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294992" start="5314" end="5327" title="Donald Perera" label="Donald Perera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368809" start="5397" end="5415" title="Roshan Goonetileke" label="Roshan Goonetileke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567631" start="5568" end="5596" title="List of Commanders of the Royal Thai Air Force" label="officer appointed to command"/>
<link wikidata="Q404766" start="5601" end="5621" title="Royal Thai Air Force" label="Royal Thai Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q114309972" start="5727" end="5745" title="Alongkorn Wannarot" label="Alongkorn Wannarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567632" start="5989" end="6012" title="List of Commanders of the Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters" label="Chief of Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q548733" start="6272" end="6286" title="Vajiralongkorn" label="Vajiralongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q38904" start="6364" end="6370" title="poodle" label="poodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647320" start="6371" end="6375" title="Fufu (dog)" label="Fufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="6538" end="6548" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="6730" end="6739" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="6860" end="6871" title="air officer" label="air-officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="6969" end="6975" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="7313" end="7331" title="Hugh Trenchard, 1st Viscount Trenchard" label="Sir Hugh Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11037030" start="7441" end="7453" title="John Salmond" label="John Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="7594" end="7616" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q20022456" start="7632" end="7648" title="Richard Knighton" label="Richard Knighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953793" start="7691" end="7700" title="four-star rank" label="four-star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595948" start="7790" end="7825" title="List of Royal Air Force air chief marshals" label="141 RAF officers have held the rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="7904" end="7924" title="British Royal Family" label="British Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691253" start="8237" end="8249" title="Jock Stirrup, Baron Stirrup" label="Lord Stirrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="9068" end="9099" title="Air force officer rank insignia" label="Air force officer rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="9102" end="9142" title="British and U.S. military ranks compared" label="British and U.S. military ranks compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="9145" end="9171" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Comparative military ranks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578194" wikidata="Q1328064" url="?curid=578194" title="Batrachomyomachia">
<text>The Batrachomyomachia (, from , &quot;frog&quot;, , &quot;mouse&quot;, and , &quot;battle&quot;) or Battle of the Frogs and Mice is a comic epic, or a parody of the &quot;Iliad&quot;.

The word &quot;batrachomyomachia&quot; has come to mean &quot;a trivial altercation&quot;. Both the Greek word and its German translation, &quot;Froschmäusekrieg&quot;, have been used to describe disputes such as the one between the ideologues and pragmatists in the Reagan administration.

==Plot==
Psicharpax, the Mouse-Prince, having escaped a hunting cat, stops by the shore of a lake to drink, and encounters the Frog King Physignathus. Physignathus offers to show Psicharpax his kingdom, on the other side of the lake, and the Mouse agrees. Psicharpax climbs onto the Frog King&#x27;s back, and Physignathus begins to swim across the lake. In the middle of the lake, they are confronted by a frightening water snake. Physignathus dives, forgetting about Psicharpax, who cannot swim, and drowns.

On the bank, another Mouse witnesses Psicharpax&#x27;s death, and informs the other Mice, who arm themselves for battle to avenge the Frog King&#x27;s treachery, and send a herald to the Frogs with a declaration of war. The Frogs blame their King, who altogether denies the incident. In the meantime, Zeus, seeing the brewing war, proposes that the gods take sides, and specifically that Athena help the Mice. Athena refuses, saying that the Mice have done her a lot of mischief, as have the Frogs, and that it would be more prudent for the gods to watch rather than get involved. A battle ensues, and the Mice prevail. Zeus summons a force of crabs to prevent the complete destruction of the Frogs. Powerless against the armoured crabs, the Mice retreat, and the one-day war ends at sundown.

==Characters==
Besides the familiar Greek gods, the &quot;Batrachomyomachia&quot; introduces a number of novel characters representing the leaders and warriors of the two armies, whose combat is described in stark and violent terms, resembling the battle scenes of the &quot;Iliad&quot;, but with arms consisting of sticks and needles, and armor made from nut shells, bean pods, straw, leaves, vegetables, and the skin of an excoriated cat. Much of the humour of the &quot;Batrachomyomachia&quot; is derived from this contrast, as well as the names of the warriors. The translations of these names are based on William Cowper&#x27;s version.

===Mice===
* Artepibulus, &quot;he who lies in wait for bread&quot;, the father of Meridarpax.
* Artophagus, &quot;the bread-eater&quot;, slays Polyphonus with his spear.
* Cnissodioctes, &quot;the savory-steam hunter&quot;, dragged into the lake and drowned by Prassophagus.
* Embasichytrus, &quot;the explorer of pots and pipkins&quot;, herald of the Mice, declares war upon the Frogs, and later slays (or is slain by, the language is unclear) Seutlaeus.
* Lichenor, &quot;the licker&quot;, (1) a Mouse speared by Hypsiboas, becoming the first casualty of the battle; (2) the Mouse that avenges the death of Troglodytes by killing Limnocharis with his lance, then chases Crambophagus into the lake and kills him.
* Lichomyle, &quot;the licker of mill-stones&quot;, mother of the Mouse-prince Psicharpax.
* Lichopinax, &quot;the dish-licker&quot;, witnesses Psicharpax&#x27;s drowning, and informs the Mice; during the battle he slays Borborocoites.
* Meridarpax, &quot;the scrap-catcher&quot;, Mouse-prince and a matchless warrior, swears to destroy the Frogs, but is prevented by the intervention of the gods.
* Psicharpax, &quot;the crumb-catcher&quot;, (1) the Mouse-prince, whose drowning at the hands of Physignathus precipitates the war; (2) a warrior who, while defending the bodies of the fallen Mice, slays Pelusius with his spear. Splashed with mud by the Frog chieftain Pelobates, he breaks his foe&#x27;s leg with a stone, but is disemboweled by Craugasides before he can kill Pelobates.
* Pternoglyphus, &quot;the ham-scraper&quot;, terrifies Calaminthius, who flees into the lake, casting aside his shield.
* Pternophagus, &quot;the bacon-eater&quot;, the Mouse-king, crushed by Hydrocharis with a stone.
* Pternotroctes, &quot;the bacon-eater&quot;, maternal grandfather of the Mouse-prince Psicharpax.
* Sitophagus, &quot;the cake-eater&quot;, crippled by his wounds, limps away from the battle, and takes refuge in a ditch.
* Troglodytes, &quot;creeper into holes and crannies&quot;, slays the Frog Pelion, and is killed by a heavy stone hurled by Limnocharis.
* Troxartes, &quot;the bread-eater&quot;, father of the Mouse-prince Psicharpax, wounds Physignathus in the foot, causing the Frog-king to jump to safety in the lake. Prassaeus then attacks him, but the Frog cannot pierce Troxartes&#x27; shield.
* Tyroglyphus, &quot;the cheese-rasper&quot;, father of Embasichytrus, slain on the lake-shore by Limnisius.

===Frogs===
* Borborocoites, &quot;sleeper in the mud&quot;, speared by Lichopinax.
* Calaminthius, &quot;calamint&quot;, flees into the lake at the approach of Pternoglyphus, leaving his shield behind.
* Crambophagus, &quot;the cabbage-eater&quot;, flees into the lake at the sight of Limnocharis&#x27; death at the hands of Lichenor, who gives chase and slays the Frog.
* Craugasides, &quot;the hoarse-croaker&quot;, saves his chieftain, Pelobates, from the Mouse-warrior Psicharpax, whom he disembowels with his lance.
* Hydrocharis, &quot;he who delights in the water&quot;, crushes the Mouse-king Pternophagus with a stone.
* Hydromedusa, &quot;governess of the waters&quot;, the mother of Physignathus.
* Hypsiboas, &quot;the loud-croaker&quot;, slays the Mouse Lichenor with his spear at the beginning of the battle.
* Limnisius, &quot;of the lake&quot;, slays Tyroglyphus on the lake-shore.
* Limnocharis, &quot;the beauty of the lake&quot;, (1) an epithet of Physignathus, the Frog-king; (2) a warrior who slays Troglodytes with a heavy stone, and is in turn killed by the lance of Lichenor.
* Peleus, &quot;of or belonging to mud&quot;, the father of Physignathus (in the &quot;Iliad&quot;, this is also the name of Achilles&#x27; father).
* Pelion, &quot;offspring of the mud&quot;, speared by Troglodytes, becomes the first casualty among the Frogs.
* Pelobates, &quot;the mud-walker&quot;, one of the Frog chieftains, splashes the Mouse-warrior Psicharpax with mud, only to have his leg broken by a stone hurled by Psicharpax. Craugasides saves him by killing Psicharpax.
* Pelusius, &quot;the muddy&quot;, slain by the spear of the Mouse warrior Psicharpax.
* Polyphonus, &quot;the noisy&quot;, slain by the spear of Artophagus.
* Physignathus, &quot;the pouter&quot;, the Frog-king, begins the war by accidentally drowning the Mouse-prince Psicharpax. Wounded by Troxartes, the father of Psicharpax, he leaps to safety in the lake.
* Prassaeus, &quot;the garlic-dealer&quot;, assails Troxartes after the Mouse-prince wounds Physignathus, causing the Frog-king to retreat, but he cannot pierce Troxartes&#x27; shield.
* Prassophagus, &quot;the garlic-eater&quot;, drags Cnissodioctes into the lake and drowns him.
* Seutlaeus, &quot;the beet-eater&quot;, slain by (or slays, the passage is unclear) Embasichytrus.

==Authorship==
The Romans attributed the &quot;Batrachomyomachia&quot; to Homer, but according to Plutarch, it is the work of Pigres of Halicarnassus, either the brother or son of Artemisia I, the Queen of Caria, and an ally of Xerxes. In the nineteenth century, the poem was widely considered to be of the fifth century BC or somewhat earlier, but linguistic studies starting in the late 1800s suggest that the poem was written in the late Hellenistic period, or even under the early Roman Empire. Lucian has been suggested as a possible author, although this attribution would place the poem after Plutarch&#x27;s death. A manuscript of the poem, dating to the eleventh or twelfth century, contains a note attributing the poem to a Tigres or Timarchus of Caria: this could refer to Timarchus the tyrant of Miletus or the Seleucid usurper. Matthew Hosty describes this attribution as &quot;a possibility at best&quot; but suggests that an origin for the poem in third- or second-century BC Ionia is plausible.

==&quot;Galeomyomachia&quot;==
&quot;Galeomyomachia&quot; (Γαλεομυομαχία), meaning &quot;Battle of the Cats and Mice&quot;, was a poem written by the Greek monk Theodore Prodromos in the twelfth century AD and imitates the &quot;Batrachomyomachia&quot;.

==See also==
*Battle of the Frogs

==References==
==English translations==
*Chapman, George (trans.) &quot;Homer&#x27;s Batrachomyomachia, Hymns and Epigrams&quot;. Adamant Media Corporation, 2001. 
*Hine, Daryl (trans.) &quot;The Battle of the Frogs and the Mice, Works of Hesiod and the Homeric Hymns&quot;. University of Chicago Press, 2008. 
*Stallings, A. E. (trans.) &quot;The Battle Between the Frogs and the Mice: a tiny homeric epic&quot;. Philadelphia: Paul Dry Books, 2019. 
*Hosty, M. (trans.) &quot;Batrachomyomachia (Battle of the Frogs and Mice): Introduction, Text, Translation, and Commentary&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020. 

==External links==
*
* The Batrachomyomachia at the Ex-Classics Website; Translated by Jane Barlow with Decorations by decorations by Francis D. Bedford
* Archive.org - &quot;Homer&#x27;s Batrachomyomachia : hymns and epigrams&quot;, translated by George Chapman.
* Wiegran.de - &quot;Batrachomyomachia&quot; 
* &quot;Βατραχομυομαχία&quot; - Greek text</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="38" end="42" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="58" end="63" title="mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="151" end="157" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="171" end="176" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="418" end="427" title="ideologue" label="ideologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="433" end="444" title="pragmatism" label="pragmatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="452" end="473" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="540" end="543" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170713" start="895" end="906" title="grass snake" label="water snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1288" end="1292" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="1375" end="1381" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="1631" end="1635" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q516588" start="1817" end="1827" title="Greek gods" label="Greek gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q780654" start="2206" end="2216" title="skinning" label="excoriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q315537" start="2392" end="2406" title="William Cowper" label="William Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="6086" end="6094" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="7208" end="7214" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="7287" end="7295" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271058" start="7315" end="7338" title="Pigres of Halicarnassus" label="Pigres of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232128" start="7369" end="7380" title="Artemisia I of Caria" label="Artemisia I"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="7395" end="7400" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q129165" start="7417" end="7423" title="Xerxes I" label="Xerxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="7688" end="7694" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109163" start="7987" end="8004" title="Timarchus of Miletus" label="tyrant of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q878366" start="8012" end="8028" title="Timarchus" label="Seleucid usurper"/>
<link wikidata="Q738057" start="8362" end="8380" title="Theodore Prodromos" label="Theodore Prodromos"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674258" start="8470" end="8489" title="Battle of the Frogs" label="Battle of the Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647732" start="8803" end="8819" title="A. E. Stallings" label="Stallings, A. E."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578195" wikidata="Q5013228" url="?curid=578195" title="Flight lieutenant">
<text>Flight lieutenant (Flt Lt or F/L) is a junior officer rank used by some air forces, with origins from the Royal Air Force. The rank originated in the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) in 1914. It fell into abeyance when the RNAS merged with the Royal Flying Corps during the First World War but was revived in 1919 in the post-war RAF. The rank is used by air forces of many countries that have historical British influence.

Flight lieutenant is immediately senior to flying officer and immediately below squadron leader. It is usually equivalent to the rank of lieutenant in the navy and of the rank of captain in other services.

The equivalent rank in the former Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF), Women&#x27;s Royal Air Force (WRAF) and Princess Mary&#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service (PMRAFNS) (until 1980) was flight officer.

==Canada==

The rank was used in the Royal Canadian Air Force from 1920 until the 1968 unification of the Canadian Forces, when army-type rank titles were adopted. Canadian flight lieutenants then became captains. In official Canadian French usage, the rank title was .

== United Kingdom ==
===Origins===

The rank originated in the Royal Navy as a rank title for naval lieutenants serving in the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS). Promotions to the rank were first gazetted on 30 June 1914. It fell into abeyance when the RNAS merged with the Royal Flying Corps during the First World War but was revived in 1919 in the post-war RAF.

On 1 April 1918, the newly created RAF adopted its officer rank titles from the British Army, with Royal Naval Air Service lieutenants (titled as flight lieutenants and flight commanders) and Royal Flying Corps captains becoming captains in the RAF. In response to the proposal that the RAF should use its own rank titles, it was suggested that the RAF might use the Royal Navy&#x27;s officer ranks, with the word &quot;air&quot; inserted before the naval rank title. For example, the current rank of flight lieutenant would have been &quot;air lieutenant&quot;. Although the Admiralty objected to this simple modification of their rank titles, it was agreed that the RAF might base many of its officer rank titles on navy officer ranks with differing pre-modifying terms. It was also suggested that RAF captains might be entitled flight-leaders. However, the rank title flight lieutenant was chosen as flights were typically commanded by RAF captains and the term flight lieutenant had been used in the Royal Naval Air Service. The RAF rank of flight lieutenant was introduced in August 1919 and it has been used continuously since then.

===Usage in the RAF===

Although in the early years of the RAF a flight lieutenant commanded an aircraft flight, with the increasing combat power of aircraft and therefore squadrons, command and control has shifted up the rank structure (currently, for instance, most squadron commanders in the RAF are Wing Commanders, a reflection on the comparative combat power between the modern air force and its predecessor).

The RAF&#x27;s promotion system is automatic up until flight lieutenant. Every officer will attain the rank provided they complete their professional training and do not leave early. For aircrew, flight lieutenant is reached 2.5 years after commissioning, Engineering Branch (AS &amp; CE) entrants with applicable bachelor&#x27;s/master&#x27;s degrees reach flight lieutenant at 2.5 and 1.5 years respectively, and for all other ground branch officers, 3.5 years. Aircrew are appointed to an Early Departure Payment Commission upon reaching their Operational Conversion Unit, which is a commission for 20 years or age 40, whichever is later. Promotion to squadron leader thereafter is strictly upon merit; officers promoted beyond flight lieutenant are appointed to a career commission, or service to age 60. Resigning a commission is generally dependent on the needs of the service, although an officer who has completed their return of service (service the RAF requires to justify its expense in originally training the officer) could leave after as little as four years. For aircrew, given the large expense required for training, this return of service is generally the length of their initial commission anyway, unless they re-role to a different branch having failed an element of flying training. Most aircrew reach their squadrons as flight lieutenants due to the length of training time required (up to four years for fast jet pilots) and the significant holds in the training pipeline. The majority of squadron line pilots are flight lieutenants, with some squadron executives or Career Commission aircrew reaching Squadron Leader.

Aside from aircrew, whose work typically does not require active leadership for units of airmen, ground branch officers can expect to operate units that can range in size from a few specialist non-commissioned personnel to 50 or more personnel for engineering or other manpower intensive roles. The role of a flight lieutenant generally involves management of a team of specialist non-commissioned officers and airmen, within their specific branch. In the RAF Regiment, a flight lieutenant generally has the same role and responsibility as a captain in the British Army, in charge of a regiment flight of 30 men, and could be second-in-command of a squadron of up to 120 men.

Flight lieutenant is the most common officer rank in the RAF; in April 2013, for example, there were 8,230 RAF officers, of whom 3,890 (47.3%) were flight lieutenants. In RAF informal usage, a flight lieutenant is sometimes referred to as a &quot;flight lieuy&quot;. A Flight Lieutenant&#x27;s starting salary is £42,008.48 as of 2019.

===RAF Air Cadets===

In the Air Training Corps, a flight lieutenant is usually the officer commanding of a squadron, appointed under a Cadet Forces Commission. Retired flight lieutenants are the first rank that may continue to use their rank after they have left active service.

===Insignia===
The rank insignia consists of two narrow blue bands on slightly wider black bands. This is worn on both the lower sleeves of the tunic or on the shoulders of the flight suit or the casual uniform. The rank insignia on the mess uniform is similar to the naval pattern, being two band of gold running around each cuff but without the Royal Navy&#x27;s loop. Unlike senior RAF officers, flight lieutenants are not entitled to fly a command flag under any circumstances.

== Gallery ==

==Notable flight lieutenants==


* Billy Strachan - pioneer of black civil rights in Britain, survived 33 missions during WWII when average life expectancy was 7 missions
* Alexander, Prince of Yugoslaviamember of Yugoslavian royal family
* Gerald Boueyformer governor of the Bank of Canada
* Sir Arthur C. ClarkeBritish author and inventor
* Sir Christopher LeeBritish actor, served in RAF Intelligence during World War II
* Peter Francis Middletongrandfather of Catherine, Princess of Wales and co-pilot of Prince Philip
* Sir Patrick MooreBritish astronomer
* Donald PleasenceBritish actor
* Matiur Rahman Bangladesh Air Force (Former Pakistan Air Force) pilot
* Jerry RawlingsGhanaian politician who twice served as his country&#x27;s president
* Ian SmithPrime Minister of Rhodesia (1964–1979)
* Rory UnderwoodLeicester, England and British and Irish Lions winger
* Jim VipondCanadian sports columnist
* Gough WhitlamPrime Minister of Australia (1972–1975)
*John Nichol – Former RAF Navigator, Gulf War prisoner of war and motivational speaker.
*Sir Nicholas George Winton - contributed to the Kindertransport humanitarian rescue.\
*William, Prince of Wales

==See also==

* Air force officer rank insignia
* British and U.S. military ranks compared
* Comparative military ranks
* RAF officer ranks
* Ranks of the RAAF
* Lieutenant (for pronunciation)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="0" end="17" title="Flight lieutenant" label="Flight lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="19" end="25" title="Flight lieutenant" label="Flt Lt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="29" end="32" title="Flight lieutenant" label="F/L"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156796" start="39" end="53" title="junior officer" label="junior officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="106" end="121" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="150" end="173" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="272" end="287" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="372" end="420" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="countries that have historical British influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="466" end="480" title="flying officer" label="flying officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="503" end="518" title="squadron leader" label="squadron leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="560" end="570" title="Lieutenant (navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="602" end="609" title="Captain (armed forces)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="664" end="696" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108612" start="705" end="733" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244744" start="745" end="797" title="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service" label="Princess Mary&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force Nursing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200706" start="825" end="839" title="flight officer" label="flight officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="879" end="903" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884903" start="929" end="963" title="Unification of the Canadian Armed Forces" label="unification of the Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="1046" end="1053" title="Captain (armed forces)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="1068" end="1083" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1176" end="1186" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="1207" end="1224" title="Lieutenant (Royal Navy)" label="naval lieutenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="1240" end="1263" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1414" end="1429" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1511" end="1514" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1556" end="1568" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="1575" end="1598" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="1668" end="1686" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1843" end="1853" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774110" start="1861" end="1874" title="Ranks of the Royal Navy" label="officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="2052" end="2061" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583449" start="2379" end="2386" title="Flight (military unit)" label="flights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="2919" end="2933" title="Wing commander (rank)" label="Wing Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097768" start="3580" end="3607" title="Operational Conversion Unit" label="Operational Conversion Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="3688" end="3703" title="squadron leader" label="squadron leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275540" start="5132" end="5144" title="RAF Regiment" label="RAF Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="5218" end="5225" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698217" start="5719" end="5737" title="Air Training Corps" label="Air Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="5798" end="5806" title="Squadron (aviation)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434634" start="6148" end="6159" title="flight suit" label="flight suit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6415" end="6427" title="Squadron Leader#Insignia and command flag" label="command flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531596" start="6504" end="6518" title="Billy Strachan" label="Billy Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242035" start="6642" end="6673" title="Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia (1924–2016)" label="Alexander, Prince of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525030" start="6710" end="6722" title="Gerald Bouey" label="Gerald Bouey"/>
<link wikidata="Q806703" start="6745" end="6759" title="Bank of Canada" label="Bank of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="6766" end="6782" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="6816" end="6831" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892684" start="6895" end="6918" title="Family of Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge" label="Peter Francis Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10479" start="6933" end="6961" title="Catherine, Princess of Wales" label="Catherine, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="6978" end="6991" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q268024" start="6998" end="7011" title="Patrick Moore" label="Patrick Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q314914" start="7032" end="7048" title="Donald Pleasence" label="Donald Pleasence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787619" start="7064" end="7077" title="Matiur Rahman (military pilot)" label="Matiur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454639" start="7078" end="7098" title="Bangladesh Air Force" label="Bangladesh Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7100" end="7125" title="Former Pakistan Air Force" label="Former Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="7135" end="7149" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="7220" end="7229" title="Ian Smith" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442064" start="7270" end="7284" title="Rory Underwood" label="Rory Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687520" start="7340" end="7350" title="Jim Vipond" label="Jim Vipond"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="7378" end="7391" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250400" start="7432" end="7443" title="John Nichol (RAF officer)" label="John Nichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q460431" start="7520" end="7546" title="Nicholas Winton" label="Sir Nicholas George Winton"/>
<link wikidata="Q683056" start="7568" end="7583" title="Kindertransport" label="Kindertransport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="7607" end="7631" title="William, Prince of Wales" label="William, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="7649" end="7680" title="Air force officer rank insignia" label="Air force officer rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="7683" end="7723" title="British and U.S. military ranks compared" label="British and U.S. military ranks compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="7726" end="7752" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275704" start="7755" end="7772" title="RAF officer ranks" label="RAF officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293360" start="7775" end="7792" title="Ranks of the RAAF" label="Ranks of the RAAF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578202" wikidata="Q7194476" url="?curid=578202" title="Pilot officer">
<text>Pilot officer (Plt Off or P/O) is a junior officer rank used by some air forces, with origins from the Royal Air Force. The rank is used by air forces of many countries that have historical British influence.

Pilot officer is the lowest ranking commissioned officer immediately below flying officer. It is usually equivalent to the rank of second lieutenant in other services.

The equivalent rank in the Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF) was &quot;company assistant&quot;, later renamed to &quot;assistant section officer&quot;.

==Canada==

The rank was used in the Royal Canadian Air Force until the 1968 unification of the Canadian Forces, when army-type rank titles were adopted. Canadian pilot officers then became second lieutenants. In official Canadian French usage, the rank title was .

== United Kingdom ==
===Origins===
In the Royal Flying Corps, officers were designated pilot officers at the end of pilot training. As they retained their commissions in their customary ranks (usually second lieutenant or lieutenant), and many of them had been seconded from their ground units, the designation of pilot officer was a position title rather than a rank.

On 1 April 1918, the newly created RAF adopted its officer rank titles from the British Army, with Royal Flying Corps second lieutenants becoming second lieutenants in the RAF. Consideration was given to renaming second lieutenants as ensigns. However, when the RAF&#x27;s own rank structure was introduced in August 1919, RAF second lieutenants who were qualified pilots were re-designated as pilot officers, a rank which has been in continuous use ever since. Those who were not qualified pilots were redesignated &quot;observer officers&quot;, but this was later phased out and all officers of this rank became pilot officers.

===RAF usage===
The rank of pilot officer does not imply that the officer is aircrew. Following reforms to the Royal Air Force&#x27;s promotion system, wherein previously, university graduates passed out of RAF Cranwell at a higher substantive rank than their non-graduate peers, pilot officer rank is now only applicable to ground branches. Aircrew and engineers receive their commissions as flying officers and skip the rank altogether. A ground branch officer will remain in the pilot officer rank for six months following commissioning, before an automatic promotion to flying officer. Because of the nature of phase II training (professional training after the phase I initial officer training), a pilot officer will generally spend time in rank on a further training course, and is not likely to be operationally active.

Some students in the University Air Squadrons are promoted to the rank of &quot;acting pilot officer&quot; (which includes a week-long course at RAF Cranwell) as part of the leadership element of their squadron. UAS students wear pilot officer rank insignia with officer&#x27;s headdress and are commissioned into the Volunteer Reserve. Pilot officers are more likely to be found in the CCF and Air Training Corps organisations of the VR(T) branch, because they are likely to spend far longer in rank than those serving in the RAF.

===Insignia===
The rank insignia consists of a thin blue band on slightly wider black band. This is worn on both the lower sleeves of the tunic or on the shoulders of the flying suit or the casual uniform.

Although no current Royal Navy rank has an insignia of a single half width ring, a pilot officer&#x27;s mess insignia of one thin band of gold running around each cuff is similar to the insignia formerly worn by Royal Navy warrant officers. As with the mess insignia for other RAF officer ranks, the band of gold does not have the Royal Navy&#x27;s loop.

== Gallery ==

== See also ==

* Air force officer rank insignia
* British and U.S. military ranks compared
* Comparative military ranks
* RAF officer ranks
* Ranks of the RAAF

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="0" end="13" title="Pilot officer" label="Pilot officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="15" end="22" title="Pilot officer" label="Plt Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="26" end="29" title="Pilot officer" label="P/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156796" start="36" end="50" title="junior officer" label="junior officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="103" end="118" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="159" end="207" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="countries that have historical British influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="246" end="266" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="285" end="299" title="flying officer" label="flying officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="341" end="358" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="406" end="438" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="575" end="599" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884903" start="615" end="649" title="Unification of the Canadian Armed Forces" label="unification of the Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="728" end="745" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="760" end="775" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="847" end="865" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1210" end="1213" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1255" end="1267" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="1410" end="1417" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347950" start="2013" end="2025" title="RAF Cranwell" label="RAF Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="2199" end="2213" title="flying officer" label="flying officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894504" start="2655" end="2678" title="University Air Squadron" label="University Air Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676873" start="2714" end="2734" title="acting pilot officer" label="acting pilot officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373616" start="3069" end="3074" title="Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve (Training Branch)" label="VR(T)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434634" start="3338" end="3349" title="flying suit" label="flying suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="3763" end="3794" title="Air force officer rank insignia" label="Air force officer rank insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="3797" end="3837" title="British and U.S. military ranks compared" label="British and U.S. military ranks compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="3840" end="3866" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275704" start="3869" end="3886" title="RAF officer ranks" label="RAF officer ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293360" start="3889" end="3906" title="Ranks of the RAAF" label="Ranks of the RAAF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578206" wikidata="Q52620" url="?curid=578206" title="Edwin Moses">
<text>Edwin Corley Moses (born August 31, 1955) is an American former hurdler who won gold medals in the 400 m hurdles at the 1976 and 1984 Olympics. Between 1977 and 1987, Moses won 107 consecutive finals (122 consecutive races) and set the world record in the event four times. In addition to his running achievements, Moses was also an innovative reformer in the areas of Olympic eligibility and drug testing. In 2000, he was elected the first Chairman of the Laureus World Sports Academy, an international service organization of world-class athletes.

==Competition in 400m hurdles==
Moses was born in Dayton, Ohio. Having accepted an academic scholarship to Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia, he majored in physics and industrial engineering, while competing for the school track team. Morehouse did not have its own track, so Moses used public high school facilities around the city to train and run. Initially, Moses competed mostly in the 120-yard hurdles and 440-yard dash. Before March 1976, he ran only one 400 m hurdles race, but once he began focusing on the event he made remarkable progress. With his height of 6&#x27;2&quot;, Moses&#x27; trademark technique was to take a consistent 13 steps between each of the hurdles, pulling away in the second half of the race as his rivals often took 15 strides or changed their stride pattern. That year, he qualified for the U.S. team for the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal. In his first international meet, Moses won the gold medal ahead of teammate Mike Shine, setting a world record of 47.63 seconds in the process.

After breaking his own world record the following year at Drake Stadium with a time of 47.45 seconds, Moses lost to West Germany&#x27;s Harald Schmid on August 26, 1977, in Berlin; this was his fourth defeat in the 400 m hurdles. Beginning the next week, Moses beat Schmid by in Düsseldorf, and he did not lose another race for nine years, nine months, and nine days. Moses qualified for the 1980 U.S. Olympic team but was unable to compete due to the 1980 Summer Olympics boycott. He did however receive one of 461 Congressional Gold Medals created for the athletes. At the 1984 Olympics held in Los Angeles, Moses was selected to recite the Olympic Oath, but forgot the text during his presentation. He went on to win his second Olympic gold medal.

By the time American Danny Harris beat Moses in Madrid on June 4, 1987, Moses had won 122 consecutive races, set the world record twice more, won three World Cup titles, a World Championship gold, as well as his two Olympic gold medals. After the loss to Harris, he went on to win 10 more races in a row, collecting his second world gold in Rome in August of the same year.

Moses finished third in the final 400m hurdles race of his career at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul.

==Eligibility reforms==
In 1979 Moses took a leave of absence from his job with General Dynamics to devote himself to running full-time. In the next two years, he was instrumental in reforming international and Olympic eligibility rules. At his urging, an Athletes Trust Fund program was established to allow athletes to benefit from government- or privately supplied stipends, direct payments, and commercial endorsement money without jeopardizing their Olympic eligibility. Moses presented the plan to Juan Antonio Samaranch, President of the International Olympic Committee, and the concept was ratified in 1981. This fund is the basis of many Olympic athlete subsistence, stipend and corporate support programs, including the United States Olympic Committee&#x27;s Direct Athlete Assistance Programs.

==Awards==
Despite the U.S.-led boycott that kept him from competing at the summer games in Moscow, Moses was the 1980 Track &amp; Field News Athlete of the Year. A year later, he became the first recipient of USA Track &amp; Field&#x27;s Jesse Owens Award as outstanding U.S. track and field performer for 1981. He received the AAU&#x27;s James E. Sullivan Award as outstanding amateur athlete in the United States in 1983. He was being named as ABC&#x27;s &quot;Wide World of Sports&quot; Athlete of the Year in 1984. Moses also shared the &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; Sportsman of the Year with American gymnast Mary Lou Retton in 1984, the same year he took the Athlete&#x27;s Oath for the 1984 Summer Olympics.

In 1984 his hometown of Dayton renamed Miami Boulevard West and Sunrise Avenue &quot;Edwin C. Moses Boulevard&quot;. In 1999, Moses ranked #47 on &quot;ESPN&#x27;s SportCentury 50 Greatest Athletes&quot;.

In 2018, Moses received the Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award.

==Drug testing==
As a sports administrator, Moses participated in the development of a number of anti-drug policies and helped the track and field community develop one of sports&#x27; most stringent random in-competition drug testing systems. In December 1988 he designed and created amateur sports&#x27; first random out-of-competition drug testing program. A physicist, Moses has been a leader in creating a structure and protocols that have significantly reduced the use of illegal, performance-enhancing pharmaceuticals in athletics for many decades.

==Other achievements==
After his retirement from track, Moses competed in a 1990 World Cup bobsled race at Winterberg, Germany. He and long-time US Olympian Brian Shimer won the two-man bronze medal.

In 1994 Moses received an MBA from Pepperdine University and was inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame.
Since election in 2000, Moses has been chairman of the Laureus World Sports Academy, which seeks &quot;to promote and increase participation in sport at every level, and also to promote the use of sport as a tool for social change around the world&quot;. Several dozen Olympic and world champion athletes, through the Laureus Sports for Good Foundation, work to assist disadvantaged youths around the world.

In 2008, Moses presented the Dayton Literary Peace Prize&#x27;s Lifetime Achievement Award to Martin Luther King Jr., biographer Taylor Branch.

In May 2009, the University of Massachusetts Boston awarded Moses an honorary doctorate for his efforts to maintain the integrity of Olympic sports and for his use of sports as a tool for positive social change.

The Edwin Moses Track at Morehouse&#x27;s 
B. T. Harvey Stadium is named in his honour, he is the school&#x27;s only alumnus to win an Olympic gold medal.

==Personal life==

Moses&#x27;s father was a Tuskegee Airman.

Moses is a vegetarian, humanitarian and advocate for peace.

From 1986 through 1988, still in the prime of his running career, he suffered from an undiagnosed ruptured disc, discovered by MRI years later.

Moses has one son, Julian, a volleyball player, born on August 29, 1995, in southern California.

He married Myrella Bordt in 1982; they divorced in 1992. He married Michelle Moses in February 2007; she filed for divorce in 2016.

In 2017, Moses suffered two traumatic brain injuries within months, but recovered to be able to walk again.

== Film ==
* &quot;Moses – 13 Steps&quot; Documentary film, 2024 The premiere of the documentary film is scheduled for September 21, 2024 at Morehouse&#x27;s Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel.

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Edwin Moses: An Era Unto Himself&quot; (1999). In &quot;ESPN SportsCentury&quot;. Michael MacCambridge, Editor. New York: Hyperion-ESPN Books. pp. 254–5.
*Marty Gitlin: &quot;The 100 Greatest American Athletes&quot;. Roman &amp; Littlefield, 2018, ISBN 9781538110270, pp. 329-329

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* Schwartz, Larry. Moses made winning look easy. &quot;ESPN.com&quot;.
* Edwin Moses Biography. &quot;Major Taylor Association, Inc.&quot;
* Georgia Sports Hall of Fame</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q52620" start="0" end="18" title="Edwin Moses" label="Edwin Corley Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="48" end="56" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q537769" start="64" end="71" title="Hurdling" label="hurdler"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="80" end="90" title="gold medal" label="gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q231419" start="99" end="112" title="400 metres hurdles" label="400 m hurdles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="120" end="124" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="129" end="142" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208410" start="236" end="248" title="List of world records in athletics" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260023" start="393" end="402" title="drug test" label="drug test"/>
<link wikidata="Q900341" start="457" end="485" title="Laureus World Sports Awards" label="Laureus World Sports Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="601" end="613" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="643" end="654" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524124" start="658" end="675" title="Morehouse College" label="Morehouse College"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="679" end="695" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="711" end="718" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="723" end="745" title="industrial engineering" label="industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637974" start="967" end="980" title="440-yard dash" label="440-yard dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="1399" end="1419" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1423" end="1431" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q979124" start="1509" end="1519" title="Michael Shine" label="Mike Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305623" start="1636" end="1649" title="Drake Stadium (UCLA)" label="Drake Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="1694" end="1706" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q61818" start="1714" end="1727" title="Harald Schmid" label="Harald Schmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1751" end="1757" title="Berlin, Germany" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="1857" end="1867" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239539" start="2030" end="2058" title="1980 Summer Olympics boycott" label="1980 Summer Olympics boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q721218" start="2094" end="2118" title="List of Congressional Gold Medal recipients" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2175" end="2186" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210157" start="2221" end="2233" title="Olympic Oath" label="Olympic Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q930115" start="2351" end="2363" title="Danny Harris" label="Danny Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="2378" end="2384" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="2778" end="2798" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="2802" end="2807" title="Seoul, South Korea" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="2890" end="2906" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3066" end="3085" title="Athletes Trust Fund" label="Athletes Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q171166" start="3314" end="3336" title="Juan Antonio Samaranch" label="Juan Antonio Samaranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="3355" end="3386" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="3540" end="3571" title="United States Olympic Committee" label="United States Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632824" start="3735" end="3777" title="Track &amp;amp; Field News Athlete of the Year" label="Track &amp;amp; Field News Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547336" start="3826" end="3847" title="USA Track &amp;amp; Field" label="USA Track &amp;amp; Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540423" start="3855" end="3872" title="Jesse Owens Award" label="Jesse Owens Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="3945" end="3955" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="AAU&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720648" start="3956" end="3979" title="James E. Sullivan Award" label="James E. Sullivan Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="4063" end="4066" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567942" start="4080" end="4100" title="Wide World of Sports (U.S. TV series)" label="Wide World of Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="4164" end="4182" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653207" start="4189" end="4210" title="Sportsman of the Year" label="Sportsman of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="4225" end="4232" title="Gymnastics" label="gymnast"/>
<link wikidata="Q235975" start="4233" end="4248" title="Mary Lou Retton" label="Mary Lou Retton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210157" start="4284" end="4303" title="Olympic Oath" label="Athlete&amp;#x27;s Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="4312" end="4332" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="4487" end="4491" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775357" start="4569" end="4603" title="Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q887670" start="5244" end="5253" title="List of Bobsleigh World Cup champions" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="5254" end="5261" title="bobsled" label="bobsled"/>
<link wikidata="Q10923" start="5270" end="5280" title="Winterberg" label="Winterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="5282" end="5289" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q913071" start="5320" end="5332" title="Brian Shimer" label="Brian Shimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q873364" start="5349" end="5361" title="bronze medal" label="bronze medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="5390" end="5393" title="Master of Business Administration" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q117876" start="5399" end="5420" title="Pepperdine University" label="Pepperdine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087567" start="5447" end="5484" title="National Track and Field Hall of Fame" label="National Track and Field Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q900341" start="5541" end="5569" title="Laureus World Sports Awards" label="Laureus World Sports Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q900341" start="5804" end="5838" title="Laureus World Sports Awards" label="Laureus Sports for Good Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243548" start="5924" end="5951" title="Dayton Literary Peace Prize" label="Dayton Literary Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="5989" end="6011" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3981664" start="6024" end="6037" title="Taylor Branch" label="Taylor Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144" start="6057" end="6091" title="University of Massachusetts Boston" label="University of Massachusetts Boston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6257" end="6316" title="Morehouse_College#Buildings" label="Edwin Moses Track at Morehouse&amp;#x27;s 
B. T. Harvey Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q39372" start="6454" end="6469" title="Tuskegee Airman" label="Tuskegee Airman"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6763" end="6773" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7176" end="7219" title="Morehouse_College#Buildings" label="Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578209" wikidata="Q928645" url="?curid=578209" title="Ericofon">
<text>The Ericofon is a one-piece plastic telephone created by the Ericsson Company of Sweden and marketed through the second half of the 20th century. It was the first commercially marketed telephone to incorporate the dial and handset into a single unit. Because of its styling and its influence on future telephone design, the Ericofon is considered one of the most significant industrial designs of the 20th century by Phaidon. It is in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City. In Sweden, the Ericofon is known as the cobra telephone for its resemblance to the hooded snake of the same name.

==History==
The Ericofon was designed in the late 1940s by a design team including Gösta Thames, Ralph Lysell, and Hugo Blomberg. The two major components of the telephone, the handset and the dial, are combined in a single unit. This one-piece design anticipated the evolution of the typical cordless phone and cell phone by several decades. Serial production began in 1954. Early models were sold only to institutions; in 1956, however, production for the open market began in Europe and Australia.

As the Bell System did not permit the operation of third-party equipment on their network, the Ericofon could only be used by independent telephone companies in the United States. North Electric in Galion, Ohio, manufactured the Ericofon for the North American independent market.

==Colors==
When it was introduced on the U.S. market, the Ericofon was available in 18 colors. However, after transfer of production to North Electric, the number of colors was reduced to eight. A small number of phones with clear and metallic finishes were produced for special promotions. The most popular and widely produced colors were bright red and bright white. Other colors included various pastel shades of blue, green, and pink. The phone was never produced in black.

==Ericotone==
Most Ericofons had mechanical rotary dials, typical of all phones made in the era. While Ericofons produced by Ericsson used miniature buzzers as ringers, North Electric introduced the electronic &quot;Ericotone&quot; ringer. The Ericotone ringer used a simple, one-transistor oscillator circuit to produce a distinctive &quot;chirping&quot; sound. Colloquially, Ericofons were sometimes referred to as &quot;tweeter&quot; phones. This was one of the earliest uses of a transistor in a telephone; telephones with mechanical bell ringers and rotary dials did not need transistors.

==Touch-tone==
North Electric introduced a touch-tone version of the Ericofon in the United States in 1967. Production of this variant was much lower than that of the rotary-dial Ericofons. A design flaw in the hook switch mechanism would cause the touch-tone version of the phone to come apart if it was set down too forcibly or accidentally dropped and the phone then became unusable. It was almost impossible for the average consumers to restore the hook switch mechanism to correct operating condition if it were so damaged. North Electric ceased production of the Ericofon for North America in 1972.

Ericsson introduced a push-button version of the Ericofon, the model 700, for the company&#x27;s 100th anniversary in 1976. The model 700 had a squarer design than earlier models. It was not a touch-tone phone. Instead, its electronics generated electrical pulses as its buttons were pressed, simulating the pulses produced by a rotary dial. Ericsson continued to produce rotary-dial Ericofons until about 1980.

==Recent production==
Wild and Wolf produces an Ericofon-lookalike called &quot;Scandiphone&quot;. The modern touch-tone phone is available in several colors and can be bought from web stores. The switch hook was redesigned to be stable. The keypad of the Scandiphones was not a standard touch-tone arrangement but rather appeared in a circle to mimic a rotary dial. A few other companies made Ericofon lookalikes with a more traditional-appearing keypad with the redesigned switch hook. Some of these lookalike phones may have used actual Ericofon cases purchased from excess stock in their phones.

==Media appearances==
The Ericofon has been seen in several feature films and TV shows, mostly in the 1960s and 1970s.

* An Ericofon appears prominently in &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; episode &quot;Third from the Sun&quot;, first broadcast on January 8, 1960; and is also in the episode &quot;One More Pallbearer&quot;.
* A white Ericofon can be seen on the office desk of the supervillain in the movie &quot;Banco à Bangkok pour OSS 117&quot; (1964).
* An Ericofon is used by actor Lee Philips in the Dick Van Dyke Show episode “The Man from Emperor” (1964).
* An Ericofon appears briefly in the headquarters of the enemy in the first episode &quot;Eleven Days to Zero&quot; (1964) of the TV series &quot;Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea&quot;.
* In the movie &quot;The World of Henry Orient&quot; (1964), Peter Sellers uses an Ericofon in his bedroom.
* Ericofons were used for several years in the detectives&#x27; office in the Australian TV series &quot;Homicide&quot;, with the phone listed by name in episode credits, and L.M Ericsson as the supplier.
* Red, white, and beige Ericofons appear throughout the underground research headquarters in &quot;Crack in the World&quot; (1965).
* I&#x27;ll Take Sweden (1965) Starring Bob Hope and Frankie Avalon. 
* June Lockhart, Marta Kristen and Mark Goddard each posed with an Ericofon in publicity shots while they were on the TV series Lost in Space (1965-1968).
* An Ericofon is featured in the opening scene in &quot;In Like Flint&quot; (1967).
* In the movie &quot;Two for The Road&quot; (1967), architect Mark Wallace (Albert Finney) receives a long-distance call at a housewarming party on an Ericofon.
* In the 1967 film &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, Le Chiffre (Orson Welles) receives a phone call from SMERSH on an Ericofon.
* In the 1969–1972 television series &quot;The Courtship of Eddie&#x27;s Father&quot;, the Corbett household has an Ericofon.
* In &quot;Doomsday&quot; (1969), the seventeenth episode of the third season of &quot;&quot;, Jim Phelps (Peter Graves) uses a white Ericofon. In the following episode, &quot;Live Bait&quot;, an Ericofon is the desk phone of Helmut Kellermann (Anthony Zerbe), the episode&#x27;s main antagonist.
* Sammy Davis Jr. speaks to Kim Lee on a blue Ericofon at Pepperworth Castle while three more (two ivory and one red) are on the shelf behind him in One More Time, the 1970 film sequel to Salt And Pepper (1968).
* A red Ericofon is used in a top-security U.S. tracking station in the episode &quot;The Ninety-Second War: Part II&quot; (1972) of the TV series &quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot;.
* An Ericofon is seen in the operation room of the secret service in the French movie &quot;Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire&quot; (1972).
* An Ericofon can be seen on a table in a scene from the 1973 film &quot;Theatre of Blood&quot;.
* Many Ericofons are used in the French adult comedy &quot;Young Casanova&quot; (1974).
* Ericofons are used in the Norvegian adult comedy &quot;Kosmetikkrevolusjonen&quot; (1977).
* There is a red Ericofon on Higgins&#x27; desk, in the episode &quot;China Doll&quot; (1980) of the TV series &quot;Magnum, P.I.&quot;
* A yellow Ericofon is placed on a table in the living room in the 1980 movie &quot;Sunday Lovers&quot;.
* Dominique Lavanant uses a red Ericofon in &quot;La boum&quot;, a 1980 French movie starring Sophie Marceau.
* Doris Roberts is seen speaking into a white Ericofon in the opening credits of Remington Steele (1982-1987).
* An Ericofon is used by Stella in the 1986 Icelandic movie Stella í orlofi.
* The character Myra Gale Brown (played by Winona Ryder) uses an Ericofon in a few scenes of &quot;Great Balls Of Fire!&quot; (1989).
* The character played by &quot;Cyndi Lauper&quot; in &quot;Off and Running&quot; uses an Ericofon at the futuristic motel run by &quot;David Keith&quot;&#x27;s character.
* The character Teddy Forzman in the TV show &quot;The Adventures of Pete &amp; Pete&quot; (1993–1996) uses an Ericofon in the third-season episode &quot;The Trouble with Teddy.&quot;
* The character Memphis Rocket in the TV show &quot;Julia Jekyll and Harriet Hyde&quot; (1995–1998) has an orange Ericofon on the desk in his office during series one and two.
* Ericofons were featured in the 1997 movie &quot;Men in Black&quot;. They were the desk phones at workstations at headquarters.
* A modified Ericofon appeared as a prop alien telephone in the first-season episode &quot;I, E.T.&quot; of the TV series &quot;Farscape&quot; (1999–2003).
* A character in the 1999 film &quot;But I&#x27;m a Cheerleader&quot; uses a green Ericofon.
* In the French TV movie &quot;L&#x27;affaire Ben Barka&quot; (2007), a white Ericofon is used in an office of the Paris-Orly Airport. The action takes place in 1965.
* In &quot;Mad Men&quot; (2007–2012), Roger Sterling uses an Ericofon in his new office. The action is set in the 1960s.
* In the Argentinian movie El Secreto De Sus Ojos from 2009 an Ericofon is used. The scene is dated in the mid seventies. 
* In the episode &quot;There Is Another Sky&quot; (2010) of the TV series &quot;Caprica&quot;, Joseph Adama receives a call on an Ericofon.
* In the Dutch movie &quot;The kidnapping of Freddy Heineken&quot; (2011), a red Ericofon was used. The story plays in 1983.
* In the 2015 film &quot;The Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot;, Victoria Vinciguerra is briefly seen speaking on an aqua mist colored Ericofon.
* In the opening scene of the 1958 science-fiction movie &quot;Queen of Outer Space&quot;, Ericofons are seen on desks in a military headquarters.
* In the first episode of 2017 Spanish spin-off series set in the 1960s, Velvet Colección, Clara uses a green Ericofon.
*Four Ericofons, one of which is red, are used as stage props for the YouTube channel &quot;The Korean War by Indy Neidell&quot; series on the Korean War. From the series&#x27; beginning on June 25, 2024, Narrator/historic researcher Indy Neidell is often seen speaking into one or another at the start of an episode as if in the period.

==See also==
* Trimphone: Another telephone from the same era.
* Trimline: AT&amp;T&#x27;s answer to the Ericofon, the Trimline phone incorporated a dial into the handset but had a separate cradle containing the ringer.
* Grillo: Another innovative telephone, from Italy. Its design anticipated the cellular &quot;flip phone&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* http://www.ericofon.com/
* Ericofon at the Museum of Modern Art
* http://www.ericofon.nl/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q928645" start="4" end="12" title="Ericofon" label="Ericofon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="36" end="45" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="61" end="77" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="457" end="477" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q928645" start="536" end="551" title="Ericofon" label="cobra telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="1120" end="1131" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q679057" start="1311" end="1323" title="Galion, Ohio" label="Galion, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q668733" start="1918" end="1929" title="rotary dial" label="rotary dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="2154" end="2164" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="2165" end="2175" title="electronic oscillator" label="oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q941685" start="2512" end="2522" title="touch-tone" label="touch-tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="4252" end="4269" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296789" start="4290" end="4308" title="Third from the Sun" label="Third from the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695018" start="4385" end="4404" title="One More Pallbearer" label="One More Pallbearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882090" start="4501" end="4529" title="Banco à Bangkok pour OSS 117" label="Banco à Bangkok pour OSS 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q123760" start="4798" end="4829" title="Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea (TV series)" label="Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433065" start="4858" end="4883" title="The World of Henry Orient" label="The World of Henry Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="4898" end="4911" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855346" start="5050" end="5058" title="Homicide (Australian TV series)" label="Homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200034" start="5563" end="5576" title="In Like Flint" label="In Like Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q232170" start="5612" end="5628" title="Two for the Road (1967 film)" label="Two for The Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q219546" start="5667" end="5680" title="Albert Finney" label="Albert Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q591272" start="5777" end="5790" title="Casino Royale (1967 film)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="5810" end="5822" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q158363" start="5851" end="5857" title="SMERSH" label="SMERSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244850" start="5917" end="5953" title="The Courtship of Eddie&amp;#x27;s Father (TV series)" label="The Courtship of Eddie&amp;#x27;s Father"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6095" end="6105" title="List of Mission: Impossible characters#Jim Phelps" label="Jim Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q156532" start="6107" end="6119" title="Peter Graves" label="Peter Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q574190" start="6245" end="6258" title="Anthony Zerbe" label="Anthony Zerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="6299" end="6314" title="Sammy Davis Jr." label="Sammy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q717479" start="6446" end="6459" title="One More Time (1970 film)" label="One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249744" start="6485" end="6500" title="Salt and Pepper (film)" label="Salt And Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q697407" start="6662" end="6675" title="Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)" label="Hawaii Five-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094519" start="6775" end="6814" title="The Tall Blond Man with One Black Shoe" label="Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064212" start="6902" end="6918" title="Theatre of Blood" label="Theatre of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17414837" start="7071" end="7092" title="Kosmetikkrevolusjonen" label="Kosmetikkrevolusjonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q254689" start="7224" end="7236" title="Magnum, P.I." label="Magnum, P.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q1892136" start="7327" end="7340" title="Sunday Lovers" label="Sunday Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q440234" start="7350" end="7368" title="Dominique Lavanant" label="Dominique Lavanant"/>
<link wikidata="Q177203" start="7398" end="7405" title="La boum" label="La boum"/>
<link wikidata="Q162753" start="7442" end="7456" title="Sophie Marceau" label="Sophie Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q232959" start="7460" end="7473" title="Doris Roberts" label="Doris Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q676371" start="7539" end="7555" title="Remington Steele" label="Remington Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480639" start="7629" end="7644" title="Stella í orlofi" label="Stella í orlofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q101797" start="7689" end="7701" title="Winona Ryder" label="Winona Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544241" start="7745" end="7765" title="Great Balls of Fire! (film)" label="Great Balls Of Fire!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="7812" end="7824" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126691" start="7840" end="7855" title="Off and Running" label="Off and Running"/>
<link wikidata="Q537190" start="7916" end="7927" title="David Keith (actor)" label="David Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761473" start="8003" end="8036" title="The Adventures of Pete &amp;amp; Pete" label="The Adventures of Pete &amp;amp; Pete"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306486" start="8188" end="8217" title="Julia Jekyll and Harriet Hyde" label="Julia Jekyll and Harriet Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q51416" start="8362" end="8374" title="Men in Black (1997 film)" label="Men in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967415" start="8532" end="8539" title="I, E.T." label="I, E.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q456666" start="8569" end="8577" title="Farscape" label="Farscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257599" start="8634" end="8660" title="But I&amp;#x27;m a Cheerleader" label="But I&amp;#x27;m a Cheerleader"/>
<link wikidata="Q510292" start="8736" end="8745" title="Mehdi Ben Barka" label="Ben Barka"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="8805" end="8823" title="Paris-Orly Airport" label="Paris-Orly Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q223977" start="8868" end="8875" title="Mad Men" label="Mad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q579554" start="9181" end="9188" title="Caprica (TV series)" label="Caprica"/>
<link wikidata="Q14488725" start="9391" end="9414" title="The Man from U.N.C.L.E. (film)" label="The Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q7842262" start="10123" end="10132" title="Trimphone" label="Trimphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842242" start="10173" end="10181" title="Trimline telephone" label="Trimline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="10183" end="10191" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609175" start="10330" end="10336" title="Grillo telephone" label="Grillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532758" start="10422" end="10432" title="flip phone" label="flip phone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578225" wikidata="Q5301550" url="?curid=578225" title="Douglas H. Ginsburg">
<text>Douglas Howard Ginsburg (born May 25, 1946) is an American lawyer and jurist serving as a senior United States circuit judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. He is also a professor of law at the Antonin Scalia Law School of George Mason University.

Ginsburg was appointed to the D.C. Circuit in 1986 by President Ronald Reagan, and he served as its chief judge from 2001 to 2008. In 1987, Reagan announced his intention to nominate Ginsburg as an associate justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. Ginsburg withdrew his name from consideration two weeks later in the wake of news reports that he had smoked marijuana in the past. Reagan instead nominated Anthony Kennedy.

Ginsburg took senior status in October 2011, and joined the faculty of New York University School of Law in January 2012. In 2013, he left NYU and began teaching at George Mason University. He is the author of scholarly works on U.S. antitrust law and constitutional law.

==Early life and education==

Ginsburg was born on May 25, 1946, in Chicago, Illinois, to Katherine (&quot;née&quot; Goodmont) and Maurice Ginsburg. After graduating from the Latin School of Chicago in 1963, he entered Cornell University as a classics major. He dropped out in 1965 due to &quot;boredom&quot; and co-founded Operation Match, an early computer dating service based in Boston, Massachusetts. Ginsburg sold the company in 1968 and returned to Cornell, graduating in 1970 with a Bachelor of Science degree in industrial relations.

Ginsburg then attended the University of Chicago Law School, where he was an editor of the &quot;University of Chicago Law Review&quot; along with future judge Frank Easterbrook. He graduated in 1973 with a Juris Doctor and membership in the Order of the Coif.

==Career==
After law school, Ginsburg was a law clerk to Judge Carl E. McGowan of the D.C. Circuit from 1973 to 1974 and to U.S. Supreme Court justice Thurgood Marshall from 1974 to 1975. He then became a professor at Harvard Law School, where he taught labor law, administrative law, antitrust law, and other subjects. 

In 1983, Ginsburg joined the administration of President Ronald Reagan as a deputy assistant attorney general in the U.S. Department of Justice&#x27;s Antitrust Division. In 1984, he became the administrator of the Executive Office of the President&#x27;s Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, and in 1985 he was appointed Assistant Attorney General of the Antitrust Division.

From 1988 to 2008, Ginsburg was an adjunct professor at the George Mason University School of Law (now Antonin Scalia Law School), where he taught a seminar called &quot;Readings in Legal Thought&quot;. Until 2011 he was also a Visiting Lecturer and Charles J. Merriam Scholar at the University of Chicago Law School in Chicago, Illinois. Ginsburg has been a visiting professor at Columbia University Law School (1987–1988) and a visiting scholar at New York Law School (2006–2008).

Ginsburg is currently a professor at the Antonin Scalia Law School. He was previously a visiting professor at University College London Faculty of Laws. He serves on the advisory boards of the Global Antitrust Institute (Chairman), the Jevons Institute for Competition Law and Economics and the Centre for Law, Economics, and Society, both at University College London, Faculty of Laws; Competition Policy International; &quot;Journal of Competition Law &amp; Economics&quot;; &quot;Journal of Law, Economics &amp; Policy&quot;; &quot;Supreme Court Economic Review&quot;; &quot;University of Chicago Law Review&quot;; and the &quot;Harvard Journal of Law &amp; Public Policy&quot;.

==Federal judicial service==

Ginsburg was nominated by President Ronald Reagan on September 23, 1986, to a seat on the District of Columbia Circuit vacated by Judge J. Skelly Wright. He was confirmed by the United States Senate on October 8, 1986, and received his commission on October 14, 1986. He served as Chief Judge of the D.C. Circuit from 2001 to 2008, and he assumed senior status on October 14, 2011.

He was a member of the Judicial Conference of the United States, 2001–2008, and previously served on its Budget Committee, 1997–2001, and Committee on Judicial Resources, 1987–1996; American Bar Association, Antitrust Section, Council, 1985–1986 (ex officio), 2000–2003 and 2009–2012 (judicial liaison); Boston University Law School, Visiting Committee, 1994–1997; and University of Chicago Law School, Visiting Committee, 1985–1988.

==United States Supreme Court nomination==

On October 29, 1987, President Reagan announced his intention to nominate Ginsburg to the U.S. Supreme Court to fill the vacancy created by the retirement of Lewis Powell, which had been announced on June 26. Ginsburg was chosen after the United States Senate, controlled by Democrats, had voted down the nomination of Judge Robert Bork after a highly controversial nomination battle which ended with a 42–58 rejection vote on October 23.

Ginsburg&#x27;s nomination collapsed for entirely different reasons from Bork&#x27;s rejection, as he almost immediately came under some fire when NPR&#x27;s Nina Totenberg revealed that Ginsburg had used marijuana &quot;on a few occasions&quot; during his student days in the 1960s and while an assistant professor at Harvard in the 1970s. It was Ginsburg&#x27;s continued use of marijuana after graduation and as a professor that made his actions more serious in the minds of many senators and members of the public. Ginsburg was also accused of a financial conflict of interest during his work in the Reagan Administration, but a Department of Justice investigation under the Ethics in Government Act determined the allegation was baseless.

Due to the allegations, Ginsburg withdrew his name from consideration on November 7, and remained on the Court of Appeals, serving as chief judge for most of the 2000s. Anthony Kennedy was then nominated on November 11 and confirmed in early February 1988 as an associate justice of the Supreme Court.

==Personal life==
Ginsburg married the public relations consultant Deecy Gray in 2007 in a ceremony at the U.S. Supreme Court performed by Chief Justice John Roberts. He has three daughters from two previous marriages.

==Selected scholarly works==
*
*
*
*
*
*

==See also==
* List of Jewish American jurists
* List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 10)

==References==
==External links==
* University of Chicago Faculty Bio
* George Mason University Faculty Bio Broken link.
* Reagan&#x27;s Remarks in Nomination to the Supreme Court </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5301550" start="0" end="23" title="Douglas H. Ginsburg" label="Douglas Howard Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="97" end="124" title="United States federal judge" label="United States circuit judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="132" end="190" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542217" start="229" end="254" title="Antonin Scalia Law School" label="Antonin Scalia Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="258" end="281" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="348" end="361" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="482" end="499" title="Associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="associate justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="507" end="525" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="636" end="645" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171" start="684" end="699" title="Anthony Kennedy" label="Anthony Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548931" start="716" end="729" title="senior status" label="senior status"/>
<link wikidata="Q846173" start="773" end="806" title="New York University School of Law" label="New York University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277149" start="931" end="949" title="United States antitrust law" label="U.S. antitrust law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="954" end="972" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1043" end="1060" title="Chicago" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496477" start="1150" end="1173" title="Latin School of Chicago" label="Latin School of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="1194" end="1212" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="1218" end="1226" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893799" start="1299" end="1314" title="Operation Match" label="Operation Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q654810" start="1325" end="1340" title="computer dating" label="computer dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1358" end="1379" title="Boston" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="1466" end="1485" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q932071" start="1496" end="1516" title="industrial relations" label="industrial relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036763" start="1546" end="1578" title="University of Chicago Law School" label="University of Chicago Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895257" start="1616" end="1648" title="University of Chicago Law Review" label="University of Chicago Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487000" start="1679" end="1696" title="Frank Easterbrook" label="Frank Easterbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="1726" end="1738" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100653" start="1761" end="1778" title="Order of the Coif" label="Order of the Coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q883231" start="1825" end="1834" title="law clerk" label="law clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040063" start="1844" end="1859" title="Carl E. McGowan" label="Carl E. McGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="1932" end="1949" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="1999" end="2017" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039782" start="2035" end="2044" title="United States labor law" label="labor law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039568" start="2046" end="2064" title="United States administrative law" label="administrative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="2220" end="2246" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889730" start="2254" end="2272" title="United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division" label="Antitrust Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355327" start="2318" end="2351" title="Executive Office of the President of the United States" label="Executive Office of the President"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996934" start="2359" end="2403" title="Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs" label="Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889542" start="2434" end="2460" title="Assistant Attorney General" label="Assistant Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036763" start="2773" end="2805" title="University of Chicago Law School" label="University of Chicago Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2809" end="2816" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="2818" end="2826" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149089" start="2870" end="2900" title="Columbia University Law School" label="Columbia University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339059" start="2939" end="2958" title="New York Law School" label="New York Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="3316" end="3341" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3360" end="3392" title="Competition Policy International" label="Competition Policy International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295001" start="3400" end="3442" title="Journal of Competition Law &amp;amp; Economics" label="Journal of Competition Law &amp;amp; Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130366807" start="3456" end="3494" title="Journal of Law, Economics &amp;amp; Policy" label="Journal of Law, Economics &amp;amp; Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644858" start="3508" end="3537" title="Supreme Court Economic Review" label="Supreme Court Economic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895257" start="3551" end="3583" title="University of Chicago Law Review" label="University of Chicago Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676466" start="3605" end="3647" title="Harvard Journal of Law &amp;amp; Public Policy" label="Harvard Journal of Law &amp;amp; Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107101" start="3822" end="3838" title="J. Skelly Wright" label="J. Skelly Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3864" end="3884" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548931" start="4033" end="4046" title="senior status" label="senior status"/>
<link wikidata="Q252739" start="4706" end="4718" title="Lewis Franklin Powell Jr." label="Lewis Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4787" end="4807" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365780" start="4873" end="4884" title="Robert Bork" label="Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342219" start="4893" end="4931" title="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination" label="highly controversial nomination battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="5135" end="5138" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038136" start="5146" end="5160" title="Nina Totenberg" label="Nina Totenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="5193" end="5202" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171" start="5902" end="5917" title="Anthony Kennedy" label="Anthony Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249971" start="6103" end="6113" title="Deecy Gray" label="Deecy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="6175" end="6188" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153" start="6189" end="6201" title="John Roberts" label="John Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575308" start="6313" end="6344" title="List of Jewish American jurists" label="List of Jewish American jurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625070" start="6347" end="6417" title="List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 10)" label="List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 10)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578227" wikidata="Q246475" url="?curid=578227" title="Sober">
<text>Sober usually refers to sobriety, the state of not having any measurable levels or effects from alcohol or drugs.

Sober may also refer to:
==Music==
* Sôber, Spanish rock band

===Songs===
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Bad Wolves song), from the 2019 album &quot;Nation&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (BigBang song), from the 2016 album &quot;Made&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Childish Gambino song), from the 2014 extended play, &quot;Kauai&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Demi Lovato song), 2018 single
* &quot;Sober&quot; (G-Eazy song), from the 2017 album &quot;The Beautiful &amp; Damned&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Inna song), 2020 single
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Jennifer Paige song), from the 1999 album &quot;Jennifer Paige&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Kelly Clarkson song), from the 2007 album &quot;My December&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Little Big Town song), from the 2012 album &quot;Tornado&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Lorde song) and &quot;Sober II (Melodrama)&quot;, two songs from the 2017 album &quot;Melodrama&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Loreen song), from the 2012 album &quot;Heal&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Pink song), from the 2008 album &quot;Funhouse&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Selena Gomez song), from the 2015 album &quot;Revival&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot; (Tool song), from the 1993 album &quot;Undertow&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot;, by Bazzi
* &quot;Sober&quot;, by Blink-182 from the 2016 album &quot;California&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot;, by Cheat Codes
* &quot;Sober&quot;, by DJ Snake featuring John Ryan From the 2016 album &quot;Encore&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot;, by Jelly Roll from the 2021 album &quot;Ballads of the Broken&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot;, by Muse from the 1999 album &quot;Showbiz&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot;, by Sam Smith from the 2020 album &quot;Love Goes&quot;
* &quot;Sober&quot;, by Fidlar from the 2015 album &quot;Too&quot;

==People==
* Bojan Sober (born 1957), Croatian opera singer
* Elliott Sober (born 1947), American philosopher of science

==Places==
* Sober Hall, village in Ingleby Barwick, England
* Sober Island, Nova Scotia
* Sober, Spain

==Other==
*Sober Grid, an app to help people in recovery from alcohol and drug addiction find and connect with one another for peer support
* &quot;Sober Meal&quot;, painting by Pieter Franciscus Dierckx
* Sober space, property of a topological space in mathematics
* Sober living houses
* Sober (worm), a family of computer worms
* &quot;Sober&quot; (&quot;Drifters&quot;), a 2016 television episode</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246475" start="0" end="5" title="Sober" label="Sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791388" start="24" end="32" title="sobriety" label="sobriety"/>
<link wikidata="Q246475" start="115" end="120" title="Sober" label="Sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458309" start="152" end="157" title="Sôber" label="Sôber"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355659" start="192" end="227" title="Sober (Bad Wolves song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Bad Wolves song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720775" start="270" end="302" title="Sober (BigBang song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (BigBang song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895959" start="343" end="384" title="Sober (Childish Gambino song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Childish Gambino song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55150122" start="435" end="471" title="Sober (Demi Lovato song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Demi Lovato song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741690" start="487" end="518" title="Sober (G-Eazy song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (G-Eazy song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q609858" start="581" end="610" title="Sober (Inna song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Inna song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549935" start="626" end="665" title="Sober (Jennifer Paige song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Jennifer Paige song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q387990" start="716" end="755" title="Sober (Kelly Clarkson song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Kelly Clarkson song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021322" start="803" end="843" title="Sober (Little Big Town song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Little Big Town song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50307767" start="887" end="917" title="Sober (Lorde song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Lorde song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811459" start="1010" end="1041" title="Sober (Loreen song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Loreen song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317892" start="1082" end="1111" title="Sober (Pink song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Pink song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29886031" start="1156" end="1193" title="Sober (Selena Gomez song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Selena Gomez song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q527131" start="1237" end="1266" title="Sober (Tool song)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (Tool song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48720231" start="1333" end="1338" title="Bazzi (singer)" label="Bazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23930100" start="1399" end="1409" title="California (Blink-182 album)" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q127260993" start="1440" end="1451" title="Cheat Codes" label="Cheat Codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25858203" start="1531" end="1537" title="Encore (DJ Snake album)" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q119240974" start="1605" end="1626" title="Ballads of the Broken" label="Ballads of the Broken"/>
<link wikidata="Q207974" start="1688" end="1695" title="Showbiz (Muse album)" label="Showbiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q85005864" start="1762" end="1771" title="Love Goes" label="Love Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038524" start="1802" end="1808" title="Fidlar" label="Fidlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25094946" start="1835" end="1838" title="Too (Fidlar album)" label="Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938621" start="1859" end="1870" title="Bojan Sober" label="Bojan Sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q329031" start="1908" end="1921" title="Elliott Sober" label="Elliott Sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096038" start="2004" end="2019" title="Ingleby Barwick" label="Ingleby Barwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549939" start="2031" end="2056" title="Sober Island, Nova Scotia" label="Sober Island, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442183" start="2059" end="2071" title="Sober, Spain" label="Sober, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908872" start="2084" end="2094" title="Sober Grid" label="Sober Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376186" start="2251" end="2276" title="Pieter Franciscus Dierckx" label="Pieter Franciscus Dierckx"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778429" start="2279" end="2290" title="Sober space" label="Sober space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549943" start="2341" end="2360" title="Sober living houses" label="Sober living houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487336" start="2363" end="2375" title="Sober (worm)" label="Sober (worm)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962826" start="2406" end="2446" title="Sober (Drifters)" label="&amp;quot;Sober&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Drifters&amp;quot;)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578233" wikidata="Q795439" url="?curid=578233" title="Black eagle">
<text>The black eagle (Ictinaetus malaiensis) is a bird of prey. Like all eagles, it is in the family Accipitridae, and is the only member of the genus Ictinaetus. They soar over forests in the hilly regions of tropical and subtropical South and Southeast Asia, as well as southeastern China. They hunt mammals and birds, particularly at their nests. They are easily identified by their widely splayed and long primary &quot;fingers&quot;, the characteristic silhouette, slow flight and yellow ceres and legs that contrast with their dark feathers.

== Taxonomy and systematics ==
The species name is spelt &quot;malayensis&quot; in most publications but the original spelling used by Temminck in his description uses the spelling &quot;malaiensis&quot; according to a 2011 finding of some of the original covers of the part publications leading to taxonomists applying the principle of priority and rejecting any later spelling emendations.

A molecular phylogenetic study of the Accipitridae published in 2024 found that the black eagle is sister to the three spotted eagles in the genus &quot;Clanga&quot;.

Two subspecies are recognised:
* &quot;I. m. perniger&quot; (Hodgson, 1836) – north India and Nepal, Bhutan, south India and Sri Lanka.
* &quot;I. m. malaiensis&quot; (Temminck, 1822) – Myanmar, Bangladesh, to south China, southeast Asia and Indonesian Archipelago (except Lesser Sunda Islands).

==Description==

The black eagle is a large but slender eagle, at about in length and in wingspan. Despite its large appearance (it is one of the largest eagles in its range), known weights are relatively modest, at between , about half the weight of the partially sympatric mountain hawk-eagle, the latter being of a similar total length. Adults have all-black plumage, with a yellow bill base (cere) and feet. The wings are long and pinched in at the innermost primaries giving a distinctive shape. The tail shows faint barring and upper tail covers are paler. When perched the wing tips reach till or exceed the tail tip. The wings are held in a shallow V (wings just above the horizontal plane) in flight. Seen on hot afternoons, scouring the treetops for a nest to maraud, this bird is easily spotted by its jet black colour, large size, and a characteristic slow flight, sometimes just above the canopy.

Sexes are similar, but young birds have a buff head, underparts and underwing coverts. The wing shape helps to distinguish this species from the dark form of changeable hawk-eagle, (&quot;Nisaetus cirrhatus&quot;). The tarsi are fully feathered and the toes are relatively stout and short with long claws (particularly on the inner toe) that are less strongly curved than in other birds of prey.

==Distribution and habitat==
The black eagle breeds in tropical and subtropical Asia. Race &quot;perniger&quot; (Hodgson, 1836) is found in the Himalayan foothills west through Nepal into the Indian states of Himachal Pradesh and Jammu &amp; Kashmir, and in the forests of the Eastern and Western Ghats in peninsular India and Sri Lanka. The bird&#x27;s westernmost extent is from Gujarat, especially in the forested areas in southern and eastern Gujarat. The species also extends into the Aravalli range of northwestern India. The nominate race &quot;malaiensis&quot; (Temminck, 1822) is found in Myanmar, Bangladesh, southern China (Yunnan, Fujian) and Taiwan, into Southeast Asia. They are generally residents and no migrations have been observed. In a study in southern India, it was found to favour forests with good forest cover and was absent from areas where the cover was less than 50%. Black eagles have been regularly observed in the skies of Bangladesh, where they are known to breed and thrive, particularly in the hilly and forested regions of the country. Their presence is most prominent in the southeastern and northeastern areas, where the terrain is characterized by dense forests and rolling hills. Among these regions, Chittagong and Sylhet stands out as a key habitat for the black eagles, that reside in Bangladesh.

==Behaviour and ecology==
===Breeding===
The courtship display involves steep dives with folded wings with swoops up in a U shape into a vertical stall. They build a platform nest, 3 to 4 feet wide, on a tall tree overlooking a steep valley. One or two white eggs which are blotched in brown and mauve may be laid during the nesting season between January and April. The nest site may be reused year after year.
===Food and feeding===
The black eagle eats mammals (including bats, squirrels and other small mammals), birds and eggs. It is a prolific nest-predator and is known for its slow flight just over the canopy. The curved claws and wide gape allow it to pick up eggs of birds from nests as well as swiftlets from caves. Along with swallow-tailed kites they share the unique habit of carrying away an entire nest with nestlings to a feeding perch. Squirrels, macaques and many species of birds emit alarm calls when these birds are spotted soaring over the forest. The Indian giant squirrel has been noted as a prey of this species and young bonnet macaques may also fall prey to them. 

===Threats and survival===
It is not threatened but uncommon in large areas in its distribution. Shrinking of forested areas due to large-scale extraction has reduced its earlier range.

==Relationship to humans==
Due to this eagle&#x27;s ability to remain aloft for long periods with minimal effort, the Lepcha people of India&#x27;s Darjeeling district described it as a bird that never sat down, while the Soliga people&#x27;s name (&quot;Kaana Kattale)&quot; recalls its black colour and its presence in relatively forested areas.

==References==
==External links==
* Internet Bird Collection
* Notes on the species in Java
* Call and sonogram
* Video of pair bathing in stream near nesting site

===Historical publications===

* Illustration and description (in French) by Temminck (&quot;Pl. Col.&quot; vol. 1, plate 117, pages 104–105.)
* 1836 original description of Nepalese race as &quot;Aquila Pernigra&quot; by B. H. Hodgson (now a subspecies &quot;I. m. perniger&quot;). 
* 1843 proposal of new genus &quot;Heteropus&quot; by Hodgson, separated from &quot;Aquila&quot; based on the unusual form of the black eagle&#x27;s foot. With a footnote by Blyth noting that Jerdon had sent specimens to the museum labeled &quot;Ictinaëtus ovivorus&quot;. Text and illustration.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q795439" start="4" end="15" title="Black eagle" label="black eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="68" end="73" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="96" end="108" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="173" end="179" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="230" end="235" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="240" end="254" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785" start="338" end="342" title="nest" label="nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="939" end="961" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="1036" end="1042" title="sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1078" end="1083" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9160388" start="1090" end="1096" title="Clanga (bird)" label="Clanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="1109" end="1119" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q735026" start="1166" end="1173" title="Brian Houghton Hodgson" label="Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q31621" start="1273" end="1281" title="Coenraad Jacob Temminck" label="Temminck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142361" start="1347" end="1369" title="List of islands of Indonesia" label="Indonesian Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803" start="1378" end="1398" title="Lesser Sunda Islands" label="Lesser Sunda Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q245097" start="1491" end="1499" title="wingspan" label="wingspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262185" start="1677" end="1696" title="mountain hawk-eagle" label="mountain hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="1798" end="1802" title="cere" label="cere"/>
<link wikidata="Q116670" start="2471" end="2492" title="changeable hawk-eagle" label="changeable hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="2790" end="2794" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="2854" end="2862" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="2919" end="2935" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="2940" end="2959" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu &amp;amp; Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="2999" end="3012" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3027" end="3032" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="3037" end="3046" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="3091" end="3098" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="3664" end="3674" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q158087" start="3950" end="3960" title="Chittagong Division" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q459732" start="3965" end="3971" title="Sylhet Division" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="4037" end="4047" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="4506" end="4512" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="4567" end="4571" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q430540" start="4789" end="4808" title="swallow-tailed kite" label="swallow-tailed kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668978" start="5026" end="5047" title="Indian giant squirrel" label="Indian giant squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q520949" start="5099" end="5113" title="bonnet macaque" label="bonnet macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q972684" start="5450" end="5463" title="Lepcha people" label="Lepcha people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134759" start="5480" end="5499" title="Darjeeling district" label="Darjeeling district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915826" start="5554" end="5567" title="Soliga people" label="Soliga people"/>
<link wikidata="Q735026" start="6068" end="6081" title="Brian Houghton Hodgson" label="B. H. Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335271" start="6322" end="6328" title="Thomas C. Jerdon" label="Jerdon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578235" wikidata="Q3856916" url="?curid=578235" title="Mickey Mouse Adventures">
<text>Mickey Mouse Adventures is a Disney comic book first published by Disney Comics from 1990 to 1991. It featured Mickey Mouse as the main character along with other characters from the Mickey Mouse universe. Somewhat similar in style to the animated series &quot;DuckTales&quot;, it was based on the continuity of earlier print material starring Mickey, mainly Floyd Gottfredson&#x27;s stories in the &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; comic strip. 

These stories usually featured Mickey, with the help of longtime friends Goofy, Donald Duck, Pluto, Minnie Mouse, Horace Horsecollar, and Clarabelle Cow, having adventures in or out of Mouseton against adversaries such as The Phantom Blot, Big Bad Pete, Emil Eagle, and even newcomer villains like Wiley Wildbeest, Ms. Vixen, and Prince Penguin. The main feature was written by contemporary writers such as Michael T. Gilbert, Marv Wolfman, and others. The back-up features were reprints of classic Mickey Mouse comic stories. The comic ran for 18 issues from April 1990 to September 1991.

From August 2004 to October 2006, Gemstone Publishing published a smaller, digest-sized series of &quot;Mickey Mouse Adventures&quot;, alongside &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot;. The bi-monthly book was 128 pages and usually contained three or more longer stories that featured Mickey and various other Disney characters. The issue numbering of the original Disney Comics series was ignored, the digests being numbered issue 1 through 12 (issues 13 and 14 were announced, but cancelled).

&quot;Mickey Mouse Adventures&quot; was the only comic book that was originally published by Disney Comics that was published again by Gemstone but was never published by Gladstone.

==See also==
* Disney comics 
* Disney comics titles in the USA:
** &quot;Mickey Mouse Magazine&quot; (1935-1940)
** &quot;Walt Disney&#x27;s Comics and Stories&quot; (1940-present)
** &quot;Donald Duck&quot; (1942-2017)
** &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; (1943-2017)
** &quot;Uncle Scrooge&quot; (1952-present)
** &quot;Walt Disney Comics Digest&quot; (1968-1976)
** &quot;Uncle Scrooge Adventures&quot; (1987-1997)
** &quot;Mickey Mouse Adventures&quot; (1990-1991)
** &quot;Donald Duck Adventures&quot; (1988-1998)
** &quot;Walt Disney Giant&quot; (1995-1996)

==External links==
*Mickey Mouse Adventures on Disney Comics Worldwide (DCW)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q906229" start="29" end="46" title="Disney comics" label="Disney comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q742886" start="66" end="79" title="Disney Comics (publishing)" label="Disney Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="111" end="123" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="239" end="254" title="animated series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q214107" start="261" end="270" title="DuckTales (1987 TV series)" label="DuckTales"/>
<link wikidata="Q552422" start="359" end="376" title="Floyd Gottfredson" label="Floyd Gottfredson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976090" start="399" end="435" title="Mickey Mouse (comic strip)" label="&amp;quot;Mickey Mouse&amp;quot; comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q111135" start="512" end="517" title="Goofy" label="Goofy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="519" end="530" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q108732" start="532" end="537" title="Pluto (dog)" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11936" start="539" end="551" title="Minnie Mouse" label="Minnie Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051189" start="553" end="571" title="Horace Horsecollar" label="Horace Horsecollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q761417" start="577" end="591" title="Clarabelle Cow" label="Clarabelle Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260246" start="624" end="632" title="Mouseton" label="Mouseton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260246" start="661" end="677" title="The Phantom Blot" label="The Phantom Blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11947" start="679" end="691" title="Big Bad Pete" label="Big Bad Pete"/>
<link wikidata="Q42897" start="693" end="703" title="Emil Eagle" label="Emil Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834754" start="846" end="864" title="Michael T. Gilbert" label="Michael T. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333734" start="866" end="878" title="Marv Wolfman" label="Marv Wolfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q969695" start="938" end="964" title="Mickey Mouse (comics)" label="Mickey Mouse comic stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530765" start="1064" end="1083" title="Gemstone Publishing" label="Gemstone Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480302" start="1105" end="1117" title="digest size" label="digest-sized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276621" start="1181" end="1203" title="Donald Duck Adventures" label="Donald Duck Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="1335" end="1341" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q685270" start="1692" end="1701" title="Gladstone Publishing" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q906229" start="1719" end="1732" title="Disney comics" label="Disney comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q66111902" start="1778" end="1799" title="Mickey Mouse Magazine" label="Mickey Mouse Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710155" start="1827" end="1864" title="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Comics and Stories" label="Walt Disney&amp;#x27;s Comics and Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036011" start="1895" end="1906" title="Donald Duck (American comic book)" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q969695" start="1934" end="1946" title="Mickey Mouse (comic book)" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770842" start="1974" end="1987" title="Uncle Scrooge" label="Uncle Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056812" start="2018" end="2043" title="Walt Disney Comics Digest" label="Walt Disney Comics Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882807" start="2071" end="2095" title="Uncle Scrooge Adventures" label="Uncle Scrooge Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276621" start="2174" end="2196" title="Donald Duck Adventures" label="Donald Duck Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963935" start="2224" end="2241" title="Walt Disney Giant" label="Walt Disney Giant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578238" wikidata="Q3110750" url="?curid=578238" title="Goofy Adventures">
<text>Goofy Adventures is a comic book published by Disney Comics featuring Goofy as the main character. In this comic book Goofy appears in different parody type stories. This comic book lasted for 17 issues from April 1990 to August 1991, edited by David Seidman.

==List of issues==
# Balboa De Goofy, and Goofy Frankenstein Part 1
# Goofy Frankenstein Part 2, Goofy Peary at the North Pole, and Goof Brothers at Kitty Hawk
# Covered Wagons Ho and Alexander Goof
# The Great Goofidini
# Sir Goof and Knights of the Square Table, and First Goof on the Moon
# Super Goof and the Thief of Zanzipar
# Two Muskeeters Plus One
# Goofy Washington Our Nation&#x27;s Flounder, A Goofy Look at the Movies, and Star Goof
# The Name&#x27;s Goof James Goof
# Goofy Samurai, and A Goofy Look at Doors
# Goofis Khan
# Arizona Goof and the Lost Aztec Temple Part 1
# Arizona Goof and the Lost Aztec Temple Part 2
# Alexander Goof The Early Years
# Super Goof Versus the Cold Ray
# Sheerluck Goof and the Giggling Ghost of Notenny Moor, and The Goofy Wolfman
# Back in Time, and Tomb of Goofula

Even after the series was cancelled the Goofy stories occasionally appeared in &quot;Walt Disney&#x27;s Comics and Stories&quot;, &quot;Donald and Mickey&quot;, &quot;Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse&quot; and &quot;Walt Disney Giant&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="22" end="32" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q742886" start="46" end="59" title="Disney Comics (publishing)" label="Disney Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q111135" start="70" end="75" title="Goofy" label="Goofy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578243" wikidata="Q6151549" url="?curid=578243" title="Apocrine">
<text>Apocrine () is a term used to classify the mode of secretion of exocrine glands. In apocrine secretion, secretory cells accumulate material at their apical ends, often forming blebs or &quot;snouts&quot;, and this material then buds off from the cells, forming extracellular vesicles. The secretory cells therefore lose part of their cytoplasm in the process of secretion.

An example of true apocrine glands is the mammary glands, responsible for secreting breast milk. Apocrine glands are also found in the anogenital region and axillae.

Apocrine secretion is less damaging to the gland than holocrine secretion (which destroys a cell) but more damaging than merocrine secretion (exocytosis).
==Apocrine metaplasia==

Apocrine metaplasia is a reversible transformation (metaplasia) of cells to an apocrine phenotype. It is common in the breast in the context of fibrocystic change. It is seen in women mostly over the age of 50 years. Metaplasia happens when there is an irritation to the breast (breast cyst). Apocrine-like cells form in a lining of developing microcysts, due to the pressure buildup within the lumen. The pressure build up is caused by secretions. This type of metaplasia represents an exception to the common rule of metaplasia increasing the risk for developing cancer in that apocrine metaplasia doesn&#x27;t increase the possibility of developing breast cancer. Metaplastic apocrine cells belong to the category of oncocytes, which are a group characterized by abundant acidophilic, granular cytoplasm (from the Greek root onco-, which means mass, bulk).

==Apocrine ductal carcinoma &quot;in situ&quot;==

Apocrine ductal carcinoma &quot;in situ&quot; (ACDIS) is a very rare breast carcinoma which is regarded as a variant of the ductal carcinoma in situ breast tumors. ACDIS tumors have microscopic histopathology features that are similar to pure apocrine carcinoma of the breast tumors but differ from them in that they are completely localized, i.e. have not invaded nearby tissues or metastasized to distant tissues.

==Apocrine carcinoma==

&quot;Apocrine carcinoma&quot; is a very rare form of female breast cancer. The rate of incidence varies from 0.5 to 4%. Cytologically, the cells of apocrine carcinoma are relatively large, granular, and it has a prominent eosinophilic cytoplasm. When apocrine carcinoma is tested as a “triple negative&quot;, it means that the cells of the patient cannot express the estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, or HER2 receptor.

==References==
==External links==
* Diagram at uwa.edu.au</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6151549" start="0" end="8" title="Apocrine" label="Apocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q84230" start="51" end="60" title="secretion" label="secretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q754845" start="64" end="79" title="exocrine glands" label="exocrine glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="149" end="155" title="apical (anatomy)" label="apical"/>
<link wikidata="Q104767305" start="176" end="181" title="Bleb (cell biology)" label="blebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q845312" start="228" end="236" title="Budding" label="buds off"/>
<link wikidata="Q189206" start="275" end="282" title="vesicle (biology and chemistry)" label="vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="334" end="343" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189961" start="416" end="429" title="mammary gland" label="mammary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q499" start="531" end="537" title="axilla" label="axilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q323426" start="683" end="693" title="exocytosis" label="exocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q660713" start="773" end="783" title="metaplasia" label="metaplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="809" end="818" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423177" start="865" end="883" title="fibrocystic breast changes" label="fibrocystic change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240055" start="1441" end="1450" title="oncocytes" label="oncocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q196188" start="1496" end="1507" title="acidophilic" label="acidophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q337585" start="1757" end="1781" title="ductal carcinoma in situ" label="ductal carcinoma in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070952" start="1827" end="1841" title="histopathology" label="histopathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q113635350" start="1871" end="1908" title="pure apocrine carcinoma of the breast" label="pure apocrine carcinoma of the breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q33525" start="2089" end="2098" title="carcinoma" label="carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106364" start="2297" end="2309" title="eosinophilic" label="eosinophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843332" start="2360" end="2382" title="Triple-negative breast cancer" label="“triple negative&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q416496" start="2442" end="2459" title="estrogen receptor" label="estrogen receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872994" start="2461" end="2482" title="progesterone receptor" label="progesterone receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q415271" start="2487" end="2491" title="HER2" label="HER2"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578248" wikidata="Q340775" url="?curid=578248" title="Whitehead">
<text>Whitehead may refer to:

* Whitehead (comedo), a blocked sweat/sebaceous duct of the skin
* Whitehead (bird), a small species of passerine bird, endemic to New Zealand
* Whitehead building, heritage listed residence of the principal of the University of Adelaide&#x27;s Lincoln College
* Whitehead (patience), a patience game related to Klondike
* Whitehead (surname)
* Whitehead &amp; Co., a former torpedo company founded by Robert Whitehead in 1875
* Whitehead SpA, one of the names of the later torpedo factory in Livorno
* Whiteheads, another name for the wheat disease take-all
* USS &quot;Whitehead&quot; (1861–1865), American Civil War, 136-ton screw steam gunboat

==Places==
* Canada:
** The Rural Municipality of Whitehead, Manitoba
** Whitehead, Nova Scotia, on Tor Bay
* Hong Kong
** Whitehead, Hong Kong, a cape at Wu Kai Sha
* Northern Ireland
** Whitehead, County Antrim, a small town in Northern Ireland
* United States:
** Cape Whitehead, Cumberland County, Maine 43.3844N 70.1131W
** Lake Whitehead reservoir, Napa County, California 38.3529N 122.2755W 
** Whitehead, Alabama, Lauderdale County, Alabama 34.5317N 87.1938W 
** Whitehead, Mississippi (Tallahatchie County) 33.5055N 90.1755W 
** Whitehead Township, Alleghany County, North Carolina 36.2802N 81.0910W
** Whitehead, Tennessee, Marshall County, Tennessee 35.2848N 86.4719W 
** Whitehead, Texas, Hunt County, Texas 32.5205N 96.1536W 
** Whitehead Island, Knox County, Maine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q340775" start="0" end="9" title="Whitehead" label="Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146379" start="27" end="45" title="Whitehead (comedo)" label="Whitehead (comedo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q860177" start="92" end="108" title="Whitehead (bird)" label="Whitehead (bird)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550557" start="170" end="188" title="Whitehead building" label="Whitehead building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191033" start="288" end="308" title="Whitehead (patience)" label="Whitehead (patience)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709639" start="348" end="367" title="Whitehead (surname)" label="Whitehead (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031339" start="370" end="389" title="Whitehead &amp;amp; Co." label="Whitehead &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q782037" start="454" end="467" title="Whitehead SpA" label="Whitehead SpA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7583798" start="575" end="583" title="take-all" label="take-all"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875488" start="586" end="611" title="USS Whitehead" label="USS &amp;quot;Whitehead&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661941" start="702" end="733" title="Rural Municipality of Whitehead" label="Rural Municipality of Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996025" start="747" end="769" title="Whitehead, Nova Scotia" label="Whitehead, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="797" end="817" title="Whitehead, Hong Kong" label="Whitehead, Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q185113" start="821" end="825" title="cape (geography)" label="cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408377" start="829" end="839" title="Wu Kai Sha" label="Wu Kai Sha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233469" start="862" end="886" title="Whitehead, County Antrim" label="Whitehead, County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="941" end="955" title="Cape Whitehead" label="Cape Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q497788" start="957" end="981" title="Cumberland County, Maine" label="Cumberland County, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1003" end="1017" title="Lake Whitehead" label="Lake Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q108137" start="1029" end="1052" title="Napa County, California" label="Napa County, California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1076" end="1094" title="Whitehead, Alabama" label="Whitehead, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q261672" start="1096" end="1122" title="Lauderdale County, Alabama" label="Lauderdale County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q14693476" start="1145" end="1167" title="Whitehead, Mississippi" label="Whitehead, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399176" start="1212" end="1264" title="Whitehead Township, Alleghany County, North Carolina" label="Whitehead Township, Alleghany County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1286" end="1306" title="Whitehead, Tennessee" label="Whitehead, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q495448" start="1308" end="1334" title="Marshall County, Tennessee" label="Marshall County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1357" end="1373" title="Whitehead, Texas" label="Whitehead, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q111729" start="1375" end="1393" title="Hunt County, Texas" label="Hunt County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996029" start="1416" end="1432" title="Whitehead Island" label="Whitehead Island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578251" wikidata="Q199923" url="?curid=578251" title="Dione (Titaness)">
<text>In ancient Greek religion and Greek mythology, Dione (; ) is an oracular goddess, a Titaness primarily known from Book V of Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;, where she tends to the wounds suffered by her daughter Aphrodite. Dione is presented as either an Oceanid, daughter of Oceanus and Tethys, or the thirteenth Titan, daughter of Gaia and Uranus.

== Name ==
Dione (Διώνη &quot;Diṓnē&quot;, from earlier *Διϝωνᾱ &quot;Diwōnā&quot;) is essentially the feminine of the genitive form of Greek Ζεύς &quot;Zeús&quot;, that is, Διός &quot;Diós&quot; (from earlier Διϝός &quot;Diwós&quot;), &quot;of Zeus&quot;. Other goddesses were called by this name (see the Dione (mythology) article for more). 

Due to being a daughter of Dione by some traditions, Aphrodite was sometimes called &quot;Dionaea&quot; (Διωναίη &quot;Diōnaíē&quot;) and even &quot;Dione&quot;.

Following the deciphering of Linear B by Ventris and Chadwick in the 1950s, a goddess named &quot;Di-u-ja&quot; was found in the tablets. This was considered to be a female counterpart of Zeus and identified with Dione by some scholars.

==Worship==


By the time of Strabo (the first century BC), Dione was worshiped at a sacred grove near Lepreon on the west coast of the Peloponnesus. She was also worshiped as a consort at the temples of Zeus, particularly his oracle at Dodona (perhaps the original, Indo-European consort of Zeus). Herodotus called this the oldest oracle in Greece and recorded two related accounts of its founding: the priests at Thebes in Egypt told him that two priestesses had been taken by Phoenician pirates, one to Libya and the other to Dodona and continued their earlier rites; the priestesses of Dodona claimed that two black doves had flown to Libya and Dodona and commanded the creation of oracles to Zeus. Homer and Herodotus both make Zeus the principal deity of the site, but some scholars propose Dodona originally served as a cult center of an earth goddess.

In the 2nd-century BC sculptural frieze of the Great Altar of Pergamum, Dione is inscribed in the cornice directly above her name and figures in the eastern third of the north frieze, among the Olympian family of Aphrodite. This placement—making her the offspring of Gaia and Uranus—is Homeric and contradicts the theory put forth by Erika Simon that the altar&#x27;s organization was Hesiodic. Dione&#x27;s possible appearance in the east pediment of the Parthenon would likewise place her among the children of Gaia and Uranus.

==Literary sources==
The mythology concerning Dione is not consistent across the existing sources.

===Homer===
In Book V of the &quot;Iliad&quot;, during the last year of the Trojan War, Aphrodite attempts to save her son Aeneas from the rampaging Greek hero Diomedes as she had previously saved her favorite Paris from his duel with Menelaus in Book III. Enraged, Diomedes chases her and drives his spear into her hand between the wrist and palm. Escorted by Iris to Ares, she borrows his horses and returns to Olympus. Dione consoles her with other examples of gods wounded by mortals — Ares bound by the Aloadae and Hera and Hades shot by Heracles — and notes that Diomedes is risking his life by fighting against the gods.

In fact, Diomedes subsequently fought both Apollo and Ares but lived to an old age; his wife Aegialia, however, took other lovers and never permitted him to return home to Argos after the war.

Dione then heals her wounds and Zeus, while admonishing her to leave the battlefield, calls her daughter.

===Hesiod===
Dione is not mentioned in Hesiod&#x27;s treatment of the Titans, although the name does appear in the &quot;Theogony&quot; among his list of Oceanids, the daughters of Oceanus and Tethys, and according to Hesiod, Aphrodite was born from the foam created by the severed genitals of Uranus, when they were thrown into the sea by Cronus, after he castrated Uranus.

===Apollodorus===
The mythographer Apollodorus (first or second century AD) includes Dione among the Titans and makes her the child of Gaia and Uranus. He makes her the mother of Aphrodite by Zeus but clearly describes Dione as one of the god&#x27;s adulterous partners and not his wife.

===Hyginus===
The Genealogy or Preface of Gaius Julius Hyginus&#x27;s &quot;Fabulae&quot;, lists Dione among the children of Terra (Earth) and Aether.

===Hesychius===
The 5th-century grammarian Hesychius of Alexandria described Dione as the mother of Bacchus in her entry from his &quot;Alphabetical Collection of All Words&quot;. This is separately supported by one of the scholiasts on Pindar.

==See also==
* &quot;Dyeus&quot;, the reconstructed sky deity of the Proto-Indo-European pantheon and etymological origin of Zeus and Dione.

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hesiod, &quot;Theogony&quot;, in &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;, Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Evelyn-White, Hugh, &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;. Homeric Hymns. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.
* Euripides, &quot;The Complete Greek Drama&#x27;, edited by Whitney J. Oates and Eugene O&#x27;Neill, Jr. in two volumes. 2&quot;. &quot;Helen&quot;, translated by E. P. Coleridge. New York. Random House. 1938.
* Strabo, &quot;The Geography of Strabo.&quot; Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Apollodorus, &quot;Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, &quot;The Myths of Hyginus&quot;. Edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960.

== External links ==

* DIONE from the Theoi Project
* DIONE from greekmythology.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="3" end="25" title="ancient Greek religion" label="ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="30" end="45" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q199923" start="47" end="52" title="Dione (Titaness)" label="Dione"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="73" end="80" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="84" end="92" title="Titan (mythology)" label="Titaness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="124" end="129" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="143" end="148" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="211" end="220" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q182406" start="254" end="261" title="Oceanid" label="Oceanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="275" end="282" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184216" start="287" end="293" title="Tethys (mythology)" label="Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="332" end="336" title="Gaia" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="341" end="347" title="Uranus (mythology)" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="486" end="491" title="ancient Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="503" end="507" title="Zeus" label="Zeús"/>
<link wikidata="Q16697870" start="657" end="674" title="Dione (mythology)" label="Dione (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="888" end="896" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q259378" start="900" end="907" title="Michael Ventris" label="Ventris"/>
<link wikidata="Q51515" start="912" end="920" title="John Chadwick" label="Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="1126" end="1132" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q811600" start="1182" end="1194" title="sacred grove" label="sacred grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5860679" start="1200" end="1207" title="Lepreum" label="Lepreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="1233" end="1245" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q382317" start="1334" end="1340" title="Dodona" label="Dodona"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1389" end="1393" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="1396" end="1405" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="1512" end="1518" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1576" end="1585" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="1603" end="1608" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q18700062" start="1942" end="1955" title="earth goddess" label="earth goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q158058" start="2005" end="2028" title="Pergamon Altar" label="Great Altar of Pergamum"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="2225" end="2229" title="Gaia (mythology)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="2234" end="2240" title="Uranus (god)" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78029" start="2292" end="2303" title="Erika Simon" label="Erika Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753726" start="2398" end="2423" title="Pediments of the Parthenon" label="pediment of the Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2624" end="2629" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="2665" end="2675" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="2677" end="2686" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="2712" end="2718" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="2744" end="2748" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="2749" end="2757" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="2799" end="2804" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="2824" end="2832" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184570" start="2950" end="2954" title="Iris (mythology)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="2958" end="2962" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="3002" end="3009" title="Mount Olympus" label="Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q909765" start="3097" end="3104" title="Aloadae" label="Aloadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="3109" end="3113" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="3118" end="3123" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="3132" end="3140" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41311" start="3311" end="3319" title="Aegiale (wife of Diomedes)" label="Aegialia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="3390" end="3395" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="3558" end="3564" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="3589" end="3595" title="Titan (mythology)" label="Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="3640" end="3648" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q182406" start="3673" end="3680" title="Oceanid" label="Oceanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="3700" end="3707" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184216" start="3712" end="3718" title="Tethys (mythology)" label="Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="3813" end="3819" title="Uranus (mythology)" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="3859" end="3865" title="Cronus" label="Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="3930" end="3941" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="4030" end="4034" title="Gaia (mythology)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="4039" end="4045" title="Uranus (god)" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="4226" end="4246" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Gaius Julius Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="4260" end="4267" title="Fabulae" label="Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q270867" start="4309" end="4314" title="Terra (mythology)" label="Terra"/>
<link wikidata="Q189175" start="4327" end="4333" title="Aether (mythology)" label="Aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q443510" start="4379" end="4402" title="Hesychius of Alexandria" label="Hesychius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="4436" end="4443" title="Bacchus" label="Bacchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q443510" start="4472" end="4508" title="Alphabetical Collection of All Words" label="Alphabetical Collection of All Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="4559" end="4568" title="scholiast" label="scholiast"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="4573" end="4579" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q796807" start="4603" end="4608" title="Dyeus" label="Dyeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401124" start="4651" end="4679" title="Proto-Indo-European mythology" label="Proto-Indo-European pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="4707" end="4711" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="4777" end="4782" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="4999" end="5005" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="5013" end="5021" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="5478" end="5487" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248812" start="5614" end="5619" title="Helen (play)" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="5690" end="5696" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="5889" end="5900" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="6152" end="6173" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus, Gaius Julius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578255" wikidata="Q5282381" url="?curid=578255" title="Disney's Comics in 3-D">
<text>Disney&#x27;s Comics in 3-D was a two-part comic book series published by Disney Comics in 1992.

Unlike most comic books, the stories are drawn in 3-D stereo. The first issue had Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, Uncle Scrooge, and Duck Tales, and the second issue had all Roger Rabbit stories.

==List of stories==

===Issue 1===
*Donald Duck in &quot;Knights of the Flying Sleds&quot; by Carl Barks (Reprinted from Walt Disney&#x27;s Comics and Stories #223)
*Duck Tales in &quot;The Billion Bean Stampede&quot; by William Van Horn (Reprinted from Duck Tales #13 &quot;The Gladstone Series&quot;)
*Mickey Mouse center spread by Floyd Gottfredson (Reprinted from King Features Syndicate on April 30, 1933)
*Uncle Scrooge in &quot;The Curse of Nostrildamus&quot; by Don Rosa (Reprinted from Uncle Scrooge #235)
*Donald Duck in &quot;Rocket Wing Saves the Day&quot; by Carl Barks (Reprinted from Walt Disney&#x27;s Comics and Stories #139)

===Issue 2===
*Roger Rabbit in &quot;Gym Dandy&quot; (Reprinted from Roger Rabbit #2)
*Roger Rabbit in &quot;The Candy Cane Mutiny&quot; (Reprinted from Roger Rabbit #6)
*Roger Rabbit in &quot;Movin to the Music&quot; (Reprinted from Roger Rabbit #11)
*Roger Rabbit in &quot;Cotton Tailspin&quot; (Reprinted from Roger Rabbit #4)

3-D comics were later used for issues of Disney Adventures Magazine which were used in the early to mid-1990s.

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q742886" start="74" end="87" title="Disney Comics (publishing)" label="Disney Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="148" end="158" title="Stereoscopy" label="3-D stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="180" end="192" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="194" end="205" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770842" start="207" end="220" title="Uncle Scrooge" label="Uncle Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="226" end="236" title="DuckTales (1987 TV series)#DuckTales" label="Duck Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265878" start="267" end="279" title="Roger Rabbit" label="Roger Rabbit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578256" wikidata="Q89959" url="?curid=578256" title="French Community of Belgium">
<text>In Belgium, the French Community (, , CFB) refers to one of the three constituent constitutional linguistic communities. Since 2011, the French Community has used the name Wallonia-Brussels Federation (, , FWB), which is controversial because its name in the Belgian Constitution has not changed and because it is seen as a political statement. The name &quot;French Community&quot; refers to Francophone Belgians, and &quot;not&quot; to French people residing in Belgium. As such, the French Community of Belgium is sometimes rendered in English as &quot;the French-speaking Community of Belgium&quot; for clarity, in analogy to the German-speaking Community of Belgium.

The Community has its own parliament, government, and administration. Its official flag is identical to the Walloon flag, which is also the official flag of the Walloons of Wallonia.

Historically, this community spoke variants of Walloon, Dutch, Picard, Luxembourgish or Moselle Franconian German, but nowadays, the dominant language is overwhelmingly Belgian French, except for some areas alongside the border to the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg (mainly the district called Land of Arlon or Arelerland), where Luxembourgish is still widely spoken.

==Description==
The French Community of Belgium includes 4.5 million people, of whom:
* 3.6 million live in the Walloon Region (that is almost the entirety of the inhabitants of this region, apart from people who live in the German-speaking communes, who number around 70,000);
* 900,000 living in the Brussels Capital Region (out of 1.2 million inhabitants).

French speakers who live in the Flemish Region are not included in the official numbers for the French-speaking Community, since the French Community has no jurisdiction in that region. Their number is unknown, given the absence of sub-nationality status and the discouragement of linguistic criteria in census-taking. Estimates of the French-speaking population of Flanders vary from 120,000, around 200,000, to around 300,000.

The French Community of Belgium makes up about 40% of the total population of Belgium; 60% of the population belongs to the Flemish Community, and 1% to the German-speaking Community.

==Alternative name==
For years there have been hints that the Community wanted to better demonstrate the link between Wallonia and Brussels, the two main territories where the French speakers are in the majority. These include the creation of several organisations such as &quot;Wallonie-Bruxelles International&quot;, a public body in charge of international cultural affairs set up jointly by the French Community, the Walloon Region and the Commission communautaire française (COCOF, a French-speaking institution of the Brussels-Capital Region). The concept of &quot;&quot;Wallonie-Bruxelles&quot; is however not mentioned in the Belgian constitution, and appeared only in a few official legal texts, such as the &quot;Arrêté du Gouvernement de la Communauté française fixant le code de qualité et de l&#x27;accueil&quot; of 17 December 2003, mentioning the name &quot;Communauté Wallonie-Bruxelles&quot;, and the &quot;Arrêté du Gouvernement de la Communauté française approuvant le programme quinquennal de promotion de la santé 2004–2008&quot; of 30 April 2004, mentioning the name &quot;Communauté française Wallonie-Bruxelles&quot;&quot;.

In May 2011, the parliament of the Community voted a resolution according to which it would, from then on, use the name &quot;Wallonia-Brussels Federation&quot; (French: &quot;Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles&quot;) for all its communications, campaigns and in the administration. The move was immediately interpreted as aggressive by the Flemish authorities, the Minister-President of Flanders announcing he would not recognize the federation as an official body and saying that documents that would be sent by the federation would be unconstitutional and therefore would not exist.
That name also obscures the fact that this institution does not represent the Flemings living in Brussels, nor their local Flemish Community Commission (&#x27;Vlaamse Gemeenschapscommissie&#x27;, or VGC) nor the Brussels-Capital Region. 
While the authorities of the Community acknowledge the fact that the new name is not mentioned in the Belgian Constitution, they insist that their move is not illegal, as long as the new name is used as an additional name for the Community and is not used when it could create a legal issue (such as with the official texts published in the Belgian Official Journal).

Although the then Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme said that the federal government would not use the new name and the Flemish VRT decided not to use the new name in its news programs either, it is used by the French-speaking media, including the RTBF public network, which is fully controlled by the Community. The independent/private media uses both the alternative and the original designation.

In September 2011, the Community adopted a new logo that incorporates its new name.

==Politics and government==

The French Community of Belgium is governed by the Parliament of the French Community, which selects the executive branch, the Government of the French Community.

===Parliament===
The Parliament of the French Community ( or PCF) is the legislative assembly of the French Community of Belgium based in the . It consists of all 75 members of the Walloon Parliament except German-speaking members (currently two) who are substituted by French-speaking members from the same party, and 19 members elected by the French linguistic group of the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region within the former body. These members are elected for a term of five years.

The current president of the Parliament of the French Community is (LE).

====Current composition (2024–2029)====

&quot;Note: Government coalition parties are denoted with bullets (•)&quot;

===Executive===
The Cabinet of the French Community of Belgium () is the executive branch of the French Community, and it too sits in Brussels. It consists of a number of ministers chosen by the parliament and is headed by a Minister-President.

===List of minister-presidents of the French Community===
==Religion==
In 2016, 63% of residents of Brussels and Wallonia declared themselves Catholics, 15% were practising Catholics and 30% were non-practising Catholics, 4% were Muslim, 2% were Protestant, 2% were of another religion and 26% were non-religious.

==See also==
* Brussels-Capital Region
* &quot;Commission communautaire française (COCOF)&quot;
* Communities and regions of Belgium
* Wallonia

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Notes===
==External links==
* Parliament of the French Community of Belgium, official website (some information available in English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="16" end="32" title="French Community of Belgium" label="French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="38" end="41" title="French Community of Belgium" label="CFB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70" end="119" title="Communities and regions of Belgium#Communities" label="constituent constitutional linguistic communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="172" end="200" title="French Community of Belgium" label="Wallonia-Brussels Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q89959" start="206" end="209" title="French Community of Belgium" label="FWB"/>
<link wikidata="Q633629" start="259" end="279" title="Constitution of Belgium" label="Belgian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="393" end="404" title="Francophone" label="Francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377716" start="405" end="413" title="Belgians" label="Belgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="438" end="451" title="French people" label="French people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="539" end="546" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q90027" start="634" end="670" title="German-speaking Community of Belgium" label="German-speaking Community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477569" start="699" end="709" title="Parliament of the French Community" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944068" start="711" end="721" title="Government of the French Community" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q617649" start="781" end="793" title="Flag of Wallonia" label="Walloon flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q381151" start="834" end="842" title="Walloons" label="Walloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="846" end="854" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205317" start="857" end="869" title="History of Belgium" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q34219" start="904" end="911" title="Walloon language" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="913" end="918" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34024" start="920" end="926" title="Picard language" label="Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="928" end="941" title="Luxembourgish language" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q503906" start="945" end="970" title="Moselle Franconian" label="Moselle Franconian German"/>
<link wikidata="Q815549" start="1026" end="1040" title="Belgian French" label="Belgian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="1092" end="1117" title="Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg" label="Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q778118" start="1163" end="1173" title="Arelerland" label="Arelerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="1333" end="1347" title="Wallonia" label="Walloon Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1523" end="1546" title="Brussels" label="Brussels Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="2136" end="2153" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q90027" start="2169" end="2194" title="German-speaking Community of Belgium" label="German-speaking Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="2315" end="2323" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="2328" end="2336" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="2618" end="2632" title="Walloon Region" label="Walloon Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150083" start="2641" end="2675" title="Commission communautaire française" label="Commission communautaire française"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="2721" end="2744" title="Brussels-Capital Region" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q633629" start="2831" end="2851" title="Belgian constitution" label="Belgian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q815545" start="4506" end="4530" title="Belgian Official Journal" label="Belgian Official Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213107" start="4552" end="4574" title="Belgian Prime Minister" label="Belgian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981" start="4575" end="4587" title="Yves Leterme" label="Yves Leterme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858" start="4664" end="4667" title="Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroeporganisatie" label="VRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190356" start="4784" end="4788" title="RTBF" label="RTBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477569" start="5101" end="5135" title="Parliament of the French Community" label="Parliament of the French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944068" start="5177" end="5211" title="Government of the French Community" label="Government of the French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477569" start="5235" end="5269" title="Parliament of the French Community" label="Parliament of the French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449493" start="5395" end="5413" title="Walloon Parliament" label="Walloon Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q435623" start="5590" end="5631" title="Brussels Parliament" label="Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q840814" start="5777" end="5779" title="Les Engagés" label="LE"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6035" end="6043" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311422" start="6126" end="6144" title="Minister-President of the French Community" label="Minister-President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6289" end="6298" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="6377" end="6383" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6393" end="6403" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6477" end="6500" title="Brussels-Capital Region" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150083" start="6509" end="6551" title="Commission communautaire française" label="Commission communautaire française (COCOF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q838185" start="6560" end="6594" title="Communities and regions of Belgium" label="Communities and regions of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="6597" end="6605" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578271" wikidata="Q653542" url="?curid=578271" title="Audio description">
<text>Audio description (AD), also referred to as a video description, described video, or visual description, is a form of narration used to provide information surrounding key visual elements in a media work (such as a film or television program, or theatrical performance) for the benefit of blind and visually impaired consumers. These narrations are typically placed during natural pauses in the audio, and sometimes overlap dialogue if deemed necessary. Occasionally when a film briefly has subtitled dialogue in a different language, such as Greedo&#x27;s confrontation with Han Solo in the 1977 film &quot;Star Wars: A New Hope&quot;, the narrator will read out the dialogue in character.

In museums or visual art exhibitions, audio described tours (or universally designed tours that include description or the augmentation of existing recorded programs on audio- or videotape), are used to provide access to visitors who are blind or have low vision. Docents or tour guides can be trained to employ audio description in their presentations.

In film and television, description is typically delivered via a secondary audio track. In North America, Second audio program (SAP) is typically used to deliver audio description by television broadcasters. To promote accessibility, some countries (such as Canada and the United States) have implemented requirements for broadcasters to air specific quotas of programming containing audio description.

==History==

The transition to &quot;talkies&quot; in the late 1920s resulted in a push to make the cinema accessible to the visually impaired. &quot;The New York Times&quot; documented the &quot;first talking picture ever shown especially for the blind&quot;—a 1929 screening of &quot;Bulldog Drummond&quot; attended by members of the New York Association for the Blind and New York League for the Hard of Hearing, which offered a live description for the visually-impaired portion of the audience. In the 1940s and 1950s, Radio Nacional de España aired live audio simulcasts of films from cinemas with descriptions, framing these as a form of radio drama before the advent of television.

In the 1980s, the Media Access Group of U.S. public television station WGBH-TV (which had already gained notability for their involvement in developing closed captioning) developed an implementation of audio description for television programming via second audio program (SAP), which it branded as &quot;Descriptive Video Service&quot; (DVS). It was developed in consultation with Dr. Margaret Pfanstiehl of Washington, D.C., who had performed descriptions at theatrical performances and had run a radio reading service known as the Washington Ear. After four years of development and on-air trials (which included a proof of concept that aired the descriptions on a radio station in simulcast with the television airing), WGBH officially launched audio description via 32 participating PBS member stations, beginning with the new season of &quot;American Playhouse&quot; on January 24, 1990.

In the 1990s at cinemas in California, RP International began to offer audio descriptions for theatrical films under the brand &quot;TheatreVision&quot;, relayed via earpieces to those who request it. A clip from &quot;Schindler&#x27;s List&quot; was used to pitch the concept to the film&#x27;s producers Gerald Molen and Branko Lustig, and one of the first films to be presented in this format was &quot;Forrest Gump&quot; (1994). TheatreVision sought notable personalities and celebrities to volunteer in providing these narrations, such as sportscaster Vin Scully, William Shatner, Monty Hall, and former U.S. president George H. W. Bush (for &quot;It&#x27;s a Wonderful Life&quot;). Sometimes the narrator had ties to the film or was part of its cast; Irene Bedard described &quot;Pocahontas&quot;—a film where she had voiced the title character, and for the 1994 remake of &quot;Little Women&quot;, stars from previous versions of the film volunteered, including June Allyson, Margaret O&#x27;Brien, and Janet Leigh (whose grandmother was blind) from the 1949 version of the film, as well as Katharine Hepburn—star of the 1933 version. Other companies emerged in providing descriptions for programming in the U.S., including the National Captioning Institute, Narrative Television Network, and others.

In the UK Audio Description services were made available on the BBC and ITV after a collaborative project with industry partners. In 2000, the BBC voluntarily committed to providing descriptions for at least 20% of its programming annually. In practice, the BBC has often exceeded these targets. In 2009, BBC iPlayer became the first streaming video on-demand service in the world to support AD where every programme that was broadcast with AD also had AD on BBC iPlayer. On January 29, 2009, The Accessible Channel was launched in Canada, which broadcasts &quot;open&quot; audio descriptions on all programming via the primary audio track. Audio description has also been extended to live events, including sporting events, the ceremonies of the Olympic and Paralympic Games, and the royal wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton, among others.

In April 2015, the subscription streaming service Netflix announced that it had added support for audio description, beginning with &quot;Daredevil&quot;—a series based on a comic book character who himself is blind, and would add descriptions to current and past original series on the platform over time. The following year, as part of a settlement with the American Council of the Blind, Netflix agreed to provide descriptions for its original series within 30 days of their premiere, and add screen reader support and the ability to browse content by availability of descriptions.

On June 17, 2016, Pornhub announced that it would launch a collection of pornographic videos with audio descriptions. The initiative is sponsored by the website&#x27;s philanthropic arm Pornhub Cares.

In the late-2010s, Procter &amp; Gamble began to add descriptions to some of its television commercials, first in the United Kingdom, and later Spain and the United States.

== Legal mandates in television broadcasting ==
=== Canada ===
Under Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) rules, broadcast television stations and former Category A services that dedicated more than half of their programming to comedy, drama, or long-form documentary programs, were required to broadcast at least four hours of programming with audio descriptions (known in Canadian English as described video) per-week, with two hours of this &quot;original&quot; to the channel per-week. These programs must have been drawn from children&#x27;s, comedy, drama, long-form documentaries, general entertainment and human interest, reality, or variety genres. Broadcasters must also promote the availability of DV programming, including airing a standard audiovisual bumper and logo at the beginning of all programs offering description (the CRTC officially recommends that this announcement be repeated after the conclusion of each commercial break, but this is not typically practiced). All television providers are also required to carry AMI-tv (formerly The Accessible Channel), a specialty channel that broadcasts all programming with descriptions on the primary audio track.

On March 26, 2015, the CRTC announced that beginning September 1, 2019, most broadcast and specialty networks owned by vertically integrated conglomerates, as well as any channel previously subject to license conditions specifying minimums for DV, are required to supply described video for any prime-time programming (7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.) that falls within the aforementioned genres. The requirement that a quota of DV programming be &quot;original&quot; to the network was also dropped. Citing the possibility that not enough imported U.S. programming may be supplied with descriptions for their first airing, and the burden this may place on their ability to carry these programs, the CRTC granted an exception to Bell Media, Corus Entertainment, and Rogers Media, along with minor companies DHX Media, CBC, Blue Ant Media, V, and TVA Group, for foreign programming that is received within 24 hours of its scheduled airing—provided that any future airings of the same program in prime-time contain descriptions. In addition, other licensed discretionary services would be expected to air at least four hours of DV programming per-week by the fourth year of their next license term.

=== United Kingdom ===
The Ofcom code on television access services requires broadcasters that have been on the air for at least five years to broadcast at least 10% of their programming with descriptions. Scrutiny has applied even to ESPN UK—a sports channel—which was fined £120,000 by Ofcom for not meeting an AD quota in 2012. The regulator rejected an argument by ESPN that AD was redundant to commentary, as it is &quot;not provided with the needs of the visually impaired in mind&quot;.

=== United States ===
Initially, audio description was provided as a public service. However, in 2000, the Federal Communications Commission would enact a policy effective April 1, 2002, requiring the affiliates of the four major television networks in the top 25 markets, and television providers with more than 50,000 subscribers via the top 5 cable networks as determined by Nielsen ratings, to offer 50 hours of programming with descriptions during primetime or children&#x27;s programming per-quarter. However, the order faced a court challenge led by the MPAA, who questioned the FCC&#x27;s jurisdiction on the matter. In November 2002, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that the FCC had no statutory jurisdiction to enforce such a rule.

This was rectified in 2010 with the passing of the Twenty-First Century Communications and Video Accessibility Act, which gave the FCC jurisdiction to enforce video description requirements. The previously intended quotas were reinstated on July 1, 2012, and have been gradually increased to require more programming and wider participation since their implementation.

==Operation==
Broadcast audio description is typically delivered via an alternate audio track, either as a separate language track containing the narration only (which, if the playback device is capable of doing so, is mixed with the primary audio track automatically, and can have separate volume settings), or on a secondary audio track pre-mixed with the primary track, such as a secondary audio program (SAP).

Many video on demand (VOD) and streaming platforms host separate assets for the audio-described media, with the soundtrack pre-mixed. Despite AD typically being presented as something that can be enabled (as with subtitles), users can encounter problems when trying to turn AD on or off because the underlying media version they require is unavailable.

In movie theaters, audio description can be heard using DVS Theatrical and similar systems (including DTS-CSS and Dolby Screentalk). Users listen to the description on a wireless headset. Audio description is stored in the Digital Cinema Package as &quot;Visually Impaired-Native&quot; (VI-N) audio on Sound Track channel 8.
In live theaters, patrons also receive the description via a wireless device, a discreet monaural receiver. However, the description is provided live by describers located in a booth acoustically insulated from the audience, but from where they have a good view of the performance. They make their description which is fed to a small radio transmitter.

==Audio description in football stadiums==
In 2006, on the occasion of the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany, a project was launched with the aim of making the live commentary of a match available to blind and visually impaired football fans in the stadium. The project was very well-received and had great success. In 2008, audio description in football was also adopted in Switzerland. The radio of FC Basel 1893 was the first club in Switzerland to take up this topic. First, FC Basel installed an antenna in St. Jakob Park, which was used to broadcast the radio&#x27;s live commentary. The visually impaired and blind fans could then listen to the commentary via a VHF frequency. More and more clubs in the Swiss Super League adopted this concept and today the matches can be heard via audio description in every stadium in Switzerland. At St. Jakob-Park in Basel, even without delay via the Internet. In the meantime, the outdated technology of FM transmission has been abolished. Today, the games are broadcast via cell phone apps. In Germany, almost every stadium is also equipped with this technology.

==Descriptive Video Service==
The Descriptive Video Service (DVS) is a major United States producer of audio description. &quot;DVS&quot; often is used to describe the product itself.

In 1985, PBS member television station WGBH-TV in Boston, Massachusetts, began investigating uses for the new technology of stereophonic television broadcasting, particularly multichannel television sound (MTS), which allowed for a third audio channel, called the &quot;Secondary Audio Program&quot; (&quot;SAP&quot;). With a history of developing closed captioning of programs for hearing-impaired viewers, WGBH considered the viability of using the new audio channel for narrated descriptions of key visual elements, much like those being done for live theatre in Washington, D.C., by Margaret Pfanstiehl, who had been experimenting with television description as part of her Washington Ear radio reading service.

After reviewing and conducting various studies, which found that blind and visually impaired people were consuming more television than ever but finding the activity problematic (often relying on sighted family and friends to describe for them), WGBH consulted more closely with Pfanstiehl and her husband, Cody, and then conducted its first tests of DVS in Boston in 1986. These tests (broadcasting to local groups of people of various ages and visual impairments) and further study were successful enough to merit a grant from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting to complete plans to establish the DVS organization permanently in 1988. After national testing, more feedback, more development of description technique, and additional grants, DVS became a regular feature of selected PBS programming in 1990. Later, DVS became an available feature in some films and home videos, including DVDs.

===Technique===
DVS describers watch a program and write a script describing visual elements which are important in understanding what is occurring at the time and the plot as a whole. For example, in the opening credit sequence of the children&#x27;s series &quot;Arthur&quot; on PBS, the description has been performed as follows:
The length of descriptions and their placement by a producer into the program are largely dictated by what can fit in natural pauses in dialogue (other producers of description may have other priorities, such as synchronization with the timing of a described element&#x27;s appearance, which differ from DVS&#x27;s priority for detail). Once recorded, placed and mixed with a copy of the original soundtrack, the DVS track is then &quot;laid back&quot; to the master tape on a separate audio track (for broadcast on the SAP) or to its own DVS master (for home video). For feature films, the descriptions are not mixed with the soundtrack, but kept separate as part of a DTS soundtrack.

===FCC involvement===
When the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) started establishing various requirements for broadcasters in larger markets to improve their accessibility to audiences with hearing and vision impairments, DVS branched out to non-PBS programming, and soon description could be heard on the SAP for shows such as &quot;&quot; and &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. However, a federal court ruled in 2002 that the Federal Communications Commission had exceeded its jurisdiction by requiring broadcasters in the top 25 markets to carry video description.

Since that time, the amount of new DVS television programming in the United States declined, as did access to information regarding upcoming described programming, while broadcasters like ABC and Fox instead decided to devote their SAP channels to Spanish language dubbing tracks of their shows rather than DVS due to the technical limitations of the analog NTSC standard. Description by DVS and other producers was still available in a limited form on television (the greatest percentage of DVS programming is still on PBS). WGBH&#x27;s Media Access Group continues supporting description of feature films (known as DVS Theatrical) and DVS home videos/DVDs are available from WGBH as well as other vendors and libraries. Commercial caption providers the National Captioning Institute and CaptionMax have also begun to describe programs. Benefit Media, Inc., a subsidiary of DuArt Film and Video in New York City provides DVS services to USA Network. For the 2016 Summer Olympics, NBC is providing description of events during the network&#x27;s primetime block.

The 21st Century Communications and Video Accessibility Act of 2010 reinstates the FCC&#x27;s involvement in providing rules for video description. Under the rules, affiliates in the top 25 markets and the top five-rated cable networks will have to provide at least 50 hours of video described programming per quarter; the rules took effect on July 1, 2012. However, this provision currently does not apply to syndicated programming; notably, many programs which have audio description in their network runs, such as those produced by Twentieth Century Fox Television, remove the DVS track for syndication, substituting in the Spanish dubbing track on SAP to reach more viewers, though as many stations affiliated with &quot;netlets&quot; like The CW and MyNetworkTV are not under the video description provision, do not have SAP channels and thus, neither an audio description or Spanish dub track can be heard. In some markets where SAP is activated on affiliate stations though, The CW had provided a Spanish SAP dub for &quot;Jane the Virgin&quot; through the series&#x27; entire run, and audio description is available and passed through for their Saturday morning &quot;One Magnificent Morning&quot; E/I block, which is done for all of the blocks produced for the major broadcast networks by Litton Entertainment. In 2019, the first primetime series with DVS for the network, &quot;In the Dark&quot; (which has a blind protagonist), was launched (the series&#x27; description propagated to its Netflix run several weeks after it was placed on that service after the first-season finale). MyNetworkTV has no provisions for audio description or language dub tracks, despite many of its scripted series having DVS tracks.

Online streaming services such as Hulu and the services of television networks themselves such as CBS All Access have yet to carry descriptive video service audio in most cases as they instead are currently focused on adding closed captioning to their libraries (the network app for ABC began to carry existing audio described shows in the fall of 2017). Netflix committed in April 2015 to begin audio description of their original series, starting with &quot;Daredevil&quot; (which features a blind protagonist with other heightened senses) and the remainder of their original programming in the next few months, making their goal in that timeframe, along with providing the DVS tracks of existing series in their library; however some platforms (mainly older versions for devices that are now unsupported) do not provide the alternate audio.

ABC, along with sister network Disney Channel has since added audio description to some of their programming (with a commensurate decline in Spanish-dubbed programming, though the ATSC standard allows more audio channels), but does not contract any of their shows to be described by the Media Access Group, instead going with commercial providers CaptionMax and Audio Eyes. Some special programming such as &quot;Toy Story of Terror!&quot; and &quot;Toy Story That Time Forgot&quot; is described by the Media Access Group under existing contracts with Walt Disney Pictures. NBC and their associated cable networks, along with outside productions by Universal Television such as &quot;Brooklyn Nine-Nine&quot; and &quot;The Mindy Project&quot;, solely use CaptionMax for description services; Netflix also utilizes CaptionMax for their original series, while going per studio for acquired programming. Most scripted programming on Fox, except for the shows of Gordon Ramsay (&quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot;, &quot;Hotel Hell&quot; and &quot;Kitchen Nightmares&quot;) is described by the Media Access Group; Ramsay&#x27;s programs are contracted by his producing studio to have audio description done by Scottish-born voiceover artist Mhairi Morrison with Descriptive Video Works. Unique to most described shows, Fox&#x27;s &quot;Empire&quot; uses actress Adrienne Barbeau for their description. CBS&#x27;s described shows all use the Media Access Group.

Some shows have lost their DVS during their original network runs due to outside factors or complications. For instance, &quot;American Dad!&quot; had a two-season interregnum in part of season 12 and all of season 13 without any DVS service during its move from Fox to TBS in late 2014, before it returned in November 2016 for its fourteenth season. &quot;The Mindy Project&quot; lost DVS at the start of their fourth season upon the move to Hulu, which does not yet provide DVS service. Cartoon Network and their time-share partner Adult Swim began to pass-through DVS for their syndicated content in the last quarter of 2018.

== See also ==
* Novelization
* Radio drama
* TheatreVision

== Citations==
== General and cited references ==
* Cronin, Barry J. Ph.D. and Robertson King, Sharon, MA. &quot;The Development of the Descriptive Video Service&quot;, Report for the National Center to Improve Practice. Retrieved on July 30, 2007.
* &quot;The ABC&#x27;s of DVS &quot;, WGBH - Media Access Group. Retrieved on July 30, 2007.
* &quot;Our Inclusive Approach &quot;, AudioVision. Retrieved on July 30, 2007.
* DVS FAQ, WGBH - Media Access Group. Retrieved on July 30, 2007.
* &quot;Media Access Guide Volume 3&quot;, WGBH - Media Access Group. Retrieved on July 30, 2007.
* &quot;ACB Statement on Video Description&quot; American Council for the Blind Legislative Seminar 2006, February 1, 2006. Retrieved from Audio Description International on July 30, 2007.
* List of PBS series with DVS, August 2007, WGBH - Media Access Group. Retrieved on July 30, 2007.
* Homepage, MoPix. Retrieved on July 30, 2007.
* &quot;DVS Home Video&quot; WGBH - Media Access Group. Retrieved on July 30, 2007.

==Further reading==
* Hirvonen, Maija: &quot;Multimodal Representation and Intermodal Similarity: Cues of Space in the Audio Description of Film.&quot; (Ph.D. thesis.) University of Helsinki, 2014. . On-line version.

== External links ==


===General===
* &quot;Description Key for Educational Media&quot; by The Described and Captioned Media Program
* ACB&#x27;s Audio Description Project
* Audio Description Associates
* Audio Description for Blind and Visually Impaired
* &quot;Who&#x27;s Watching? A Profile of the Blind and Visually Impaired Audience for Television and Video&quot;
* List of UK audio described programmes on TV
* List of UK audio described DVDs
* Joe Clark on audio description
* E-Inclusion Research Network
* Media Access Australia: Audio Description
* VocalEyes, UK audio description charity, providing access to the arts for blind and partially sighted people
* Audiodescription-france.org 
* Audio Description Association (Hong Kong)
*In the US:
**WGBH - Media Access Group - DVS Services
**The Audio Description Project
**Schedule of USA Audio Described TV Programs, Produced by the American Council of the Blind&#x27;s Audio Description Project
**Metropolitan Washington Ear
**Audio tracks of DVS version of Masterpiece Theatre&#x27;s &quot;Wind In the Willows&quot; (regional restrictions may apply)
**Poems written from a transcribed DVS version of Basic Instinct via Triple Canopy (online magazine)

===Examples of audio description===
* adp.acb.org/samples.html
* www.audiodescribe.com/samples/
* www.artbeyondsight.org/handbook/acs-verbalsamples.shtml
* Description of &quot;Neighbours&quot; and &quot;The Motorman&quot; from the National Film Board of Canada (QuickTime)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q653542" start="0" end="17" title="Audio description" label="Audio description"/>
<link wikidata="Q653542" start="46" end="63" title="Audio description" label="video description"/>
<link wikidata="Q653542" start="65" end="80" title="Audio description" label="described video"/>
<link wikidata="Q653542" start="85" end="103" title="Audio description" label="visual description"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="118" end="127" title="narration" label="narration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="215" end="219" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="223" end="241" title="television program" label="television program"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="246" end="268" title="Theatre" label="theatrical performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="289" end="294" title="blindness" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="299" end="316" title="visually impaired" label="visually impaired"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="543" end="549" title="Greedo" label="Greedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="576" end="584" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="608" end="629" title="Star Wars: A New Hope" label="Star Wars: A New Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="695" end="702" title="museums" label="museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406949" start="1153" end="1173" title="Second audio program" label="Second audio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="1266" end="1279" title="accessibility" label="accessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="1488" end="1495" title="talkies" label="talkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="1576" end="1593" title="visually impaired" label="visually impaired"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1601" end="1619" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q598245" start="1731" end="1759" title="Bulldog Drummond (1929 film)" label="&amp;quot;Bulldog Drummond&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546344" start="1787" end="1821" title="New York Association for the Blind" label="New York Association for the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302267" start="1975" end="1999" title="Radio Nacional de España" label="Radio Nacional de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="2096" end="2107" title="radio drama" label="radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="2187" end="2204" title="Public broadcasting" label="public television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564675" start="2213" end="2220" title="WGBH-TV" label="WGBH-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367247" start="2294" end="2311" title="closed captioning" label="closed captioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406949" start="2393" end="2413" title="second audio program" label="second audio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2551" end="2567" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2126260" start="2641" end="2662" title="radio reading service" label="radio reading service"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="2810" end="2823" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="2930" end="2933" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614089" start="2990" end="3008" title="American Playhouse" label="American Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092719" start="3076" end="3092" title="Retinitis Pigmentosa International" label="RP International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943041" start="3203" end="3211" title="earpiece" label="earpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q483941" start="3256" end="3277" title="Schindler&amp;#x27;s List" label="Schindler&amp;#x27;s List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385337" start="3343" end="3355" title="Gerald Molen" label="Gerald Molen"/>
<link wikidata="Q703611" start="3360" end="3373" title="Branko Lustig" label="Branko Lustig"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="3443" end="3455" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422581" start="3594" end="3604" title="Vin Scully" label="Vin Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="3606" end="3621" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q936132" start="3623" end="3633" title="Monty Hall" label="Monty Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="3661" end="3678" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q204191" start="3690" end="3716" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q958996" start="3794" end="3806" title="Irene Bedard" label="Irene Bedard"/>
<link wikidata="Q218894" start="3823" end="3833" title="Pocahontas (1995 film)" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q850522" start="3922" end="3934" title="Little Women (1994 film)" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q232863" start="4006" end="4018" title="June Allyson" label="June Allyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q241273" start="4020" end="4041" title="Margaret O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Margaret O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q205314" start="4047" end="4058" title="Janet Leigh" label="Janet Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466426" start="4098" end="4110" title="Little Women (1949 film)" label="1949 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="4135" end="4152" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q195274" start="4165" end="4177" title="Little Women (1933 film)" label="1933 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948158" start="4272" end="4301" title="National Captioning Institute" label="National Captioning Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4489" end="4492" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557489" start="4651" end="4662" title="BBC iPlayer" label="BBC iPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819269" start="4839" end="4861" title="AMI-tv" label="The Accessible Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="5093" end="5100" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q73633" start="5105" end="5121" title="Paralympic Games" label="Paralympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q486814" start="5131" end="5186" title="wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton" label="royal wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="5253" end="5260" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977365" start="5341" end="5350" title="Daredevil (TV series)" label="Daredevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q327553" start="5377" end="5397" title="Daredevil (Marvel Comics character)" label="comic book character"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743548" start="5563" end="5592" title="American Council of the Blind" label="American Council of the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328864" start="5699" end="5712" title="screen reader" label="screen reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q936394" start="5807" end="5814" title="Pornhub" label="Pornhub"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="5862" end="5880" title="pornographic video" label="pornographic video"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="6010" end="6030" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="6072" end="6093" title="television commercial" label="television commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993801" start="6234" end="6293" title="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission" label="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815697" start="6349" end="6368" title="Category A services" label="Category A services"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="6825" end="6832" title="Reality television" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q336181" start="6837" end="6844" title="Variety show" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q884017" start="6960" end="6966" title="Bumper (broadcasting)" label="bumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819269" start="7234" end="7240" title="AMI-tv" label="AMI-tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="7494" end="7515" title="Vertical integration" label="vertically integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="8096" end="8106" title="Bell Media" label="Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135686" start="8108" end="8127" title="Corus Entertainment" label="Corus Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386987" start="8133" end="8145" title="Rogers Media" label="Rogers Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700394" start="8174" end="8183" title="WildBrain" label="DHX Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="8185" end="8188" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928834" start="8190" end="8204" title="Blue Ant Media" label="Blue Ant Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168122" start="8206" end="8207" title="Remstar Media Group" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117582" start="8213" end="8222" title="TVA Group" label="TVA Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815697" start="8422" end="8443" title="discretionary service" label="discretionary service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="8592" end="8597" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046167" start="8800" end="8807" title="ESPN UK" label="ESPN UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="8964" end="8974" title="Sports commentator" label="commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="9167" end="9200" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="9438" end="9453" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="9621" end="9625" title="MPAA" label="MPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="9707" end="9760" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057934" start="9886" end="9949" title="Twenty-First Century Communications and Video Accessibility Act of 2010" label="Twenty-First Century Communications and Video Accessibility Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406949" start="10588" end="10611" title="secondary audio program" label="secondary audio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="10625" end="10640" title="video on demand" label="video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q204028" start="10833" end="10842" title="subtitles" label="subtitles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193170" start="11144" end="11160" title="wireless headset" label="wireless headset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581328" start="11197" end="11219" title="Digital Cinema Package" label="Digital Cinema Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="11728" end="11747" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="11751" end="11758" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q189671" start="12051" end="12064" title="FC Basel 1893" label="FC Basel 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q189671" start="12129" end="12137" title="FC Basel" label="FC Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190010" start="12162" end="12176" title="St. Jakob Park" label="St. Jakob Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q202699" start="12361" end="12379" title="Swiss Super League" label="Swiss Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="12478" end="12489" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q190010" start="12494" end="12508" title="St. Jakob-Park" label="St. Jakob-Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="12512" end="12517" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12691" end="12698" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="12838" end="12851" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="12955" end="12958" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12959" end="12965" title="Network affiliate#Member stations" label="member"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="12966" end="12984" title="television station" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564675" start="12985" end="12992" title="WGBH-TV" label="WGBH-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="12996" end="13002" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="13004" end="13017" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="13070" end="13106" title="stereophonic sound" label="stereophonic television broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q904840" start="13121" end="13150" title="multichannel television sound" label="multichannel television sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406949" start="13216" end="13239" title="Second audio program" label="Secondary Audio Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367247" start="13294" end="13311" title="closed captioning" label="closed captioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="13328" end="13344" title="Hearing impairment" label="hearing-impaired"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="13512" end="13528" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2628754" start="14196" end="14231" title="Corporation for Public Broadcasting" label="Corporation for Public Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056342" start="14828" end="14834" title="Arthur (TV series)" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299010" start="15566" end="15569" title="Digital Theater System" label="DTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="15614" end="15647" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="15723" end="15730" title="media market" label="markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="15941" end="15953" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="16398" end="16414" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="16415" end="16429" title="Dub localization" label="dubbing tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="16803" end="16806" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948158" start="16905" end="16934" title="National Captioning Institute" label="National Captioning Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036908" start="16939" end="16949" title="CaptionMax" label="CaptionMax"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="17088" end="17099" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="17109" end="17129" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089093" start="17131" end="17134" title="NBC Olympics" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="17624" end="17634" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814799" start="17749" end="17781" title="Twentieth Century Fox Television" label="Twentieth Century Fox Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="17958" end="17964" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="17969" end="17980" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16913682" start="18244" end="18259" title="Jane the Virgin" label="Jane the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109891" start="18390" end="18413" title="One Magnificent Morning" label="One Magnificent Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424721" start="18420" end="18423" title="E/I" label="E/I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653214" start="18512" end="18532" title="Litton Entertainment" label="Litton Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q53746188" start="18602" end="18613" title="In the Dark (American TV series)" label="In the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="18974" end="18978" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q27903045" start="19038" end="19052" title="CBS All Access" label="CBS All Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="19295" end="19302" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977365" start="19400" end="19409" title="Daredevil (TV series)" label="Daredevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q327553" start="19434" end="19451" title="Daredevil (Marvel Comics character)" label="blind protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="19816" end="19830" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q637801" start="19965" end="19969" title="ATSC" label="ATSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036908" start="20132" end="20142" title="CaptionMax" label="CaptionMax"/>
<link wikidata="Q15090947" start="20198" end="20218" title="Toy Story of Terror!" label="Toy Story of Terror!"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049213" start="20235" end="20261" title="Toy Story That Time Forgot" label="Toy Story That Time Forgot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="20337" end="20357" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Walt Disney Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337530" start="20434" end="20454" title="Universal Television" label="Universal Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417244" start="20469" end="20487" title="Brooklyn Nine-Nine" label="Brooklyn Nine-Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62564" start="20504" end="20521" title="The Mindy Project" label="The Mindy Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280" start="20744" end="20757" title="Gordon Ramsay" label="Gordon Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012139" start="20765" end="20784" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen (American TV series)" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252173" start="20798" end="20808" title="Hotel Hell" label="Hotel Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531243" start="20825" end="20843" title="Kitchen Nightmares" label="Kitchen Nightmares"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975134" start="20936" end="20952" title="ITV Studios America" label="producing studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992512" start="21113" end="21119" title="Empire (2015 TV series)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253561" start="21139" end="21155" title="Adrienne Barbeau" label="Adrienne Barbeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="21366" end="21379" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="21509" end="21512" title="TBS (American TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q62564" start="21596" end="21613" title="The Mindy Project" label="The Mindy Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="21728" end="21743" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="21773" end="21783" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421000" start="21886" end="21898" title="Novelization" label="Novelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="21901" end="21912" title="Radio drama" label="Radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21915" end="21928" title="Retinitis Pigmentosa International#TheatreVision" label="TheatreVision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843359" start="24336" end="24367" title="Triple Canopy (online magazine)" label="Triple Canopy (online magazine)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578283" wikidata="Q9337" url="?curid=578283" title="Flemish Region">
<text>The Flemish Region (, ), usually simply referred to as [[Flanders]] ( ), is one of the three regions of Belgium—alongside the Walloon Region and the Brussels-Capital Region. Covering the northern portion of the country, the Flemish Region is primarily Dutch-speaking. With an area of , it accounts for only 45% of Belgium&#x27;s territory, but 58% of its population. It is one of the most densely populated regions of Europe with around .

The Flemish Region is distinct from the Flemish Community: the latter encompasses both the inhabitants of the Flemish Region and the Dutch-speaking minority living in the Brussels-Capital Region. It borders the Netherlands and France.

==Politics==
Immediately after its establishment in 1980, the region transferred all its constitutional competencies to the Flemish Community. Thus, the current Flemish authorities (Flemish Parliament and Flemish Government) represent all the Flemish people, including those living in the Brussels-Capital Region. Hence, the Flemish Region is governed by the Flemish Community institutions. However, members of the Flemish Community parliament elected in the Brussels-Capital Region have no right to vote on Flemish regional affairs.

==Administrative divisions==


The Flemish Region comprises five provinces, each consisting of administrative arrondissements that, in turn, contain municipalities (in total 300 municipalities in Flanders).

The seat of the Flemish parliament is located in Brussels, which is an enclave withinbut not part ofthe Flemish region, being specified that the Brussels-Capital Region is established as an administrative region of Belgium in its own right. In contrast, the Walloon parliament has established its parliament in the territory of Wallonia, specifically in the city of Namur, Namur Province.

==Economy==
Flanders is home to a diversified modern economy, with emphasis put on research and development. Many enterprises work closely with local knowledge and research centres to develop new products and services. The Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was €270 billion in 2018, accounting for 59% of Belgium&#x27;s economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was €36,300 or 136% of the EU27 average in the same year.

===Transport===
&quot;De Lijn&quot; serves as the main public transport company, run by the Flemish government. It consists of buses and trams. TEC is the equivalent company in Wallonia, and MIVB-STIB in Brussels. The railway network run by the NMBS, however, is a federal responsibility.

The Flemish government is also responsible for about 500 kilometers of regional roads (Dutch: &quot;gewestwegen&quot;) and about 900 kilometers of highways in the territory of the Flemish Region. Other types of roads are provincial roads and municipal roads.

==Demographics==
===Cities===
Largest cities in the region include (with population figures as of 1 January 2018):

*Antwerp (523,248)
*Ghent (260,341)
*Bruges (118,284)
*Leuven (101,396)
*Mechelen (86,304)
*Aalst (85,715)
*Hasselt (77,651)
*Sint-Niklaas (76,756)
*Kortrijk (76,265)
*Ostend (71,332)
*Genk (66,110)
*Roeselare (62,301)

The Flemish Diamond (Dutch: &quot;Vlaamse Ruit&quot;) is the name of the central, populous area in Flanders and consists of several of these cities, such as Antwerp, Ghent, Leuven and Mechelen. Approximately 5.5 million people live in the area.

===Language===
The official language of the Flemish Region is Dutch. The dialect cluster spoken in the region is sometimes colloquially referred to as Flemish (&quot;Vlaams&quot;), Flemish Dutch (&quot;Vlaams-Nederlands&quot;), Belgian Dutch (&quot;Belgisch-Nederlands&quot;), or Southern Dutch (&quot;Zuid-Nederlands&quot;). Spelling and grammar are regulated by a single authority, the Dutch Language Union (&quot;Nederlandse Taalunie&quot;), comprising a committee of ministers of the Flemish and Dutch governments, their advisory council of appointed experts, a controlling commission of 22 parliamentarians, and a secretariat. The term Flemish can be applied to the Dutch spoken in Flanders; it shows many regional and local variations. The main dialect groups include West Flemish, East Flemish, Brabantian and Limburgish.

French (specifically Belgian French) may also be used in the Flemish Region for certain administrative purposes in a limited number of the so-called &quot;municipalities with language facilities&quot; around the Brussels-Capital Region and on the border with Wallonia. These &quot;rim municipalities&quot; around Brussels are Drogenbos, Kraainem, Linkebeek, Sint-Genesius-Rode, Wemmel and Wezembeek-Oppem. Brussels was originally a Dutch-speaking city (Brabantian dialect to be exact), but it was francised in the 19th and 20th centuries and is now officially bilingual in French and Dutch (although largely French-speaking in practice). Municipalities with language facilities on the border with Wallonia are Bever (), Herstappe, Mesen (), Ronse (), Spiere-Helkijn (), and Voeren ().

===Religion===

According to a 2016 survey by the Free University of Brussels, 68% of Flemish citizens are Roman Catholic, 2% are Protestant, 26% are irreligious, while 2% have other religions.

==International relations==
===Twin regions and sister regions===
* Aichi, Japan

==See also==
*Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium
*Count of Flanders
*De Vlaamse Leeuw
*Flanders
*Flemish
*Provinces of Belgium

==References==

===Footnotes===
===Notes===

==External links==
* Flemish authorities (Dutch: &quot;Vlaamse overheid&quot;).
* Flanders online (also in French, German and Dutch).
* Toerisme Vlaanderen
* French Flanders 
* Frans-Vlaanderen
* The Flemish region reaches 6 million inhabitants</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9337" start="4" end="18" title="Flemish Region" label="Flemish Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q9337" start="55" end="67" title="Flemish Region" label="[[Flanders]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q838185" start="93" end="100" title="communities, regions and language areas of Belgium" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="104" end="111" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="126" end="140" title="Wallonia" label="Walloon Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="149" end="172" title="Brussels" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="252" end="257" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="480" end="497" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="611" end="634" title="Brussels" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="651" end="662" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="667" end="673" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9331" start="800" end="817" title="Flemish Community" label="Flemish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292" start="858" end="876" title="Flemish Parliament" label="Flemish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186029" start="881" end="899" title="Flemish Government" label="Flemish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="919" end="933" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="965" end="988" title="Brussels" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q83116" start="1276" end="1285" title="Provinces of Belgium" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1306" end="1336" title="Arrondissements of Belgium#Administrative" label="administrative arrondissements"/>
<link wikidata="Q493522" start="1360" end="1374" title="Municipalities of Belgium" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="1490" end="1497" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1564" end="1587" title="Brussels" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="1747" end="1755" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134121" start="1785" end="1790" title="Namur" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125" start="1792" end="1806" title="Namur Province" label="Namur Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="2032" end="2054" title="Gross domestic product" label="Gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q614819" start="2281" end="2288" title="De Lijn" label="De Lijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q366922" start="2403" end="2406" title="TEC (transport)" label="TEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631655" start="2450" end="2459" title="Brussels Intercommunal Transport Company" label="MIVB-STIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q524255" start="2504" end="2508" title="NMBS" label="NMBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="2926" end="2933" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="2945" end="2950" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="2962" end="2968" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="2980" end="2986" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="2998" end="3006" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121" start="3017" end="3022" title="Aalst, Belgium" label="Aalst"/>
<link wikidata="Q58780" start="3033" end="3040" title="Hasselt" label="Hasselt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13127" start="3051" end="3063" title="Sint-Niklaas" label="Sint-Niklaas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="3074" end="3082" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="3093" end="3099" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q189692" start="3110" end="3114" title="Genk" label="Genk"/>
<link wikidata="Q211037" start="3125" end="3134" title="Roeselare" label="Roeselare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967836" start="3149" end="3164" title="Flemish Diamond" label="Flemish Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="3453" end="3458" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="3464" end="3479" title="dialect cluster" label="dialect cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q152299" start="3779" end="3799" title="Dutch Language Union" label="Dutch Language Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="4032" end="4039" title="Flemish dialects" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q100103" start="4165" end="4177" title="West Flemish" label="West Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q215264" start="4179" end="4191" title="East Flemish" label="East Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56488" start="4193" end="4203" title="Brabantian dialect" label="Brabantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q102172" start="4208" end="4218" title="Limburgish" label="Limburgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q815549" start="4242" end="4256" title="Belgian French" label="Belgian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q737681" start="4376" end="4415" title="municipalities with language facilities" label="municipalities with language facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="4480" end="4488" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q688377" start="4547" end="4556" title="Drogenbos" label="Drogenbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q839023" start="4558" end="4566" title="Kraainem" label="Kraainem"/>
<link wikidata="Q631639" start="4568" end="4577" title="Linkebeek" label="Linkebeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q841597" start="4579" end="4597" title="Sint-Genesius-Rode" label="Sint-Genesius-Rode"/>
<link wikidata="Q913195" start="4599" end="4605" title="Wemmel" label="Wemmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q912091" start="4610" end="4625" title="Wezembeek-Oppem" label="Wezembeek-Oppem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450775" start="4718" end="4727" title="Francisation of Brussels" label="francised"/>
<link wikidata="Q839017" start="4931" end="4936" title="Bever, Belgium" label="Bever"/>
<link wikidata="Q499584" start="4941" end="4950" title="Herstappe" label="Herstappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q737077" start="4952" end="4957" title="Mesen" label="Mesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q268219" start="4962" end="4967" title="Ronse" label="Ronse"/>
<link wikidata="Q846212" start="4972" end="4986" title="Spiere-Helkijn" label="Spiere-Helkijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q460479" start="4995" end="5001" title="Voeren" label="Voeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q574606" start="5057" end="5084" title="Université libre de Bruxelles" label="Free University of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5114" end="5128" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="5137" end="5147" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q80434" start="5270" end="5275" title="Aichi" label="Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q838185" start="5298" end="5348" title="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium" label="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824016" start="5350" end="5367" title="Count of Flanders" label="Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q876594" start="5369" end="5385" title="De Vlaamse Leeuw" label="De Vlaamse Leeuw"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="5387" end="5395" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="5397" end="5404" title="Flemish dialects" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83116" start="5406" end="5426" title="Provinces of Belgium" label="Provinces of Belgium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578284" wikidata="Q137576" url="?curid=578284" title="James H. Billington">
<text>James Hadley Billington (June 1, 1929 – November 20, 2018) was an American academic and author who taught history at Harvard and Princeton before serving for 42 years as CEO of four federal cultural institutions. He served as the 13th Librarian of Congress after being nominated by President Ronald Reagan in 1987, and his appointment was approved unanimously by the U.S. Senate. He retired as Librarian on September 30, 2015.

==Life==
Born in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, Billington was educated in Philadelphia-area public schools. He was class valedictorian at both Lower Merion High School and Princeton University, where he graduated with highest honors and an A.B. in history in 1950 after completing a senior thesis titled &quot;Nicholas Berdyaev.&quot; Three years later, he earned his doctorate in Russian history from Balliol College of the University of Oxford, where he was a Rhodes Scholar and student of the philosopher Isaiah Berlin.

Following service with the U.S. Army and the Office of National Estimates, he taught history at Harvard University from 1957 to 1962 and subsequently at Princeton University, where he was a professor of history from 1964 to 1974.

From 1973 to 1987, Billington was director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, the nation&#x27;s official memorial in Washington, D.C., to America&#x27;s 28th president. As director, he founded the Kennan Institute for Advanced Russian Studies at the center, and seven other new programs, as well as the &quot;Wilson Quarterly&quot;.

Billington was married to the former Marjorie Anne Brennan. They had four children: Susan Billington Harper, Anne Billington Fischer, the Rev. James Hadley Billington Jr., and Thomas Keator Billington, as well as 12 grandchildren. Billington and his daughter Susan were the first father and daughter to both be awarded Rhodes Scholarships and to use them to earn Doctorates of Philosophy at Oxford University.

==Library of Congress==
Billington was sworn in as the Librarian of Congress on September 14, 1987. He was the 13th person to hold the position since the Library of Congress was established in 1800. He was nominated by President Ronald Reagan and his appointment was unanimously confirmed by the Senate.

During his tenure at the Library of Congress, Billington doubled the size of the Library&#x27;s traditional analog collections, from 85.5 million items in 1987 to more than 160 million items in 2014. He led the acquisition of Lafayette&#x27;s previously inaccessible papers in 1996 from Château de la Grange-Bléneau in France. Billington has since been the only non-Frenchman on the board of the foundation governing the castle. He also acquired the only copy of the 1507 Waldseemüller world map (&quot;America&#x27;s birth certificate&quot;) in 2003 for permanent display in the Library&#x27;s Thomas Jefferson Building.

Billington pioneered the reconstruction, using privately raised funds, of Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s original library, which was placed on permanent display in the Jefferson building in 2008. He enlarged and technologically enhanced public spaces of the Jefferson Building into a national exhibition venue, and hosted over 100 exhibitions, most featuring materials not previously displayed publicly in the United States. These included exhibits on the Vatican Library and the Bibliothèque Nationale de France, several on the Civil War and Lincoln, on African-American culture, on Religion and the founding of the American Republic, the Early Americas (the Kislak Collection is now on permanent display), and the global celebration commemorating the 800th anniversary of Magna Carta, and on early American printing featuring the Rubenstein Bay Psalm Book. Billington also advocated successfully for an underground connection between the U.S. Capitol Visitors Center and the Library in 2008 to increase congressional usage and public tours of the Library&#x27;s Thomas Jefferson Building.

Billington launched a mass deacidification program in 2001, which has extended the lifespan of almost 4 million volumes and 12 million manuscript sheets; and a new collection storage modules at Fort Meade, the first opening in 2002, to preserve and make accessible more than 4 million items from the Library&#x27;s analog collections. Billington established the Library Collections Security Oversight Committee in 1992 to improve protection of collections, and also the Library of Congress Congressional Caucus in 2008 to draw attention to the Library&#x27;s curators and collections. He created the Library&#x27;s first Young Readers Center in the Jefferson Building in 2009, and the first large-scale summer intern (Junior Fellows) program for university students in 1991. Under Billington, the Library also sponsored the Gateway to Knowledge in 2010–2011, a mobile exhibition to 90 sites covering all states east of the Mississippi in a specially designed 18-wheel truck, increasing public access to library collections off-site, particularly for rural populations.

During his tenure at the Library of Congress, Billington championed no-fee electronic services, beginning with:
* American Memory in 1990, which became The National Digital Library in 1994, providing free access online to digitized American history and culture resources with curatorial explanations for K-12 education;
* thomas.gov website in 1994 to provide free public access to U.S. federal legislative information with ongoing updates; and congress.gov website to provide a state-of-the-art framework for both Congress and the public in 2012;
* Educational portal for K-12 teachers and students in 1996, and subsequently new prizes and programs for advancing literacy in 2013;
* Online social media presence for the Library beginning in 2007, which expanded to include blogs, Flickr, establishment of Flickr Commons, Facebook, iTunesU, Pinterest, RSS, Twitter, YouTube and other new media channels. Twitter donated its digital archive to the Library of Congress in 2010; its vice president of engineering, Greg Pass noted, &quot;I am very grateful that Dr. Billington and the Library recognize the value of this information.&quot;
* &quot;eCo&quot; online copyright registration, status-checking, processing, and electronic file upload systems in 2008;
* The World Digital Library in 2009, in association with UNESCO and 181 partners in 81 countries, to make online copies of professionally curated primary materials of the world&#x27;s varied cultures free available in multiple languages.
* Resource Description and Access (RDA) in 2010, a new cataloguing standard for the digital age implemented in 2013;
* BIBFRAME in 2011, a data model for bibliographic description to provide a foundation for those depending on bibliographic data shared by the Library with partners on the web and in the broader networked world;
* National Jukebox in 2011 to provide streaming free online access to more than 10,000 out-of-print music and spoken word recordings.
* BARD in 2013, digital talking books mobile app for Braille and Audio Reading Downloads in partnership with the Library&#x27;s National Library Service for the blind and physically handicapped, that enables free downloads of audio and Braille books to mobile devices via the Apple App Store.
Billington directed the growth of the Library of Congress&#x27; digital outreach and analog collections during the period 1992 through 2014 when the Library also experienced a 30 percent decrease in its staff largely due to legislative appropriations cutbacks. Every three years, the Librarian reviews the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). In 2010, Billington&#x27;s decision to open new DMCA loopholes resulted in his being described as &quot;the most important person you never heard of, having headed the library since well before the Web was spun or the DMCA was even a glint in the Recording Industry Association of America&#x27;s eye ... It was probably Billington&#x27;s unassailable reputation for integrity and probity that won the LOC this power under the DMCA.&quot;

Billington championed the Library&#x27;s American Memory National Digital Library (NDL) Program, which makes freely available on-line over 24 million American historical items from the collections of the Library and other research institutions. Besides these unique American Memory materials, the Library Internet services include the congressional database, THOMAS; the on-line card catalog; exhibitions; information from the U.S. Copyright Office; and a web site for children and families called America&#x27;s Library. In fiscal year 2013 the Library&#x27;s website recorded 84 million visits and 519 million page views.

Billington also established the following new programs at the Library of Congress:
* The National Book Festival, founded in 2001 with Laura Bush, which has brought more than 10000 authors and more than a million guests to the National Mall and the Washington Convention Center. Thanks to a major gift from David Rubenstein in 2013, Billington also promoted the establishment of Library of Congress Literacy Awards to recognize and support achievements in improving literacy in the United States and abroad;
* The Kluge Center, started in 2000 with a grant of $60 million John W. Kluge, the Kluge Center increases engagement of scholars with the U.S. Congress and other public leaders brought to the Library through endowed Kluge fellowships;
* The Kluge Prize for the Study of Humanity (now worth $1.5 million), the first Nobel-level international prize for lifetime achievement in the humanities and social sciences (subjects not included in the Nobel awards);
* The National Audio-Visual Conservation Center, which opened in 2007 at a 45-acre site in Culpeper, Virginia, thanks to the largest private gift ever made to the Library (more than $150 million by the Packard Humanities Institute) and $82.1 million additional support from Congress. In 1988, Billington also established the National Film Preservation Board, a congressionally mandated National Film Preservation Board to select American films annually for preservation and inclusion in the new National Registry. The Librarian named 650 films to the Registry by 2015;
* The Veterans History Project, congressionally mandated in 2000 to collect, preserve, and make accessible the personal accounts of American war veterans from World War I to the present day;
* The National Registry of Recorded Sound, congressionally mandated in 2000, to which Billington has selected 425 recordings to date;
* The Gershwin Prize for Popular Song, started in 2007 to honor the work of an artist whose career reflects lifetime achievement in song composition. Winners have included Paul Simon, Stevie Wonder, Paul McCartney, Burt Bacharach and Hal David, Carole King, Billy Joel, and Willie Nelson. Billington also launched the Living Legend Awards in 2000 to honor artists, activists, filmmakers, and others who have contributed to America&#x27;s diverse cultural, scientific, and social heritage, (he was himself declared a Library of Congress Living Legend after his tenure);
* Open World Leadership Center started in 2000, which has administered 23,000 professional exchanges for emerging post-Soviet leaders in Russia, Ukraine, and the other successor states of the former USSR to visit counterparts in the United States. Open World began as a Library of Congress project, and later became an independent agency in the legislative branch. Billington is founder and was chairman of the board of trustees.
* The Fiction Prize (now the Library of Congress Prize for American Fiction) created in 2008 to recognize distinguished lifetime achievement in the writing of fiction.
During Billington&#x27;s tenure at the Library of Congress, he raised more than half a billion dollars of private support to supplement Congressional appropriations. These private funds were used to increase Library collections, programs, and digital outreach. Billington created the Library&#x27;s first development office for private fundraising in 1987, and, in 1990, established the James Madison Council, the Library&#x27;s first national private sector donor-support group. Billington also asked the GAO to conduct the first Library-wide audit in 1987. This precedent led to regular annual financial audits, which produced unmodified (&quot;clean&quot;) opinions from 1995 onwards. He also created the first Office of the Inspector General at the library in 1987 to provide regular independent review of library operations.

At the 2011 National Book Festival, author David McCullough said: &quot;We have had a number of eminent distinguished Librarians of Congress: Archibald MacLeish, the famous poet, Daniel Boorstin, the scholar and historian ... But we have never had a more accomplished, productive, inspirational or far-seeing Librarian of Congress than James Billington.&quot;

There were however critics who felt that his approach of wooing wealthy private donors was inappropriate, and his management was criticized by a number of inquiries by government oversight agencies and librarians.

Billington is the author of &quot;Mikhailovsky and Russian Populism&quot; (1956), &quot;The Icon and the Axe&quot; (1966), &quot;Fire in the Minds of Men&quot; (1980), &quot;Russia Transformed: Breakthrough to Hope, August 1991&quot; (1992) and &quot;The Face of Russia&quot; (1998), a companion book to the three-part television series of the same name, which he wrote and narrated for the Public Broadcasting Service, and &quot;Russia in Search of Itself&quot; (2004). These books have been translated and published in a variety of languages. Billington also wrote and hosted a nationally televised series for PBS, &quot;The Humanities Film Forum&quot;, with Mark Waxman, executive producer, in 1973.
Billington accompanied ten congressional delegations to Russia and the former Soviet Union, making him, in the words of commentator George Weigel, &quot;the personal tutor in Russian affairs to several generations of members of the House and the Senate.&quot; In June 1988, Billington accompanied President and Mrs. Reagan to the Soviet Summit in Moscow. In October 2004, he headed a Library of Congress delegation to Tehran that expanded exchanges between the Library of Congress and the National Library of Iran. Billington was the most senior U.S. government official to openly visit Iran in 25 years.

==Honors==

Billington received 42 &quot;honoris causa&quot; degrees, as well as the Presidential Citizen&#x27;s Medal (2008), Woodrow Wilson Award from Princeton University (1992), the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement (1992), the UCLA Medal (1999), and the Pushkin Medal of the International Association of the Teachers of Russian Language and Culture (1999). He was awarded the Order of Friendship by the president of the Russian Federation (2008), the highest order that a foreign citizen may receive. He received honorary doctorates from Tbilisi State University in Georgia (1999) and the Russian State University for the Humanities (2001), and the University of Oxford (2002).
Billington was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1985. He was an elected member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and has been decorated as Chevalier (1985), Chevalier of the Legion of Honor (2007), and again as a Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters (1991) of France, as Commander of the National Order of the Southern Cross of Brazil (2002), awarded the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic (2002), and a Knight Commander&#x27;s Cross of the Order of Merit by the Federal Republic of Germany (1995). Billington was awarded the first Lafayette Prize by the French-American Cultural Foundation (2007). He has also been awarded the Gwanghwa Medal by the Republic of Korea (1991), and the Chingiz Aitmatov Gold Medal by the Kyrgyz Republic (2001). Altogether, Billington received decorations and awards from 15 foreign governments and universities.

Billington was a longtime member of the editorial advisory boards of &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; and of &quot;Theology Today&quot;, and a member of the Board of Foreign Scholarships (1971–1976; chairman, 1973–1975), which has executive responsibility for academic exchanges worldwide under the Fulbright-Hays Act. He was on the board of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and was a member of the American Philosophical Society.

==Death==
Billington died November 20, 2018, at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington, D.C., of complications from pneumonia. He was 89.

==Publications==
* New York City: Alfred A. Knopf (1966). .
* &quot;Fire in the Minds of Men: Origins of the Revolutionary Faith&quot;. London: Temple Smith (1980). . Published with new introduction by the author in 1999: New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers.
** at Internet Archive.
* &quot;Russia Transformed: Breakthrough to Hope, Moscow, August 1991&quot;. New York City: The Free Press (1992). .
* &quot;The Face of Russia: Anguish, Aspiration, and Achievement in Russian Culture&quot;. London (1998). .
* Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson Press &amp; Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press (2004). .

== Television productions ==
* Billington, James H. (1973). &quot;Humanities Film Forum&quot;, PBS Documentary Series.
* Billington, James H. (1988). &quot;The face of Russia: A Three part documentary television series.&quot; Malone Gill Productions, The Library of Congress, WETA, Washington, D.C., and Public Media Inc. , , .

== Contributing author ==
* &quot;Orthodox Christianity and the Russian Transformation&quot;, &quot;Proselytism and Orthodoxy in Russia: The New War for Souls&quot;, edited by Whitte, John, and Michael Bourdeaux. New York: Orbis Books, 1999.
* Preface, &quot;Revelations from the Russian Archives: Documents in English&quot;, edited by Diane Koenker and Ronald D. Bachman. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1997.
* Introduction to &quot;Before the Revolution: St. Petersburg in Photographs, 1890–1914&quot;, text by Mikhail P. Iroshnikov, Yury B. Shelayev and Liudmila A. Protsai. New York: Abrams, 1992.
* &quot;Six Views of the Russian Revolution&quot;, &quot;Russian and Soviet History&quot;, edited by Bertrand M. Patenaude. New York, London: Garland Publishing, 1992.
* Foreword, &quot;Before the Revolution: St. Petersburg in Photographs, 1890–1914&quot;, by Mikhail P. Iroshnikov, Yury B. Shelayev, Liudmila A. Protsai; introduction by Dmitry S. Likhachov. New York: Harry N. Abrams; Leningrad: Nauka: JV SMART, 1991.
* &quot;The Role of a Western University in Forming a Social Morality&quot;, &quot;Moral Values and Higher Education&quot;, edited by Dennis L. Thompson. (Based on an address given at a symposium held at Brigham Young University, February 1987). Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1991.
* Foreword, &quot;Henry M. Jackson and World Affairs: Selected Speeches, 1953–1983&quot;, edited by Dorothy Fosdick. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1990.
* Introduction to &quot;Solidarity and Poland, Impacts East and West&quot;, edited by Steve W. Reiquam; a collections of papers presented at conferences, &quot;The Legacy of Solidarity&quot;, Held February 1987 at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, D.C.: Wilson Center Press: 1988.
* &quot;Diplomacy and the Soviet Union&quot;, &quot;Diplomacy for the Future&quot;, edited by George C. McGhee. Washington, D.C.: University Press of America, in cooperation with the Institute for the Study of Diplomacy, Georgetown, university, 1987, pp. 35–48.
* &quot;American Foreign Policy and the New Isolationism&quot;, &quot;Public Diplomacy: USA Versus USSR&quot;, edited by Richard F. Staar. Stanford, California: Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University, 1986, pp. 3–18 (adaptation of address delivered at Hoover Institution, October 3, 1985).
* &quot;Education and Culture: Beyond &#x27;Lifestyles&#x27;&quot;, &quot;Virtue—Public &amp; Private&quot;, edited by Richard John Neuhaus. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans, in cooperation with the Rockford Institute Center on Religion and Society, 1986, pp. 1–7.
* &quot;Socio-Cultural Imperatives for a New Containment Policy&quot;, &quot;Containment Concept and Policy&quot;, edited by Terry L. Deibel and John Lewis Gaddis. Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press, 1986, v. 2, pp. 597–613.
* &quot;General Change: In Search of a Post-Stalinist Identity&quot;, &quot;From Brezhnev to Gorbachev – Domestic Affairs and Soviet Foreign Policy&quot;, edited by Hans-Joachim Veen. Leamington Spa, Hamburg, New York: Berg, 1987, pp. 156–163. (English translation of &quot;Der Generationswechsel: Die Suche nach einer nachstalinistischen Identität&quot;, &quot;Wohin entwickelt sich die Sowjetunion? Zur aussenpolitischen Relevanz innerpolitischer Entwicklungen.)&quot;
* &quot;Three Views of Revolution&quot;, &quot;And He Loved Big Brother: Man, State and Society in Question&quot; (contributions to the George Orwell Colloquium, 1984, Council of Europe, Strasbourg), London, 1985, pp. 13–24; also in &quot;Reflections on America, 1984, An Orwell Symposium&quot;, edited by Robert Mulvihill. University of Georgia Press, 1986, pp. 202–214.
* &quot;Der Generationswechsel: Die Suche nach einer nachstalinistischen Identität&quot;, &quot;Wohin entwickelt sich die Sowjetunion? Zur aussenpolitischen Relevanz innerpolitischer Entwicklungen&quot;, edited by Hans-Joachim Veen. (Third German-American Conference, Social Science Research Institute, Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, Sankt Augustin bei Bonn) Melle: Knoth, 1984, pp. 180–183.
* &quot;Rival Revolutionary Ideals&quot;, &quot;Totalitarian Democracy and After&quot; (International Colloquium in Memory of Jacob L. Talmon.) Jerusalem: Israeli Academy of Science and Humanities, 1984, pp. 56–69.
* &quot;Reflections on the Nonmaterial Aspects of National Interests&quot;, &quot;The National Interests of the United States in Foreign Policy&quot;, edited by Prosser Gifford. Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, 1981, pp. 180–183.
* &quot;Neglected Figures and Features in the Rise of the Raskol&quot;, &quot;The Religious World of Russian Culture&quot;, edited by Andrew Blane. The Hague, Paris: Mouton, 1975.
* &quot;The Spirit of Russian Art&quot;, introduction to &quot;The Arts of Russia.&quot; New York: Horizon, 1970.
* &quot;The Intellectuals&quot;, &quot;Prospects for Soviet Society&quot;, edited by Allen Kassof. New York: Praeger, 1968, pp. 449–472.
* &quot;Finland&quot;, chapter on Finnish Communism, &quot;Communism and Revolution&quot;, edited by C. Black and T. Thornton. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964, pp. 117–144.

=== Booklets ===
* &quot;The Intellectual and Cultural Dimensions of International Relations.&quot; Washington, D.C. (presented at the Plenary Meeting XXII of the President&#x27;s Committee on the Arts and the Humanities, February 28, 1991).
* &quot;The Electronic Erosion of Democracy&quot;, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign (presented as the Inaugural C. Walter and Gerda B. Mortenson Distinguished Lecture, September 10, 1990).
* &quot;Books and the World&quot;, Center for the Book, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., 1988 (adaptation of address given at opening of exhibition – &quot;Legacies of Genius&quot; – Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, April 13, 1988).
* &quot;The Moral Imperative of Conservation&quot;, The National Committee to Save America&#x27;s Cultural Collections, Washington, D.C. (presented as keynote address of &quot;Invest in the American Collection&quot;, a Regional Forum on the Conservation of Cultural Property, June 16, 1987, The Art Institute of Chicago).
* &quot;The Adventure of Liberal Education&quot;, Syracuse, 1982.
* &quot;The Humanities Film Forum&quot;, Los Angeles, 1973.

=== Book contributions ===
* to , by Michael S. Roth. New York: Vintage Books (2000). . .

=== Book reviews ===
* &quot;The Cross and the Sickle.&quot; Review of &quot;A Long Walk to Church: A Contemporary History of Russian Orthodoxy&quot; by Nathaniel Davis. &quot;New York Times Book Review&quot; (April 16, 1995), p. 25.
* &quot;A Revolutionary Russian Writer&#x27;s Redemption.&quot; Review of &quot;Dostoevsky: The Miraculous Years, 1865–1871&quot; by Joseph Frank. &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot; (March 28, 1995), p. A24.

=== Articles ===
* &quot;Okay, They&#x27;ve Met. Now Let&#x27;s Get Engaged.&quot; &quot;Washington Post&quot; (June 17, 2001), p. B2.
* &quot;Russia, Between a Dream and a Nightmare&quot; (Op-Ed). &quot;New York Times&quot; (June 17, 1998).
* &quot;Religion and Russia&#x27;s Future: The Templeton Lecture on Religion and World Affairs.&quot; &quot;Foreign Policy Research Institute WIRE&quot;, vol. 5, no. 10 (October 1997), pp. 1–4.
* &quot;Russian Librarians Host Idea Exchange in Vologda.&quot; &quot;American Libraries&quot; (September 1996), p. 21.
* &quot;Here Today, Here Tomorrow: The Imperative of Collections Security.&quot; &quot;American Libraries&quot; (August 1996), p. 40.
* &quot;On My Mind: A Technological Flood Requires Human Navigators.&quot; &quot;American Libraries&quot; (June/July 1996), p. 39.
* &quot;Libraries, the Library of Congress, and the Information Age.&quot; &quot;Daedalus: Books, Bricks, &amp; Bytes&quot; (Fall 1996). American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
* &quot;The Library of Congress&#x27; National Digital Library Program.&quot; In: &quot;Digital Libraries: Research and Technology Advances&quot;. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag (1996).
:: Selected Papers from ADL &#x27;95 Forum held in McLean, Virginia (May 1995).
* &quot;Let Russia Be Russian&quot; (Op-ed). &quot;New York Times&quot; (June 16, 1996).
* &quot;Cultural Heritage, Education, and the Information Highway&quot;, &quot;J. Paul Getty Trust Bulletin&quot;, spring 1995 (from speech presented at Center for Education in the Arts&#x27; National Conference held in January 1995).
* &quot;Gliazhu vpered ia bez boiazni&quot;, &quot;Moskovskie novosti&quot;, January 15/22, 1995, p. 20.
* &quot;The Local Library and the Electronic Age&quot;, &quot;Moveable Type&quot;, Willamette University publication, Salem, Oregon, 1994/95.
* &quot;Khristianstvo i preobrazovanie Rossii&quot;, &quot;Mera&quot;, St. Petersburg: Glagol, 1994 (Russian translation of &quot;Christianity and the Transformation of Russia&quot;, speech given at the 71st Convocation of the U.S. Episcopal Church, August 29, 1994).
* &quot;Electronic Content and Civilization&#x27;s Discontent&quot;, &quot;Educom Review&quot;, September/October 1994, p. 22.
* &quot;The Case for Orthodoxy&quot;, &quot;The New Republic&quot;, May 30, 1994, p. 24.
* &quot;The Electronic Library&quot;, &quot;Media Studies Journal&quot;, Winter 1994, p. 109.
* &quot;Religious Revival in Russia: Discovery and Change&quot;, &quot;Woodstock Report&quot;, October 1992, no. 31, pp. 3–8. (An abridged version of opening presentation at Woodstock Theological Center&#x27;s Forum on Religion in the Former Soviet Republics, May 6, 1992).
* &quot;Opening a Window on Deceit&quot;, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;, August 24, 1992.
* &quot;The Intellectual and Cultural Dimensions of International Relations: Present Ironies and Future Possibilities&quot;, &quot;The Journal of Arts Management, Law and Society&quot;, v. 22, no. 2, Summer 1992.
* &quot;Feed Russia&#x27;s Pride, Not Just Its Stomach&quot;, (based on an address given at Princeton University), &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, February 25, 1992.
* &quot;The Search for a Modern Russian Identity&quot;, &quot;Bulletin: The American Academy of Arts and Sciences&quot;, January 1992 (edited version of &quot;Russia&#x27;s Fever Break&quot;, which appeared in the &quot;Wilson Quarterly&quot;, Autumn 1991).
* &quot;Library of Congress to Open Collections to Local Libraries in Electronic Access Plans&quot;, &quot;American Libraries&quot;, Feature, September 1991.
* &quot;Russia&#x27;s Fever Break&quot;, &quot;The Wilson Quarterly&quot;, Autumn 1991.
* &quot;U.S.S.R.: The Birth of a Nation&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post – Outlook&quot;, September 8, 1991.
* &quot;The True Heroes of the Soviet Union&quot;, &quot;The New York Times Op-Ed&quot;, August 30, 1991.
* &quot;The Crisis of Communism and the Future of Freedom&quot;, &quot;NBR Publications: NBR Analysis&quot;, v. 2, no. 3, July 1991.
* &quot;The Crisis of Communism and the Future of Freedom&quot;, paper prepared for Conference on Global Responsibilities and National Interests, co-sponsored by the Carnegie Council on Ethics and International Affairs and DePauw University, and held June 1990 in Greencastle, Indiana. &quot;Ethics &amp; International Affairs&quot;, 1991, v. 5.
* &quot;Sovetskaia drama&quot;, &quot;Kar&#x27;era&quot;, no. 8 (16), April 1991, pp. 8–9.
* &quot;Rossiia v poiskakh sebia&quot;, &quot;Nezavisimaia gazeta&quot;, June 4, 1991, p. 5 (publication of lecture given at U.S. Embassy, Moscow).
* &quot;The Soviet Drama&quot;, two-part article, &quot;The Washington Post.&quot; 1. &quot;Russia&#x27;s Quest for Identity&quot;, January 21, 1990, and 2. &quot;Looking to the Past&quot;, January 22, 1990.
* &quot;James Billington on Russian Opera&quot;, &quot;The Washington Opera&quot;, Winter 1989.
* &quot;Russia: the Search for a New Identity&quot;, &quot;Geopolitique – Review of the International Institute of Geopolitics&quot;, Summer 1989, Paris.
* &quot;Keeping the Faith in the USSR After a Thousand Years&quot;, &quot;Smithsonian Magazine&quot;, April 1989, pp. 130–143.
* &quot;...&quot;Rossii nepovtorimye cherty&quot;&quot;, &quot;Literaturnaia gazeta&quot;, April 13, 1988, p. 2.
* &quot;A Search for Leaders&quot;, A Symposium: What Future Directions for Academic Exchange? by Paul Seabury, A. Kenneth Pye, Mark Blitz and James H. Billington, &quot;The Annals&quot;, The American Academy of Political and Social Science, May 1987, Sage Publications, pp. 161–163.
* &quot;Realism and Vision in American Foreign Policy&quot;, &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, February 1987.
* &quot;Soviet Power and the Unity of the Industrial Democracies&quot;, &quot;The Atlantic Community Quarterly&quot;, Winter 1986–87, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 374–379 (adaptation of address given at symposium – &quot;The Critical Triangle – Japan, the USA and the USSR&quot;, Sponsored by the &quot;Asahi Shimbun&quot;, Tokyo, April 21, 1986).
* &quot;Liberty, Equality, Fraternity – Old Ideals, New Revolution&quot;, &quot;Jubilee&quot;, Summer 1984, pp. 7–12.
* &quot;With Russia: After 50 Years. A Time of Danger, an Opening for Dialogue&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, November 20, 1983.
* &quot;The Essentials: Goodness, Beauty, Truth&quot;, &quot;Envoy&quot; (The Catholic University of America), Fall 1983.
* &quot;Russia After Brezhnev: A Nation in Search of a New Identity&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, November 14, 1982.
* &quot;Revolution and Its Discontents: The Revolutionary Faith in the Modern World&quot;, &quot;Syracuse Scholar&quot;, no. 2, Fall 1981.
* &quot;The World&#x27;s Fight: 17. An Innovation in International Scholarship&quot;, &quot;American Oxonian&quot;, no. 2, Spring 1981.
* &quot;Christianity in the USSR&quot;, &quot;Theology Today&quot;, July 1980.
* &quot;Fire in the Minds of Men&quot;, &quot;Wilson Quarterly&quot;, Summer 1980.
* &quot;The Crisis of Legitimacy&quot;, &quot;Theology Today&quot;, July 1976.
* &quot;The Gun Within&quot;, &quot;Newsweek&quot;, October 6, 1975.
* &quot;The Strange Death of Liberal Education&quot;, &quot;Furman Magazine&quot;, Fall 1972.
* &quot;Fulbright Success Story&quot;, &quot;New York Times&quot; Op-Ed page, December 13, 1971.
* &quot;Purpose in the University&quot;, &quot;Theology Today&quot;, January 1971.
* &quot;Address to the Rhodes Scholar Sailing Party, 1969&quot;, &quot;American Oxonian&quot;, April 1970.
* &quot;A Ferment of Intellectuals&quot;, &quot;Life&quot;, January 10, 1969.
* &quot;The Humanistic Heartbeat Has Failed&quot;, &quot;Life&quot;, January 10, 1969.
* &quot;Force and Counterforce in Eastern Europe&quot;, &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, October 1968.
* Two articles on the Czech Crisis in &quot;Life&quot;, May 24, 1968.
* Articles on Russia in &quot;Life&quot;, September 22 and November 10, 1967.
* &quot;Six Views of the Russian Revolution&quot;, &quot;World Politics&quot;, no. 18, April 1966, pp. 452–473.
* &quot;Soviet Youth is Getting Out of (Party) Line&quot;, &quot;University: A Princeton Quarterly&quot;, 1965–66, winter (No. 27).
* &quot;Science in Russian Culture&quot;, &quot;American Scientist&quot;, June 1964.
* &quot;Images of Muscovy&quot;, &quot;Slavic Review&quot;, March 1962.
* &quot;Five Clues to the Khrushchev Riddle&quot;, &quot;New York Times Sunday Magazine&quot;, October 29, 1961, lead article&quot;.&quot;
* &quot;The Intelligentsia and the Religion of Humanity&quot;, &quot;American Historical Review&quot;, July 1960.
* &quot;Nikita Khrushchev and &#x27;Doctor Zhivago,&#x27;&quot; &quot;New York Times Sunday Magazine&quot;, November 9, 1958, lead article&quot;.&quot;
* &quot;The Renaissance of the Russian Intelligentsia&quot;, &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, 1957, April.
* &quot;The Bolshevik Debt to Russian Populism&quot;, &quot;Occidente&quot;, 1956, no. 4.
* &quot;Thoughts on America and the Cold War&quot;, &quot;Freedom and Union&quot;, 1952, Autumn.

==Notes==
==References==
* 

==External links==
* 1989 Address to the Washington Press Club on the Library of Congress in Text, Audio, Video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q137576" start="0" end="23" title="James H. Billington" label="James Hadley Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="117" end="124" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="129" end="138" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542448" start="235" end="256" title="Librarian of Congress" label="Librarian of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="292" end="305" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="367" end="378" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q995267" start="445" end="468" title="Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania" label="Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693608" start="566" end="590" title="Lower Merion High School" label="Lower Merion High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="595" end="615" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q184656" start="733" end="750" title="Nikolai Berdyaev" label="Nicholas Berdyaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="825" end="840" title="Balliol College" label="Balliol College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="848" end="868" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="885" end="899" title="Rhodes Scholar" label="Rhodes Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q205162" start="931" end="944" title="Isaiah Berlin" label="Isaiah Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973808" start="992" end="1020" title="Office of National Estimates" label="Office of National Estimates"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1043" end="1061" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1100" end="1120" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q872975" start="1228" end="1276" title="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars" label="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389513" start="1397" end="1442" title="Kennan Institute for Advanced Russian Studies" label="Kennan Institute for Advanced Russian Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775027" start="1509" end="1525" title="Wilson Quarterly" label="Wilson Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542448" start="2000" end="2021" title="Librarian of Congress" label="Librarian of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2099" end="2118" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969554" start="2537" end="2565" title="Château de la Grange-Bléneau" label="Château de la Grange-Bléneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q195801" start="2722" end="2735" title="Waldseemüller map" label="Waldseemüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="3346" end="3378" title="Bibliothèque nationale de France" label="Bibliothèque Nationale de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="3640" end="3651" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q471729" start="3980" end="4000" title="mass deacidification" label="mass deacidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q755026" start="4152" end="4162" title="Fort Meade, Maryland" label="Fort Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="4877" end="4892" title="Mississippi River" label="the Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="5053" end="5072" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="5809" end="5815" title="Flickr" label="Flickr"/>
<link wikidata="Q255381" start="5869" end="5878" title="Pinterest" label="Pinterest"/>
<link wikidata="Q45432" start="5880" end="5883" title="RSS" label="RSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="7223" end="7230" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="7263" end="7278" title="App Store (iOS)" label="Apple App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q753379" start="7586" end="7618" title="Digital Millennium Copyright Act" label="Digital Millennium Copyright Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="7874" end="7915" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670276" start="8425" end="8431" title="THOMAS" label="THOMAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q856638" start="8445" end="8457" title="card catalog" label="card catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784058" start="8493" end="8514" title="United States Copyright Office" label="U.S. Copyright Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="8522" end="8530" title="web site" label="web site"/>
<link wikidata="Q152019" start="8825" end="8835" title="Laura Bush" label="Laura Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q465811" start="8917" end="8930" title="National Mall" label="National Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971746" start="8939" end="8967" title="Washington Convention Center" label="Washington Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q179382" start="9262" end="9275" title="John Kluge" label="John W. Kluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="10719" end="10729" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="10731" end="10744" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="10746" end="10760" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q212762" start="10762" end="10776" title="Burt Bacharach" label="Burt Bacharach"/>
<link wikidata="Q449030" start="10781" end="10790" title="Hal David" label="Hal David"/>
<link wikidata="Q217787" start="10792" end="10803" title="Carole King" label="Carole King"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="10805" end="10815" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="10821" end="10834" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542686" start="11063" end="11096" title="Library of Congress Living Legend" label="Library of Congress Living Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q374610" start="12588" end="12604" title="David McCullough" label="David McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13209" end="13229" title="The Icon and the Axe" label="The Icon and the Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038772" start="13250" end="13274" title="Fire in the Minds of Men" label="Fire in the Minds of Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="13512" end="13539" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="Public Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="14242" end="14248" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672405" start="14313" end="14337" title="National Library of Iran" label="National Library of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893109" start="14557" end="14577" title="Woodrow Wilson Award" label="Woodrow Wilson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="14583" end="14603" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="14642" end="14673" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14686" end="14696" title="UCLA Medal" label="UCLA Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244633" start="14713" end="14726" title="Pushkin Medal" label="Pushkin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="15176" end="15213" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="15255" end="15282" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="15310" end="15319" title="knight" label="Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="15401" end="15426" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Order of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q93713" start="15465" end="15501" title="Order of the Southern Cross" label="National Order of the Southern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059569" start="15532" end="15570" title="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic" label="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="15622" end="15671" title="Federal Cross of Merit" label="Order of Merit by the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063180" start="15809" end="15823" title="Order of Diplomatic Service Merit" label="Gwanghwa Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="15843" end="15848" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="15900" end="15915" title="Kyrgyz Republic" label="Kyrgyz Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="16101" end="16116" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051386" start="16136" end="16150" title="Theology Today" label="Theology Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507800" start="16320" end="16338" title="Fulbright–Hays Act of 1961" label="Fulbright-Hays Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="16367" end="16413" title="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts" label="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="16438" end="16468" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431868" start="16644" end="16659" title="Alfred A. Knopf" label="Alfred A. Knopf"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16678" end="16738" title="Fire in the Minds of Men: Origins of the Revolutionary Faith" label="Fire in the Minds of Men: Origins of the Revolutionary Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="16889" end="16905" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499961" start="16999" end="17013" title="Free Press (publisher)" label="The Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645059" start="17190" end="17220" title="Johns Hopkins University Press" label="Johns Hopkins University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100023" start="17784" end="17795" title="Orbis Books" label="Orbis Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="18795" end="18819" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834082" start="23926" end="23941" title="Michael S. Roth" label="Michael S. Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560313" start="23953" end="23966" title="Vintage Books" label="Vintage Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969582" start="24133" end="24148" title="Nathaniel Davis" label="Nathaniel Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413088" start="24156" end="24182" title="New York Times Book Review" label="New York Times Book Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="24367" end="24386" title="Wall Street Journal" label="Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="24509" end="24524" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="24610" end="24615" title="Op-Ed" label="Op-Ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24624" end="24638" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744356" start="24926" end="24944" title="American Libraries" label="American Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="25378" end="25415" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q176916" start="25584" end="25599" title="Springer-Verlag" label="Springer-Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="25725" end="25730" title="Op-ed" label="Op-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="25739" end="25753" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578289" wikidata="Q4405931" url="?curid=578289" title="Cecil H. Green Library">
<text>The Cecil H. Green Library (commonly known as Green Library) is the main library on the Stanford University campus and is part of the SUL system. It is named for Cecil H. Green.

Green Library houses 4 million volumes, most of which are related to the humanities and social sciences. Libraries elsewhere on campus cover specialized areas such as Business, Law, Art, Medicine, or Engineering.

Books from Green and other Stanford libraries are being scanned as part of the Google Books project.

==History==
The earliest library at Stanford was in the inner quadrangle. It was housed in one large room capable of accommodating 100 readers. This was replaced in 1900 by a separate building on the outer quadrangle, named the Thomas Welton Stanford library after its major donor. This library was recognized as being too small, and a new larger library in a separate building was begun, but it was destroyed in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake before it could be occupied.

A major new library was approved in 1913 and completed in 1919. This building forms the older portion of the Green Library. In 1980, a larger annex was added and the library renamed for Cecil H. Green. The original part of the building is now known as the Bing Wing for Peter Bing, who donated a substantial amount of money for fixing it after the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake.

==Design==
Green Library&#x27;s design was a significant and early departure from the architectural style of Stanford&#x27;s Main Quad. Jane Stanford held a design competition for the new library and chose the submission of Joseph MacKay, a San Francisco art glassmaker, which drew more on Romanesque style than the existing buildings. Several stories tall, this original construction was refurbished in 1999 and now forms the main halls and rotunda of the library.

==See also==
*Stanford University Libraries

==References==
== External links ==
* Stanford University Libraries &amp; Academic Information Resources
* Online Tour of Green Library
* Information Center, Green Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4405931" start="4" end="26" title="Cecil H. Green Library" label="Cecil H. Green Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405931" start="46" end="59" title="Cecil H. Green Library" label="Green Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="88" end="107" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598806" start="134" end="137" title="Stanford University Libraries" label="SUL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357288" start="162" end="176" title="Cecil H. Green" label="Cecil H. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="252" end="262" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="267" end="282" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="472" end="484" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794983" start="723" end="745" title="Thomas Welton Stanford" label="Thomas Welton Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="912" end="941" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1242" end="1252" title="Peter Bing" label="Peter Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053476" start="1320" end="1347" title="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake" label="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891993" start="1486" end="1499" title="Jane Stanford" label="Jane Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="1640" end="1650" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598806" start="1831" end="1860" title="Stanford University Libraries" label="Stanford University Libraries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578296" wikidata="Q4127009" url="?curid=578296" title="Gate of Heaven Cemetery (Hawthorne, New York)">
<text>Gate of Heaven Cemetery, approximately 25 miles (40 km) north of New York City, was established in 1917 at 10 West Stevens Ave. in Hawthorne, Westchester County, New York, as a Catholic burial site. Among its famous residents is baseball player Babe Ruth, whose grave has an epitaph by Cardinal Francis Spellman and is almost always adorned by many baseballs, bats and caps. Adjacent to the Garden Mausoleum is a small train station of the Metro-North Railroad Harlem Division named Mount Pleasant, where four trains stop daily, two northbound and two southbound. Several baseball players are buried here.

==Notable interments== 
*Robert Abplanalp (1922–2003), inventor of the aerosol spray valve
*Fred Allen (1894–1956), actor and comedian
* Mario Biaggi (1917–2015), decorated policeman and US Congressman
*Spruille Braden (1894–1978), diplomat
*Ralph Branca (1926–2016), professional baseball pitcher who gave up the Shot Heard &#x27;Round the World to Bobby Thomson in 1951
*Heywood Broun (1888–1939), journalist
*Alfred Bryan (1871-1958), songwriter
*Ronald Paul Bucca (1954–2001), New York City Fire Department Marshal killed in the September 11 attacks
*Charles A. Buckley (1890–1967), United States Representative from New York
*Frances W. &quot;Billie&quot; Cagney, née Vernon (1899–1994), dancer and wife of James Cagney
*James Cagney (1899–1986), actor
*Charles J. Carroll (1882–1942), lawyer and politician
*Emil A. Ciccotelli (1929–1998), Chief of Detectives New York City Police Department
*Mary Higgins Clark (1927–2020), novelist 
*Bob Considine (1906–1975), author
*Mark J. Coyle (1965–2007), political consultant
*Angelo &quot;Gyp&quot; DeCarlo (1902–1973), mobster
*Philip D&#x27;Antoni (1929–2018), film producer
*Dudley Digges (1880–1947), stage and film actor
*Bella Dodd (1904–1969), activist, teacher and attorney
*Dorothy Donnelly (1876–1928), actress, playwright, librettist, producer and director
*Jessica Dragonette (1900–1980), singer
*James Farley (1888–1976), Postmaster General and advisor to President Franklin D. Roosevelt
*Joseph T. Flynn (1894–1935), World War I pilot, New York State Assemblyman, lawyer
*Samuel J. Foley (1891–1951), attorney, judge and Bronx County District Attorney
*Bill Froats (1930–1998), baseball player
*Henry Jacques Gaisman, philanthropist and inventor of the safety razor
*Ralph W. Gallagher (1881–1952), chairman of Standard Oil of New Jersey
* (1859–1945), father of Federico García Lorca
*Hector Guimard (1867–1942), French architect and most prominent representative of the Art Nouveau movement in France
*Ernest E. L. Hammer (December 17, 1884 – March 10, 1970), Administrator of the Bronx, Supreme Court Justice of the State of New York, presided over Bruno Hauptman trial for extradition in the Lindbergh baby kidnapping
*Frank Hardart (1884–1972), son of founder of Horn &amp; Hardart automat
*Julie Haydon (1910–1994), actress
*Martin J. Healy (1883–1942), member of the New York State Assembly and New York City Board of Aldermen
*Anna Held (1872–1918), actress and singer
*Portland Hoffa (1905–1990), actress
*Phillips Holmes (1907–1942), actor, Royal Canadian Air Force airman of World War II (recorded by Commonwealth War Graves Commission with younger age of 31.) 
*Bess Houdini (1876–1943), wife of magician Harry Houdini
*Peter Hujar (1934–1987), photographer and artist
*G. Murray Hulbert (1881–1950), United States Representative from New York
*Ethel D. Jacobs (1910–2001), thoroughbred racehorse owner
*Peggy Hopkins Joyce (1893–1957), actress and socialite
*Arthur Judson (1881–1975), co-founder of CBS
*Owen M. Kiernan (1867–1940), member of the New York State Assembly
*Dorothy Kilgallen (1913–1965), journalist and television personality
*Richard Kollmar (1910–1971), Broadway producer
*T. Vincent Learson (1912–1996), IBM chairman and Ambassador at Large for Law of the Sea Matters
*Ernesto Lecuona (1896–1963), composer and songwriter
*Augustus C. Long (1904–2001), chairman of Texaco
*James J. Lyons (1890–1966), Bronx Borough President from 1934 to 1962
*Ann Mara (1929–2015), wife of Wellington Mara
*Tim Mara (1887–1959), founder of the NFL New York Giants
*Wellington Mara (1916–2005), owner of the NFL New York Giants
*Billy Martin (1928–1989), Major League Baseball player/manager
*Malachi Martin (1921–1999), Irish Catholic priest and writer
*Anne O&#x27;Hare McCormick (1880–1954), Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist
*Pat McDonald (1871–1954), Olympic champion weight-thrower
*Charles B. McLaughlin (1884–1947), attorney, judge and Bronx County District Attorney
*John McSherry (1944–1996), Major League Baseball umpire
*Sal Mineo (1939–1976), actor
*Condé Nast (1873–1942), publisher
*George Jean Nathan (1882–1958), drama critic
*Elliott Nugent (1896–1980), actor, director and screenwriter 
*John P. O&#x27;Brien (1873–1951), politician and mayor of New York City 
*Richard W. O&#x27;Neill (1898–1986), soldier and Medal of Honor recipient in World War I
*Fulton Oursler (1893–1952), writer
*Lester W. Patterson (1893–1947), Bronx assemblyman and county judge.
*Westbrook Pegler (1894–1969), Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist
*Justin Pierce (1975–2000), actor and skateboarder
*Mike Quill (1905–1966), founder of Transport Workers Union of America
*Dan Reeves (1912–1971), former owner of the NFL Los Angeles Rams
*Michael Restel (1924–2014), World War II Navy Veteran 
*Babe Ruth (1895–1948), Hall of Fame baseball player
*Claire Merritt Ruth (1900–1976), wife of baseball great Babe Ruth
*Dutch Schultz (1902–1935), mobster
*Charles M. Schwab (1862–1939), steel magnate (remains later moved to St. Michael Cemetery in Loretto, Pennsylvania)
*Arnold Skaaland (1925–2007), professional wrestler 
*Spyros Skouras (1893–1971), former president of 20th Century-Fox
*Lisa Steinberg (1981–1987), child murder victim
*Daniel V. Sullivan (1886–1966), attorney, judge and Bronx County District Attorney
*Henry Waters Taft (1859–1945), lawyer and author, brother of President William Howard Taft
*Mike Tiernan (1867–1918), professional baseball player New York Giants
*James H. Torrens (1874–1952), politician
*Vito Valentinetti (1928–2021), Major League Baseball pitcher
*Jimmy Walker (1881–1946), mayor of New York City
*Bill Wendell (1924–1999), television announcer
*William B. Widnall (1906–1983), former US Congressman
*Malcolm Wilson (1914–2000), Governor of New York for whom the previous Tappan Zee Bridge over the Hudson River was named
*Sal Yvars (1924–2008), Major League Baseball catcher

==Image gallery==

==References==
==External links==

*Gate of Heaven Cemetery at FindAGrave.com
*Gate of Heaven Cemetery at Interment.net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4127009" start="0" end="23" title="Gate of Heaven Cemetery (Hawthorne, New York)" label="Gate of Heaven Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="65" end="78" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826333" start="131" end="140" title="Hawthorne, New York" label="Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="142" end="160" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="162" end="170" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="177" end="185" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="245" end="254" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q547185" start="295" end="311" title="Francis Spellman" label="Francis Spellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="398" end="407" title="Mausoleum" label="Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="440" end="460" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11339892" start="483" end="497" title="Mount Pleasant station (Metro-North)" label="Mount Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q354463" start="632" end="648" title="Robert Abplanalp" label="Robert Abplanalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q967454" start="699" end="709" title="Fred Allen" label="Fred Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880937" start="744" end="756" title="Mario Biaggi" label="Mario Biaggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504182" start="810" end="825" title="Spruille Braden" label="Spruille Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418235" start="849" end="861" title="Ralph Branca" label="Ralph Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502395" start="921" end="953" title="Shot Heard &amp;#x27;Round the World (baseball)" label="Shot Heard &amp;#x27;Round the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935641" start="957" end="970" title="Bobby Thomson" label="Bobby Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617040" start="980" end="993" title="Heywood Broun" label="Heywood Broun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273339" start="1019" end="1031" title="Alfred Bryan (lyricist)" label="Alfred Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365160" start="1057" end="1074" title="Ronald Paul Bucca" label="Ronald Paul Bucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="1088" end="1117" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1140" end="1160" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074810" start="1162" end="1180" title="Charles A. Buckley" label="Charles A. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q94041" start="1333" end="1345" title="James Cagney" label="James Cagney"/>
<link wikidata="Q112581665" start="1366" end="1384" title="Charles J. Carroll" label="Charles J. Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371147" start="1421" end="1439" title="Emil A. Ciccotelli" label="Emil A. Ciccotelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="1473" end="1504" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q231736" start="1506" end="1524" title="Mary Higgins Clark" label="Mary Higgins Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932122" start="1549" end="1562" title="Bob Considine" label="Bob Considine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616956" start="1633" end="1663" title="Angelo DeCarlo" label="Angelo &amp;quot;Gyp&amp;quot; DeCarlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183409" start="1686" end="1706" title="Philip D&amp;#x27;Antoni" label="Philip D&amp;#x27;Antoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743601" start="1735" end="1748" title="Dudley Digges (actor)" label="Dudley Digges"/>
<link wikidata="Q785385" start="1784" end="1794" title="Bella Dodd" label="Bella Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298385" start="1840" end="1856" title="Dorothy Donnelly" label="Dorothy Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205526" start="1926" end="1944" title="Jessica Dragonette" label="Jessica Dragonette"/>
<link wikidata="Q954859" start="1966" end="1978" title="James Farley" label="James Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753094" start="1992" end="2010" title="United States Postmaster General" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="2036" end="2057" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107863883" start="2059" end="2074" title="Joseph T. Flynn" label="Joseph T. Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q24845725" start="2143" end="2158" title="Samuel J. Foley (district attorney)" label="Samuel J. Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204599" start="2192" end="2222" title="Bronx County District Attorney" label="Bronx County District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909065" start="2224" end="2235" title="Bill Froats" label="Bill Froats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723803" start="2266" end="2287" title="Henry Jacques Gaisman" label="Henry Jacques Gaisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720740" start="2338" end="2356" title="Ralph W. Gallagher" label="Ralph W. Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="2382" end="2408" title="ExxonMobil" label="Standard Oil of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q316422" start="2457" end="2471" title="Hector Guimard" label="Hector Guimard"/>
<link wikidata="Q112600606" start="2575" end="2594" title="Ernest E. L. Hammer" label="Ernest E. L. Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668563" start="2794" end="2807" title="Frank Hardart" label="Frank Hardart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903883" start="2839" end="2857" title="Horn &amp;amp; Hardart" label="Horn &amp;amp; Hardart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308246" start="2867" end="2879" title="Julie Haydon" label="Julie Haydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612930" start="2902" end="2917" title="Martin J. Healy" label="Martin J. Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="2945" end="2968" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091397" start="2973" end="3004" title="New York City Board of Aldermen" label="New York City Board of Aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q454030" start="3006" end="3015" title="Anna Held" label="Anna Held"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354665" start="3049" end="3063" title="Portland Hoffa" label="Portland Hoffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718605" start="3086" end="3101" title="Phillips Holmes" label="Phillips Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="3122" end="3146" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3157" end="3169" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="3183" end="3217" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896361" start="3245" end="3257" title="Bess Houdini" label="Bess Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="3288" end="3301" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075836" start="3303" end="3314" title="Peter Hujar" label="Peter Hujar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542724" start="3353" end="3370" title="G. Murray Hulbert" label="G. Murray Hulbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3384" end="3412" title="United States Representative" label="United States Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403100" start="3428" end="3443" title="Ethel D. Jacobs" label="Ethel D. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q531133" start="3487" end="3506" title="Peggy Hopkins Joyce" label="Peggy Hopkins Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799296" start="3543" end="3556" title="Arthur Judson" label="Arthur Judson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3584" end="3587" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q109283892" start="3589" end="3604" title="Owen M. Kiernan" label="Owen M. Kiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="3632" end="3655" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q273177" start="3657" end="3674" title="Dorothy Kilgallen" label="Dorothy Kilgallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327131" start="3727" end="3742" title="Richard Kollmar" label="Richard Kollmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668816" start="3775" end="3793" title="T. Vincent Learson" label="T. Vincent Learson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="3807" end="3810" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q345446" start="3872" end="3887" title="Ernesto Lecuona" label="Ernesto Lecuona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821481" start="3926" end="3942" title="Augustus Long" label="Augustus C. Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q775060" start="3968" end="3974" title="Texaco" label="Texaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136717" start="3976" end="3990" title="James J. Lyons" label="James J. Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="4004" end="4009" title="Bronx" label="Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946327" start="4010" end="4027" title="Borough President" label="Borough President"/>
<link wikidata="Q18926769" start="4047" end="4055" title="Ann Mara" label="Ann Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434138" start="4094" end="4102" title="Tim Mara" label="Tim Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="4135" end="4150" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557801" start="4152" end="4167" title="Wellington Mara" label="Wellington Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q863184" start="4215" end="4227" title="Billy Martin" label="Billy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="4241" end="4262" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281158" start="4279" end="4293" title="Malachi Martin" label="Malachi Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654349" start="4341" end="4367" title="Anne O&amp;#x27;Hare McCormick" label="Anne O&amp;#x27;Hare McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381503" start="4416" end="4428" title="Pat McDonald (athlete)" label="Pat McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196993" start="4475" end="4496" title="Charles B. McLaughlin" label="Charles B. McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182076" start="4562" end="4575" title="John McSherry" label="John McSherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q380997" start="4619" end="4628" title="Sal Mineo" label="Sal Mineo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035037" start="4649" end="4659" title="Condé Montrose Nast" label="Condé Nast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507659" start="4684" end="4702" title="George Jean Nathan" label="George Jean Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332362" start="4730" end="4744" title="Elliott Nugent" label="Elliott Nugent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701296" start="4793" end="4813" title="John P. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="John P. O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329721" start="4867" end="4890" title="Richard W. O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Richard W. O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="4916" end="4930" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4944" end="4955" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q519082" start="4957" end="4971" title="Fulton Oursler" label="Fulton Oursler"/>
<link wikidata="Q106906323" start="4993" end="5012" title="Lester W. Patterson" label="Lester W. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987177" start="5063" end="5079" title="Westbrook Pegler" label="Westbrook Pegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q325742" start="5128" end="5141" title="Justin Pierce" label="Justin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848486" start="5179" end="5189" title="Mike Quill" label="Mike Quill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214266" start="5250" end="5260" title="Dan Reeves (Rams owner)" label="Dan Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="5298" end="5314" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="5372" end="5381" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125265" start="5425" end="5444" title="Claire Merritt Hodgson" label="Claire Merritt Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="5481" end="5490" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q957299" start="5492" end="5505" title="Dutch Schultz" label="Dutch Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q365218" start="5528" end="5545" title="Charles M. Schwab" label="Charles M. Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185011" start="5621" end="5642" title="Loretto, Pennsylvania" label="Loretto, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q696313" start="5645" end="5660" title="Arnold Skaaland" label="Arnold Skaaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494323" start="5698" end="5712" title="Spyros Skouras" label="Spyros Skouras"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="5746" end="5762" title="20th Century-Fox" label="20th Century-Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6214001" start="5764" end="5778" title="Lisa Steinberg" label="Lisa Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24845736" start="5813" end="5831" title="Daniel V. Sullivan (New York judge and district attorney)" label="Daniel V. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729899" start="5897" end="5914" title="Henry Waters Taft" label="Henry Waters Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="5968" end="5987" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094988" start="5989" end="6001" title="Mike Tiernan" label="Mike Tiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135298" start="6061" end="6077" title="James H. Torrens" label="James H. Torrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937180" start="6103" end="6120" title="Vito Valentinetti" label="Vito Valentinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q204135" start="6165" end="6177" title="Jimmy Walker" label="Jimmy Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911326" start="6215" end="6227" title="Bill Wendell" label="Bill Wendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577938" start="6263" end="6281" title="William B. Widnall" label="William B. Widnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q880392" start="6318" end="6332" title="Malcolm Wilson (New York)" label="Malcolm Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q125841" start="6389" end="6406" title="Tappan Zee Bridge (1955–2017)" label="Tappan Zee Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="6416" end="6428" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403316" start="6440" end="6449" title="Sal Yvars" label="Sal Yvars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578298" wikidata="Q4882937" url="?curid=578298" title="Belisarius series">
<text>The Belisarius Series is a fictional saga in the alternate history and military history subgenres of science fiction, written by American authors David Drake and Eric Flint. Its protagonist is a real historical figure, the late Roman general Flavius Belisarius (505–565 AD).

The saga is published by Baen Books wherein an overarching theme ties each book together.

==Books==
Originally intended as a trilogy as outlined by David Drake, each of the initial drafts were divided into two books. The series consists of the following six books:

# &quot;An Oblique Approach&quot; (1998)
# &quot;In the Heart of Darkness&quot; (1998)
# &quot;Destiny&#x27;s Shield&quot; (1999)
# &quot;Fortune&#x27;s Stroke&quot; (2000)
# &quot;The Tide of Victory&quot; (2001)
# &quot;The Dance of Time&quot; (2006)

All of these are available as e-books from Baen. The first four were in the Baen Free Library until removed in early 2013.

* &quot;Islands&quot; (novella) by Eric Flint in &quot;The Warmasters&quot; (2002; )

===Omnibus reprints===
Each volume contains two novels.
* &quot;Belisarius I: Thunder at Dawn&quot; () Cover art by Kurt Miller.
* &quot;Belisarius II: Storm at Noontide&quot; ()
* &quot;Belisarius III: The Flames of Sunset&quot; ()

==Plot==
The premise of this science fiction (more specifically alternate history) series is that a war between two competing societies in the future spills over to 6th century Earth. The New Gods back the Malwa Empire of India and commence attempts to conquer the world and stamp out meritorious accomplishment as a means to privilege and instead favor planned eugenics and hereditary birth (autocracy) in order to change the future. Meritorious performance is seen to originate in the Eastern Roman Empire, and the root cause of a future that must be changed by conquest, and Malwa has a malleable society and the base power for their intervention. Anything in the way (other Indian kingdoms, the Sassanid Persian Empire, and so forth) must be crushed, including plans to deal with China after Byzantium falls.

The Malwa Empire is advised and controlled by a calculating cyborg (human/machine) interface named Link, and the empire uses gunpowder technology to conquer most of the rest of India. To counter this, the other side, crystalline entities originating in humanity&#x27;s far future after much adaptive exploration of the galaxies, contacts the Byzantine general Belisarius via a local holy man and shows him the vision of the future with Malwa conquering the Byzantine Empire and the world. This in essence, puts the problem of thwarting the horrible future visions exposed by the crystal in Belisarius&#x27;s lap even as emissaries of the far off Malwa Empire are visiting Rome to establish a factional struggle to divide Byzantium—and are becoming very popular amongst some of the ruling class and with the Emperor Justinian in particular, forcing Belisarius and friends to move surreptitiously.

Belisarius, though a cataphract general (heavy cavalry) more attuned to direct approaches, is no stranger to either intrigues or indirect methods—and is thus a good choice for the crystalline emissary to contact within the Byzantine political situation, as he must work with imperfect tools, including the suspicious Byzantine Emperor Justinian I and the Empress Theodora, to thwart the hidden Malwa plotting and invasion. He and his wife thus spearhead a conspiracy to save the empire despite its rulers, setting out to build an alliance with Byzantium&#x27;s historical enemy, Persia, with whom they are currently effectively at war, the African Kingdom of Axum—a naval and trading power of the day which is so far away little is known of it or its capabilities, and various Indian forces and individuals that remain in opposition to Malwa—which may or may not be out there, but which are suggested by the visions presented by the mysterious crystal—whatever agenda it might have. So starts &quot;just another day at the office&quot; for what is arguably one of the best general officers known to history.

&quot;An Oblique Approach&quot; primarily revolves around Belisarius, a grand-master of the indirect approach, and a few trusted confidants forming a conspiracy to save the empire under the nose of their jealous and dangerously paranoid emperor. This is a period of seeming calm that precedes any major conflict between rivals where the conspiracy struggles to play catch up and not let its existence be discovered by friend or foe—an important deception hoping to gain both information and time. During the conflict and action, the greater part of this book, the Byzantines are at war with the Sassanid Persian Empire, and the general takes uncharacteristic &quot;great risks&quot; instead of indirection at one point to bring that conflict to a speedy end. This uncharacteristic event in turn partially exposes his conspiracy to his good friend, a fellow general who becomes part of the intrigue and willing co-conspirator thereafter.

&quot;In the Heart of Darkness&quot; primarily revolves around Belisarius learning the strengths and weaknesses of both his Axumite allies and his Malwa enemies. The cataphract general personally travels to India to explore for vulnerabilities (spy) among the Malwa Empire&#x27;s peoples, and spars dangerously both with the rulers themselves and their spies planted in Constantinople. The conspiracy against the Malwa expands to a few others and establishes a secret research site overseen by his wife and a discredited naval officer who carry on an affair seemingly under the nose of a Malwa spy, dance further in &#x27;feigned disaffection&#x27; with spies of the Malwa and their allies within Byzantium and so tend to things in Byzantium with the added cast of a fellow General (Belisarius&#x27; best friend) and his spy mistress.

Belisarius meanwhile leaves the dangers of both his emperor—being too popular can be a &#x27;bad thing&#x27; and his stunning victories in the first book against the Persians made him so—and cultivates the Kingdom of Axum as allies, a naval power of the day, and leads a five-man invasion of his &#x27;exposed&#x27; Malwa enemies (nominally diplomatic friends).

The events in this book provide him time to plan out various contingencies which come to bear fruit in surprising ways in the later sequels and allow the West&#x27;s own gunpower tech researchers to get started. During his journey, the spy mission and deception allow Belisarius to become better able to communicate and understand the crystalline emissary &quot;Aide&quot;.

Belisarius learns of his true enemy, the mysterious entity known as Link, an artificial intelligence that uses human bodies as its interactive device. It concludes with the war between the Byzantines led by Belisarius against his Malwa enemies transforming from a cold to a hot war as Belisarius, separated from his companions by urgent circumstances born of intrigue and might—is hotly pursued fleeing half of Malwa&#x27;s might, alone and unaided, some 1500 miles from the Malwa capital (Modern Delhi) to make his way back home to the west. His companions (and people they gathered along the way during the course of the spying parts of the book) are also variously pursued, but saved by prior contingency planning by the wily general, who is at least as good at deceptions as he is at indirections (But they are complementary skills).

&quot;Destiny&#x27;s Shield&quot; deals with the Malwa invasion of the Persian Empire, and the growing of an alliance and trust between the Byzantines and Persians to stop the invasion and to cement a permanent peace. Belisarius&#x27; actions and magnanimous behavior as victor in the first book will pay a pivotal role as the third book develops and the secret war against the Malwa turns hot. Belisarius leads an under-strength expeditionary force in much more characteristic &quot;indirect approaches&quot; to the aid of the Persian empire which as a new ally had requested four to five times as many troops. The Malwa invade the gut of Persia by sea through the Persian Gulf during the monsoons with an unbelievably huge (Asian) army (to the Persians and other Byzantium generals) which force succeeds in battering the unwary and surprised Persians (forcing them to seek peace with Justinian) and penetrates as far as Babylon thereby pinning most of Persia&#x27;s military might and paralyzing its capabilities whilst also invading from the Hindu Kush by land into eastern Persia. Belisarius gains the trust of the Persian Emperor, uses the chance of conspiracy and treason as a hole card, and generally totally upsets the Malwa plans of conquest by repeatedly tactically showing one thing and strategically moving unseen in surprising real tactics when it matters.

&quot;Fortune&#x27;s Stroke&quot; covers the later events of the Malwa Invasion of Persia as Belisarius must campaign against Rana Sanga, a Rajput general of great skill who befriended Belisarius during the second book of the series, who is loyal to the Malwa through an overdeveloped adherence to honoring his given word. The campaign is but another stratagem (developing like a good mystery story) while in fact, Belisarius is carefully marking time and giving other events set in motion by himself and the conspiracy members time to bear fruit and astonish both friends, and readers in the events and results.

&quot;The Tide of Victory&quot; begins the third phase of the war against the Malwa, with Belisarius appointed commander of a combined Byzantine/Persian army to invade India while Axum and the Kushans (a tribe turned against the Malwa in the subterfuges of &quot;Fortune&#x27;s Stroke&quot;) carry out operations north and south of him. By moving boldly, the obvious again is demonstrated as delightfully false in the stratagems of Belisarius and the developments at times both delight and dismay his allies. In the end, &quot;In Belisarius we trust&quot; becomes a motto of all save the Malwa.

&quot;The Dance of Time&quot; concludes the series as the disparate events set in motion by Belisarius unfold, creating the opportunities that he hopes will end the threat that the Malwa pose to Rome once and for all.

== Reception and analysis ==
A reviewer for &quot;Gizmodo&quot; included the series in his list of &quot;Preposterously Manly Fantasy Series&quot;, describing the protagonist as &quot;a master of the battlefield but in action and in strategy... equally skilled at playing politics or getting his hands dirty&quot;.

A reviewer for &quot;Tor.com&quot; noted that the authors are &quot;not using the story of Belisarius—they’re using the characters in a different story. Though I suppose that in itself testifies to the popularity of Belisarius&quot;.

==See also==
* The General series—Another series plotted by David Drake, with a main character and story inspired by the historical Belisarius
* &quot;Lest Darkness Fall&quot;—By L. Sprague de Camp; another scenario of Belisarius and his time being impacted by a (far more sympathetic) visitor from the future

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4882937" start="4" end="21" title="Belisarius series" label="Belisarius Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="49" end="66" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q192781" start="71" end="87" title="military history" label="military history"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="101" end="116" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q736343" start="146" end="157" title="David Drake" label="David Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320489" start="162" end="172" title="Eric Flint" label="Eric Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="223" end="233" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="late Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="242" end="260" title="Belisarius" label="Flavius Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="301" end="311" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="638" end="659" title="Destiny&amp;#x27;s Shield" label="Destiny&amp;#x27;s Shield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="681" end="702" title="Fortune&amp;#x27;s Stroke" label="Fortune&amp;#x27;s Stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q209788" start="724" end="743" title="The Tide of Victory" label="The Tide of Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="827" end="833" title="e-book" label="e-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841272" start="873" end="890" title="Baen Free Library" label="Baen Free Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="1270" end="1285" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="1305" end="1322" title="alternate history (fiction)" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="1634" end="1643" title="autocracy" label="autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1728" end="1748" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="1940" end="1963" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2232" end="2237" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2397" end="2406" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="2415" end="2425" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="2870" end="2879" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204766" start="2973" end="2983" title="cataphract" label="cataphract"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="2993" end="3006" title="Cavalry" label="heavy cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q204843" start="3315" end="3323" title="Theodora (6th century)" label="Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3531" end="3537" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="3600" end="3615" title="Kingdom of Axum" label="Kingdom of Axum"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="3636" end="3641" title="regional power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="4025" end="4040" title="general officer" label="general officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="4656" end="4679" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="7070" end="7075" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="8078" end="8090" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528871" start="10262" end="10269" title="Gizmodo" label="Gizmodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353448" start="10549" end="10556" title="Tor.com" label="Tor.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736075" start="10778" end="10796" title="The General series" label="The General series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020470" start="10914" end="10932" title="Lest Darkness Fall" label="Lest Darkness Fall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578303" wikidata="Q1668887" url="?curid=578303" title="Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion">
<text>The Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion was a Canadian military unit that volunteered to fight with the XV International Brigade on the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War. Except for France, no other country had a greater proportion of its population volunteer in Spain as did Canada. The Canadian soldiers were engaged in some of the fiercest battles of 1937-38 and suffered heavy casualties.

After the war, the surviving &quot;Mac-Paps&quot; faced new struggles. The Canadian Foreign Enlistment Act of 1937 had prohibited citizens from participating in foreign conflicts. As a result, Canadian veterans of the Spanish Civil War were investigated as politically suspect by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. The veterans were not recognized by national military institutions or in official histories. The prohibition was eventually eased at the end of the 20th century. Three Canadian monuments were erected to honor the Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion, including a monument commissioned by the federal government and installed in Ottawa in 2001. The names of all known Canadian volunteers are listed there.

==History==
===Recruitment and mobilization===
It&#x27;s estimated that three-fourths of Canadian volunteers were either members of the Communist Party of Canada (CPC) or the Young Communist League. They just needed to approach their local committees to initiate the recruitment process. Unlike the American and British volunteers who included significant numbers of students and intellectuals, the Canadian contingent was almost wholly working class. Many had been unemployed and forced into relief camps during the Great Depression. A sizable percentage were recent immigrants, the two largest groups being Finns and Ukrainians.

In general, the Canadian volunteers were self-educated about the Spanish conflict and its repercussions for Europe if the pro-fascist Nationalist side prevailed. To raise awareness about the Spanish Republican cause, Canada&#x27;s leftist political parties created the Canadian Committee to Aid Spanish Democracy.

Canadian volunteers who wanted to serve in Spain had to travel under false pretenses. The Parliament passed the Canadian Foreign Enlistment Act in April 1937, and applied it to the Spanish conflict in July 1937, prohibiting participation in a foreign war. Even before the prohibition went into effect, recruits assembled and transported themselves in secret to avoid potential prosecution.

Volunteers usually went first to Toronto, where they met at operation headquarters, located at Queen and Spadina streets. Applicants were screened. For the most part, anyone intending to enlist required a leftist background. Drunken and adventurous types were weeded out, leaving only those who were ardent about fighting European fascism. These factors, together with the comparatively mature age of the soldiers61.5% were over thirtyresulted in an ideologically committed Canadian contingent. From Toronto they traveled to Montreal or, more frequently, to New York City, where they departed by ship across the Atlantic Ocean to France. They then made their way to Spain either by ship or by foot across the Pyrenees.

===1937===
In February 1937, the XVth Brigade—composed primarily of English-speaking battalions from the U.S., Britain and Canada—fought in the pivotal Battle of Jarama in which eleven Canadian soldiers were killed. By the summer of 1937, an estimated 1,200 Canadians were involved in the Spanish conflict. The first volunteers to arrive were dispatched with the Abraham Lincoln Battalion of Americans. Later, the Canadians were assigned to the North American George Washington Battalion, with approximately forty Canadians serving in each group.

In May 1937, a Canadian battalion began to take shape. It was formally mustered into the XVth Brigade on 1 July 1937 at Albacete. The Canadian soldiers named it after William Lyon Mackenzie and Louis-Joseph Papineau, who led the Rebellion of 1837–1838. They became noted 19th century politicians, standing for a responsive, reform-minded government. The Canadians chose this name as a symbol of their national identity and their commitment to the elected Spanish Republican side against the Nationalist insurgency headed by General Francisco Franco.

The Mac-Paps came from both the U.S. and Canada. In fact, the Americans initially outnumbered the Canadians 2 to 1, and there was discussion about possibly forming another American battalion. Later, however, Canadians comprised over half of the Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion. As casualties mounted in the unit, it began to incorporate more Spanish-born volunteers and conscripts.

In the fighting at Fuentes de Ebro in October 1937, the Mac-Paps were commanded by American Robert G. Thompson. By November, the battalion had its first Canadian commander, Captain Edward Cecil-Smith from Toronto. He was a CPC member, a co-author of the banned play &quot;Eight Men Speak&quot;, a journalist, and a former militiaman. Cecil-Smith commanded the Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion for most of its existence.

Company Three of the Mac-Paps (under Lieutenant Lionel Edwards of Edmonton) earned distinction at the Battle of Teruel (December 1937 – February 1938). After withstanding the most intense artillery barrage of the war, the Canadian soldiers held their battered trench position and routed the advancing Nationalist forces. The heroism displayed by the Canadians at Teruel won the praise of American and British war correspondents and military observers: &quot;The Battalion received a special citation of bravery from the Army, and Captain E. Cecil Smith was promoted to the rank of Major for his brilliant leadership in the action.&quot;

===1938===

By early 1938, the tide had turned in favor of the Nationalist side, which enjoyed superior manpower and materiel, due in large part to the aid they were receiving from Nazi Germany and fascist Italy. The Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion fought in several major 1938 battles, including the Aragon Offensive (March–April), more commonly known to Republican forces as the &quot;Retreats&quot;. The Finnish-American machine gun companies successfully repelled the Nationalists, but the collapse of the front on their flanks compelled the Mac-Paps to join the withdrawal. Their final engagement was the Battle of the Ebro (July–September). This decisive Nationalist victory broke the back of the Republican forces.

In the end, Spanish Prime Minister Juan Negrín ordered the International Brigades withdrawn on September 21, 1938. Madrid fell six months later on March 28, 1939. By the end of the war, of the 1,546 Canadians known to have fought in Spain, 721 perished.

Returning to Canada was an arduous ordeal for the surviving soldiers, who depended on friends and family to collect the money to get them home; some soldiers were arrested in France. The Canadian government continued its policy of ignoring or prosecuting the veterans of Spain, in accordance with the Foreign Enlistment Act. It was not until January 1939 that the government agreed that the veteran combatants could return to Canada. Upon their arrival, many were investigated by the RCMP because of their Communist Party affiliations and were denied employment. A majority of Mac-Pap veterans volunteered to fight in World War II, but some were rejected as &quot;politically unreliable&quot;.

==Legacy and commemoration==
Because the Canadian government chose non-intervention in the Spanish Civil War, the Mac-Pap volunteers do not have status in military institutions or in the national honoring of veterans. The Canadians who died in the war are not included in the Books of Remembrance in the Peace Tower. Their sacrifice is not commemorated on federal war memorials or in Remembrance Day services. Those who survived the Spanish conflict were not entitled to veterans&#x27; benefits.
A partial &quot;thaw&quot; occurred at the end of the 20th century. A group known as the Veterans and Friends of the Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion gained government permission to install three monuments to honor Canada&#x27;s Spanish Civil War veterans. The first was erected in Toronto on June 4, 1995 at Queen&#x27;s Park. The monument is a large boulder transported from the battlefield of Gandesa, Spain. Attached to the boulder is a federal plaque from the national Historic Sites and Monuments Board, reflecting the status of the Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion as a National Historic Event.
A statue to the Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion was unveiled February 12, 2000 in Victoria, British Columbia.

Another monument was erected in Ottawa&#x27;s Green Island Park in 2001. This project was also organized and funded by Veterans and Friends of the Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion. The monument lists the names of 1,546 Canadian volunteers, which includes all Canadians who served in the Mac-Paps or other battalions, plus those who served in the medical, communications, transportation, and translation corps. The monument was designed by architect Oryst Sawchuck of Sudbury, selected in a juried competition by the organizers. It shows a figure of Prometheus raising his arm towards the Sun, cut out of a sheet of steel. A 12-metre memorial wall is inscribed with volunteers&#x27; names.

Dr. Norman Bethune, a key developer of mobile army medical units for the Republican side, is one of the few Canadians to be officially recognized for his service in Spain.

The Canadian folk band, Hudson Valley Sally, recorded a song entitled &quot;The Mackenzie-Papineau Brigade&quot; (note: it should be &quot;Battalion&quot;). The song details the adventures of the Mac-Paps and their fight in Spain.

==See also==

*Canadian League for Peace and Democracy
*International Brigades
*Spanish Civil War
*Spanish Republican Armed Forces
*Spanish Civil War – Nova Scotia
*Military history of Canada

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Beeching, William C. &quot;Canadian Volunteers: Spain 1936–1939&quot;. Regina: U. of Regina, 1989.
* Petrou, Michael. &quot;Renegades: Canadians in the Spanish Civil War&quot;. Vancouver: UBC Press, 2008.
*Zuehlke, Mark (2007) &quot;The Gallant Cause: Canadians in the Spanish Civil War, 1936–1939, Wiley &amp; Sons Canada 

==Further reading==
*Sharpe, Emily Robins (2018). &quot;“The heart above the ruins”: Miriam Waddington’s Poetry, the Spanish Civil War, and Jewish Canadian Literature&quot;. &quot;Canadian Jewish Studies / Études Juives Canadiennes.&quot; 26: 56-74. . Retrieved 2 December 2023.

==External links==
* Friends of the Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion
* Governor General of Canada&#x27;s Speech on the Occasion of the Unveiling of the MacKenzie-Papineau Battalion Monument – Archive.org cached version of Governor General&#x27;s speech
* To My Son In Spain: Finnish Canadians in the Spanish Civil War (Thunderstone Pictures)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1668887" start="4" end="32" title="Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion" label="Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="39" end="47" title="Canadian" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q941335" start="97" end="121" title="XV International Brigade" label="XV International Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="129" end="144" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republican side"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="152" end="169" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668887" start="429" end="437" title="Mackenzie–Papineau Battalion" label="Mac-Paps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="469" end="508" title="Foreign Enlistment Act 1870#Canada" label="Canadian Foreign Enlistment Act of 1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="678" end="707" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="1029" end="1035" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160378" start="1243" end="1268" title="Communist Party of Canada" label="Communist Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113020" start="1282" end="1304" title="Young Communist League of Canada" label="Young Communist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="1544" end="1557" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1624" end="1640" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="1716" end="1721" title="Finns" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="1726" end="1736" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2008" end="2051" title="Canadian League for Peace and Democracy#Activities" label="Canadian Committee to Aid Spanish Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2478" end="2485" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067220" start="2540" end="2545" title="Queen Street West" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120143" start="2550" end="2557" title="Spadina Avenue" label="Spadina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436685" start="2767" end="2783" title="Fascism in Europe" label="European fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2970" end="2978" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3003" end="3016" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="3057" end="3071" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3075" end="3081" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="3154" end="3162" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956" start="3317" end="3333" title="Battle of Jarama" label="Battle of Jarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623454" start="3528" end="3553" title="Abraham Lincoln Battalion" label="Abraham Lincoln Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623454" start="3625" end="3652" title="George Washington Battalion" label="George Washington Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15095" start="3833" end="3841" title="Albacete" label="Albacete"/>
<link wikidata="Q182454" start="3880" end="3902" title="William Lyon Mackenzie" label="William Lyon Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271150" start="3907" end="3928" title="Louis-Joseph Papineau" label="Louis-Joseph Papineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560445" start="3942" end="3964" title="Rebellions of 1837–1838" label="Rebellion of 1837–1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="4204" end="4226" title="Nationalist faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalist insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="4245" end="4261" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639187" start="4663" end="4678" title="Fuentes de Ebro" label="Fuentes de Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344636" start="4736" end="4754" title="Robert G. Thompson" label="Robert G. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107178130" start="4825" end="4843" title="Edward Cecil-Smith" label="Edward Cecil-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="4849" end="4856" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348996" start="4916" end="4931" title="Eight Men Speak" label="Eight Men Speak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="5127" end="5135" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467456" start="5163" end="5179" title="Battle of Teruel" label="Battle of Teruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="5816" end="5824" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5880" end="5892" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="5897" end="5910" title="fascist Italy" label="fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q625218" start="5997" end="6013" title="Aragon Offensive" label="Aragon Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280119" start="6306" end="6324" title="Battle of the Ebro" label="Battle of the Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="6431" end="6453" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="Spanish Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q312757" start="6454" end="6465" title="Juan Negrín López" label="Juan Negrín"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="7158" end="7162" title="RCMP" label="RCMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7292" end="7304" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943284" start="7645" end="7665" title="Canadian Books of Remembrance" label="Books of Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533602" start="7673" end="7684" title="Peace Tower" label="Peace Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q27631" start="7753" end="7768" title="Remembrance Day" label="Remembrance Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419018" start="8170" end="8187" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park (Toronto)" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q773369" start="8257" end="8264" title="Gandesa" label="Gandesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="8538" end="8564" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="8599" end="8605" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="9112" end="9122" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162112" start="9257" end="9271" title="Norman Bethune" label="Norman Bethune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934870" start="9292" end="9317" title="Mobile Army Surgical Hospital" label="mobile army medical units"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="9650" end="9655" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q124811553" start="9673" end="9712" title="Canadian League for Peace and Democracy" label="Canadian League for Peace and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132518" start="9714" end="9736" title="International Brigades" label="International Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="9738" end="9755" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573282" start="9757" end="9788" title="Spanish Republican Armed Forces" label="Spanish Republican Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9790" end="9821" title="Military history of Nova Scotia#Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War – Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659344" start="9823" end="9849" title="Military history of Canada" label="Military history of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578304" wikidata="Q7042793" url="?curid=578304" title="No-show">
<text>No show or no-show or No Show may refer to:

* No show, failure to turn up for a performance
* No-show (airlines), clause of some airlines&#x27; terms of service
* No-show (professional wrestling), when a wrestler does not show up for a match
* No-show job, a job for which no work, or even attendance, is expected
* &quot;No Show&quot;, the forty-first episode of the HBO television series &quot;The Sopranos&quot;
* &quot;No Show&quot;, single by Regurgitator 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35140" start="81" end="92" title="performance" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353875" start="95" end="113" title="No-show (airlines)" label="No-show (airlines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="164" end="196" title="No-show (professional wrestling)" label="No-show (professional wrestling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382776" start="245" end="256" title="No-show job" label="No-show job"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193671" start="323" end="330" title="No Show" label="No Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309724" start="449" end="461" title="Regurgitator" label="Regurgitator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578307" wikidata="Q354079" url="?curid=578307" title="Extra">
<text>Extra, Xtra, or The Extra may refer to:

==Arts, entertainment and media==
===Film===
* &quot;The Extra&quot; (1962 film), a Mexican film
* &quot;The Extra&quot; (2005 film), an Australian film

===Literature===
* &quot;Extra&quot; (newspaper), a Brazilian newspaper
* &quot;Extra!&quot;, an American media criticism magazine
* &quot;Diario Extra&quot; (Costa Rica), a newspaper
* &quot;Extra Magazine&quot;, an Italian weekly magazine
* Newspaper extra, a supplemental issue
* &quot;Xtra&quot; (newspaper), by the Norwegian Young Conservatives, 1922-2010
* &quot;Xtra Magazine&quot;, a Canadian website and former newspaper

===Music===
* &quot;Extra&quot; (Gilberto Gil album), 1983, and the title track
* &quot;Extra, Vol. 1&quot;, an album by KMFDM
* &quot;Extra&quot;, a 2019 song by Future from &quot;Save Me (EP)&quot;
* &quot;Extra&quot;, a 1966 song by Tages from their album &quot;Extra Extra&quot;
* &quot;Xtra&quot; (EP), a 2022 extended play by Oh Land

===Television and radio===
* Extra (Australian TV channel)
* Extra TV 42, a defunct Costa Rican television channel
* &quot;Extra&quot; (Australian TV program), 1991–2009
* &quot;Extra&quot; (American TV program), since 1994
* &quot;extra&quot; (franchise), or &quot;extr@&quot;, a language education television program (2002–2004)
* &quot;Extra&quot;, a TV game by Norsk Tipping
* &quot;XTRA&quot;, call sign formerly used by Tijuana, Mexico radio station XEWW-AM
* BBC Radio 1Xtra, a Black British radio station from the BBC
* Capital Xtra, a Black British radio station from Global Media &amp; Entertainment

==Businesses and organisations==
* Extra (gum), by Wrigley
* Extra (service areas), a UK chain
* Extra (supermarket), a German chain
* Extra (Coop), a Norwegian supermarket chain
* EXTRA, a former mobile phone brand of SmarTone
* Extra (retail chain), Brazil
* Pibb Xtra, a soft drink
* Tiendas Extra, a Mexican convenience store chain

==Computing==
* Xtra (ISP), an Internet service provider owned by Spark New Zealand (then called Telecom)
* Xtra (Macromedia), a software plug-in
* Yahoo!Xtra, XtraMSN, a web portal

==Sports==
* Extra (cricket), a run not involving hitting the ball
* Extra (sailing), a sail not part of the sail plan

==Transportation==
* Extra Aircraft, a German light aircraft manufacturer
* Renault Extra, a van
* Xtra (automobile), an English three-wheel cyclecar
* Kolb Mark III Xtra, an ultralight aircraft

==Other uses==
* Extra (acting), an actor in a minor role
* Extra, West Virginia, a place in the U.S.
* EXTRA artillery rocket system, an Israeli artillery rocket system
* Walter Extra (born 1954), German pilot and aircraft designer

==See also==
* Extras (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q354079" start="0" end="5" title="Extra" label="Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q354079" start="7" end="11" title="Extra" label="Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q354079" start="16" end="25" title="Extra" label="The Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12164415" start="88" end="121" title="The Extra (1962 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Extra&amp;quot; (1962 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732882" start="140" end="173" title="The Extra (2005 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Extra&amp;quot; (2005 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10278872" start="214" end="243" title="Extra (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Extra&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422104" start="275" end="281" title="Extra!" label="Extra!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271855" start="328" end="365" title="Diario Extra (Costa Rica)" label="&amp;quot;Diario Extra&amp;quot; (Costa Rica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207827" start="387" end="401" title="Extra Magazine" label="Extra Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143311" start="438" end="453" title="Newspaper extra" label="Newspaper extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12010888" start="478" end="506" title="Xtra (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Xtra&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q920043" start="564" end="577" title="Xtra Magazine" label="Xtra Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422127" start="640" end="678" title="Extra (Gilberto Gil album)" label="&amp;quot;Extra&amp;quot; (Gilberto Gil album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422108" start="714" end="727" title="Extra, Vol. 1" label="Extra, Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043922" start="807" end="819" title="Save Me (Future EP)" label="Save Me (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125191270" start="885" end="908" title="Extra Extra (album)" label="&amp;quot;Extra Extra&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q120705407" start="911" end="932" title="Xtra (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Xtra&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422128" start="996" end="1025" title="Extra (Australian TV channel)" label="Extra (Australian TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1028" end="1039" title="Extra TV 42" label="Extra TV 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422126" start="1084" end="1125" title="Extra (Australian TV program)" label="&amp;quot;Extra&amp;quot; (Australian TV program)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422130" start="1139" end="1178" title="Extra (American TV program)" label="&amp;quot;Extra&amp;quot; (American TV program)"/>
<link wikidata="Q309502" start="1193" end="1222" title="extra (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;extra&amp;quot; (franchise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319873" start="1332" end="1345" title="Norsk Tipping" label="Norsk Tipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041933" start="1423" end="1430" title="XEWW-AM" label="XEWW-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q795563" start="1433" end="1448" title="BBC Radio 1Xtra" label="BBC Radio 1Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104020" start="1495" end="1507" title="Capital Xtra" label="Capital Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049501" start="1613" end="1624" title="Extra (gum)" label="Extra (gum)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422133" start="1639" end="1660" title="Extra (service areas)" label="Extra (service areas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q847811" start="1675" end="1694" title="Extra (supermarket)" label="Extra (supermarket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11964085" start="1713" end="1725" title="Extra (Coop)" label="Extra (Coop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079498" start="1797" end="1805" title="SmarTone" label="SmarTone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422131" start="1808" end="1828" title="Extra (retail chain)" label="Extra (retail chain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190436" start="1839" end="1848" title="Pibb Xtra" label="Pibb Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801042" start="1865" end="1878" title="Tiendas Extra" label="Tiendas Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045042" start="1931" end="1941" title="Xtra (ISP)" label="Xtra (ISP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061837" start="2023" end="2040" title="Xtra (Macromedia)" label="Xtra (Macromedia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046830" start="2063" end="2073" title="Yahoo!Xtra" label="Yahoo!Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422134" start="2111" end="2126" title="Extra (cricket)" label="Extra (cricket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422132" start="2167" end="2182" title="Extra (sailing)" label="Extra (sailing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q652457" start="2239" end="2253" title="Extra Aircraft" label="Extra Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q109042999" start="2294" end="2307" title="Renault Extra" label="Renault Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653075" start="2317" end="2334" title="Xtra (automobile)" label="Xtra (automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427104" start="2370" end="2388" title="Kolb Mark III Xtra" label="Kolb Mark III Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q658371" start="2431" end="2445" title="Extra (acting)" label="Extra (acting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422113" start="2474" end="2494" title="Extra, West Virginia" label="Extra, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31197821" start="2518" end="2547" title="EXTRA artillery rocket system" label="EXTRA artillery rocket system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964791" start="2586" end="2598" title="Walter Extra" label="Walter Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736174" start="2663" end="2686" title="Extras (disambiguation)" label="Extras (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578309" wikidata="Q725247" url="?curid=578309" title="Robert Joy">
<text>Robert Joy (born August 17, 1951) is a Canadian actor. He is best known for his role as medical examiner Sid Hammerback on the police procedural series &quot;&quot;, and his appearances in the films &quot;Atlantic City&quot; (1980), &quot;Ragtime&quot; (1981), &quot;Desperately Seeking Susan&quot; (1985), &quot;Land of the Dead&quot; (2005), and &quot;The Hills Have Eyes&quot; (2006). He is a two-time Genie Award nominee for Best Supporting Actor; for &quot;Atlantic City&quot; and &quot;Whole New Thing&quot;.

Joy has also worked extensively on the stage, particularly in Shakespearean productions, in both Canada and the United States. Earlier in his career, he was closely affiliated with Newfoundland comedy troupe CODCO.

==Early life==
Joy was born on August 17, 1951, in Montreal, Quebec, Canada and grew up in St. John&#x27;s, Newfoundland. He is the son of Flora Louise (née Pike) and Dr. Clifton Joseph Joy, a physician and politician. He attended Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on a Rhodes Scholarship and Memorial University of Newfoundland.

==Career==
Joy played Madonna&#x27;s punk musician boyfriend Jim in 1985&#x27;s &quot;Desperately Seeking Susan&quot;, and the Dutch-Israeli Hans in the 1986 Alliance/CTV production &quot;Sword of Gideon&quot;, an adaptation of George Jonas&#x27;s book &quot;Vengeance&quot;.

In 1998, he appeared in Gregory Hoblit&#x27;s thriller &quot;Fallen&quot;, where he fit into the all-star cast that included Denzel Washington, Donald Sutherland, James Gandolfini, and John Goodman. In 2005, he had a lead role as the simple-minded sharpshooter Charlie Houx in George A. Romero&#x27;s zombie film &quot;Land of the Dead&quot;.

In the fall of 2005, Joy joined the CBS police procedural series &quot;&quot; during its second season as a recurring character, Dr. Sid Hammerback, the Chief Medical Examiner, and became a main cast member in season five. Joy stated, &quot;I basically read the script and then look up everything on Wikipedia that I don&#x27;t know, and try to find out how to pronounce all the long words and get my head around actually what it is that I&#x27;m conveying, because often my character has a lot of explaining to do.&quot;

In 2006, Joy appeared onscreen in Alexandre Aja&#x27;s remake of &quot;The Hills Have Eyes&quot; where he portrays a mutant named Lizard. He also starred as Ted Bedworth, father of Samaire Armstrong&#x27;s character Nell Bedworth, in the 2006 romantic comedy &quot;It&#x27;s a Boy Girl Thing&quot;. In 2007, Joy played the character of Colonel Stevens in &quot;Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem&quot;. He appeared as Dr. Stephen Hawking in the comedy &quot;Superhero Movie&quot; in 2008.

In addition to his acting, Joy was frequently associated with the Newfoundland-based CODCO, working with the comedy troupe on many of their pre-television stage shows and appearing as a guest performer in the series. He also co-starred in the 1986 Andy Jones film, &quot;The Adventure of Faustus Bidgood&quot;, the only film that features the entire cast of CODCO.

He appeared as himself in the 2012 documentary film &quot;That Guy... Who Was in That Thing&quot;.

Joy has had on-going stage engagements on Broadway and throughout US, most recently appearing as Charles in &quot;King Charles III&quot; at Shakespeare Theatre Company in Washington, DC (February 7 – March 18, 2017). and as Crito and the poet Mellitus in &quot;Socrates&quot; at The Public Theater, New York, NY, which ran from April 2019 through June 3, 2019.

==Personal life==
Joy is divorced from actress Mary Joy. They have one daughter, Ruby Joy, who is an actress. In the summer of 2011, Joy and his daughter performed together in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;The Tempest&quot;. Joy was formerly the partner of actor William Duff-Griffin, who died from prostate cancer on November 13, 1994. Joy has been in a relationship with Broadway composer Henry Krieger since 1995.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725247" start="0" end="10" title="Robert Joy" label="Robert Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143199" start="88" end="104" title="medical examiner" label="medical examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483088" start="105" end="119" title="Sid Hammerback" label="Sid Hammerback"/>
<link wikidata="Q756329" start="205" end="218" title="Atlantic City (1980 film)" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604288" start="239" end="246" title="Ragtime (film)" label="Ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420421" start="267" end="292" title="Desperately Seeking Susan" label="Desperately Seeking Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500141" start="313" end="329" title="Land of the Dead" label="Land of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141519" start="354" end="373" title="The Hills Have Eyes (2006 film)" label="The Hills Have Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502249" start="405" end="416" title="Genie Award" label="Genie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567246" start="492" end="507" title="Whole New Thing" label="Whole New Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="578" end="591" title="Shakespearean" label="Shakespearean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="697" end="709" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981405" start="724" end="729" title="CODCO" label="CODCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="783" end="791" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="823" end="838" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="840" end="852" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455914" start="885" end="888" title="maiden and married names" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737684" start="903" end="921" title="Clifton Joseph Joy" label="Clifton Joseph Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135137" start="963" end="993" title="Corpus Christi College, Oxford" label="Corpus Christi College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="1000" end="1018" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895354" start="1023" end="1058" title="Memorial University of Newfoundland" label="Memorial University of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="1083" end="1090" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420421" start="1147" end="1172" title="Desperately Seeking Susan" label="Desperately Seeking Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q573934" start="1249" end="1264" title="Sword of Gideon" label="Sword of Gideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450874" start="1289" end="1301" title="George Jonas" label="George Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009488" start="1320" end="1329" title="Vengeance (Jonas book)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q267524" start="1362" end="1376" title="Gregory Hoblit" label="Gregory Hoblit"/>
<link wikidata="Q162225" start="1399" end="1405" title="Fallen (1998 film)" label="Fallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="1463" end="1480" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q103784" start="1482" end="1499" title="Donald Sutherland" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q308722" start="1501" end="1517" title="James Gandolfini" label="James Gandolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q215072" start="1523" end="1535" title="John Goodman" label="John Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28044813" start="1586" end="1598" title="sharpshooter" label="sharpshooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51511" start="1615" end="1631" title="George A. Romero" label="George A. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q9406" start="1639" end="1645" title="zombie" label="zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500141" start="1657" end="1673" title="Land of the Dead" label="Land of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1718" end="1721" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321734" start="1722" end="1739" title="police procedural" label="police procedural"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483088" start="1811" end="1829" title="Sid Hammerback" label="Dr. Sid Hammerback"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143199" start="1835" end="1857" title="Chief Medical Examiner" label="Chief Medical Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q528132" start="2239" end="2252" title="Alexandre Aja" label="Alexandre Aja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141519" start="2276" end="2295" title="The Hills Have Eyes (2006 film)" label="The Hills Have Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q234955" start="2386" end="2403" title="Samaire Armstrong" label="Samaire Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290094" start="2470" end="2496" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Boy Girl Thing" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Boy Girl Thing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2566" end="2594" title="Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem" label="Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="2617" end="2636" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Dr. Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q783880" start="2657" end="2672" title="Superhero Movie" label="Superhero Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981405" start="2774" end="2779" title="CODCO" label="CODCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712438" start="2960" end="2992" title="The Adventure of Faustus Bidgood" label="The Adventure of Faustus Bidgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711198" start="3113" end="3146" title="That Guy... Who Was in That Thing" label="That Guy... Who Was in That Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386557" start="3269" end="3285" title="King Charles III (play)" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="3718" end="3729" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="3811" end="3826" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724487" start="3903" end="3916" title="Henry Krieger" label="Henry Krieger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578312" wikidata="Q1010598" url="?curid=578312" title="Buret">
<text>Buret may refer to:
*Burette laboratory equipment

==Surname==
*Isabelle Buret
*Maurice Buret

==Toponymy==
*Le Buret, France
*Buret District, a former district of Kenya
*Buret&#x27;, archaeological site in Siberia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1010598" start="0" end="5" title="Buret" label="Buret"/>
<link wikidata="Q201554" start="21" end="28" title="Burette" label="Burette"/>
<link wikidata="Q29512481" start="64" end="78" title="Isabelle Buret" label="Isabelle Buret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042971" start="80" end="93" title="Maurice Buret" label="Maurice Buret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066443" start="109" end="117" title="Le Buret" label="Le Buret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010616" start="127" end="141" title="Buret District" label="Buret District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887797" start="171" end="182" title="Buret&amp;#x27;" label="Buret&amp;#x27;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578314" wikidata="Q212973" url="?curid=578314" title="Tú alfagra land mítt">
<text>&quot;&#x27;&quot; (&quot;Thou fairest land of mine&quot;), officially &quot;&#x27;&quot; (&quot;My fairest land&quot;), is the national anthem of the Faroe Islands. It was written in 1906 by headteacher Símun av Skarði, and the melody was composed in 1907 by violinist Petur Alberg.

== History ==
=== Composition ===
The song was written in a work dated 1 February 1906 by Símun av Skarði, the headmaster of a high school in Føgrulið, southwest of Klaksvík. It was written during a time of strong division in the Faroe Islands between conservatives who wanted to preserve Danish rule and autonomists who wanted more self-government, of which Símun was the latter.

Violinist Petur Alberg wrote the first notes of the music of the anthem on 4 September 1907, after the melody came to him that evening. He later sang the melody down the phone in the Løgting to Símun av Skarði, who liked it. Petur then sent it to a music teacher he knew in Akureyri, Iceland, and to asked him to harmonise it for a male quartet. In October 1907, the male quartet arrangement arrived, and singers began to practice it for a Boxing Day concert in Sloan&#x27;s Hall in Tórshavn. Petur, not daring to reveal the song&#x27;s author, told the singers the song was Icelandic, by a certain Jón Sveinsson. However, the singers liked the song. The song was performed at the concert on 26 December 1907, which was the first time any song by Petur had been performed publicly and the first time &quot;Tú alfagra land mítt&quot; was performed publicly.

=== Distribution ===
On 8 January 1908, &quot;Tú alfagra land mítt&quot; was published in the Faroese newspaper &quot;Tingakrossur&quot;. It was then published in the &quot;Lesibók&quot;, a literary history in chronological order, in 1911. It was later published in many editions of the (Faroese People&#x27;s Songbook), generally in the number one position, from 1913 through 1959.

In 1925, a Nynorsk translation of the song by Rolf Hjort Schøgen was published in the &quot;Tingakrossur&quot;. In 1928, a Danish translation by university student Tormod Jørgensen was published in &quot;Højskolebladet&quot; No. 7928. An Icelandic translation by Jochum M. Eggertsson appeared in the magazine &quot;Dvöl&quot; in 1935. The same year, a German translation by Ernst Krenn was published in the (&quot;Faroese Instalment&quot;), a Faroese booklet at the Nordic Society in Vienna, Austria. In 1943, an English translation by Padre G. C. C. Knowleson was featured in the notes of the magazine &quot;The Pioneer&quot; by some British soldiers in the Faroe Islands during World War II.

=== As the national anthem ===
&quot;Tú alfagra land mítt&quot; won out in a rivalry with &quot;Eg oyggjar veit&quot; (&quot;I know some islands&quot;), from 1877, on which song should become the national anthem of the Faroe Islands. &quot;Tú alfagra land mítt&quot; has been sung at all festivals in the Faroe Islands, and it has been in the psalm book of the Faroese Church since 1990. The national radio station Útvarp Føroya, established in 1957, played it every night before ending its broadcast for the evening.

==Lyrics==


==Literature==
*W.B. Lockwood: &quot;An Introduction to Modern Faroese&quot;, Tórshavn 1977 

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Faroese national anthem (with lyrics)
*Faroese national anthem (instrumental only)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="128" end="143" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="151" end="164" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q468058" start="204" end="219" title="Símun av Skarði" label="Símun av Skarði"/>
<link wikidata="Q737253" start="270" end="282" title="Petur Alberg" label="Petur Alberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q468058" start="375" end="390" title="Símun av Skarði" label="Símun av Skarði"/>
<link wikidata="Q189361" start="450" end="458" title="Klaksvík" label="Klaksvík"/>
<link wikidata="Q756617" start="574" end="585" title="Danish Realm" label="Danish rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q737253" start="677" end="689" title="Petur Alberg" label="Petur Alberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q509668" start="850" end="857" title="Løgting" label="Løgting"/>
<link wikidata="Q29042" start="941" end="949" title="Akureyri" label="Akureyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="951" end="958" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q514090" start="1129" end="1141" title="William Gibson Sloan" label="Sloan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q10704" start="1150" end="1158" title="Tórshavn" label="Tórshavn"/>
<link wikidata="Q983305" start="1266" end="1279" title="Jón Sveinsson" label="Jón Sveinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993529" start="1643" end="1655" title="Tingakrossur" label="Tingakrossur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25164" start="1920" end="1927" title="Nynorsk" label="Nynorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2393" end="2399" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q375335" start="2965" end="2979" title="Faroese Church" label="Faroese Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q800304" start="3019" end="3032" title="Útvarp Føroya" label="Útvarp Føroya"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578324" wikidata="Q356130" url="?curid=578324" title="SAF">
<text>SAF, S.A.F or saf might refer to:

== Companies ==
* SAF Tehnika, a producer of digital microwave data transmission equipment
* Strip Art Features, a comic book publishing house
* Svenska Automobilfabriken, a Swedish auto manufacturer

== Computing ==
* Service automation framework, a set of best practices for the automated delivery of services
* Service Availability Forum, (SAF or SA Forum), highly available systems model
* Storage Access Framework

==Law enforcement==
* Special Action Force, of the Philippine National Police

== Locations ==
* Salfords railway station (station code codice_1), Surrey, England, UK
* Santa Fe Regional Airport (IATA airport code codice_1), Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA
* South Africa (UNDP country code codice_1)

== Military ==
* Secretary of the Air Force
* Singapore Armed Forces
* Slovenian Armed Forces
* Somali Air Force
* Somali Armed Forces
* Spanish Air Force
* Spanish Armed Forces
* Sudanese Air Force
* Sudanese Armed Forces
* Swedish Air Force
* Swedish Armed Forces
* Soviet Air Force
* Swiss Air Force

== Organizations ==
* Second Amendment Foundation, a US gun rights organization
* Škola Animiranog Filma (ŠAF), a Croatian school of animation
* Société astronomique de France, astronomical society
* Society of American Foresters
* Students for Academic Freedom, hosted by the David Horowitz Freedom Center
* Swedish Employers Association (&quot;&quot;)

== Other ==
*Safety (common abbreviation in journal titles: &quot;Saf.&quot;)
*Sociedade Anônima do Futebol, a type of public limited company in Brazil
*System access fee, a Canadian telephone surcharge
*Sustainable aviation fuel
*Sir Alex Ferguson, a Scottish former football manager
*Safaliba language (ISO 639 language code codice_4), a language found in Ghana

==See also==
* 
* Safe (disambiguation)
* Saif (disambiguation)
* Saph</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356130" start="0" end="3" title="SAF" label="SAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q356130" start="5" end="10" title="SAF" label="S.A.F"/>
<link wikidata="Q356130" start="14" end="17" title="SAF" label="saf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388547" start="53" end="64" title="SAF Tehnika" label="SAF Tehnika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624068" start="128" end="146" title="Strip Art Features" label="Strip Art Features"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737507" start="180" end="205" title="Svenska Automobilfabriken" label="Svenska Automobilfabriken"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996993" start="254" end="282" title="Service automation framework" label="Service automation framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455663" start="349" end="375" title="Service Availability Forum" label="Service Availability Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q62059755" start="429" end="453" title="Storage Access Framework" label="Storage Access Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164420" start="477" end="497" title="Special Action Force" label="Special Action Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282929" start="552" end="576" title="Salfords railway station" label="Salfords railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545563" start="624" end="649" title="Santa Fe Regional Airport" label="Santa Fe Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="708" end="720" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q261746" start="768" end="794" title="Secretary of the Air Force" label="Secretary of the Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="797" end="819" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q921208" start="822" end="844" title="Slovenian Armed Forces" label="Slovenian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083597" start="847" end="863" title="Somali Air Force" label="Somali Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580398" start="866" end="885" title="Somali Armed Forces" label="Somali Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q833218" start="888" end="905" title="Spanish Air Force" label="Spanish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q326991" start="908" end="928" title="Spanish Armed Forces" label="Spanish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735944" start="931" end="949" title="Sudanese Air Force" label="Sudanese Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q371721" start="952" end="973" title="Sudanese Armed Forces" label="Sudanese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q113525" start="976" end="993" title="Swedish Air Force" label="Swedish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q783911" start="996" end="1016" title="Swedish Armed Forces" label="Swedish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="1019" end="1035" title="Soviet Air Force" label="Soviet Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q688072" start="1038" end="1053" title="Swiss Air Force" label="Swiss Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443015" start="1077" end="1104" title="Second Amendment Foundation" label="Second Amendment Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919053" start="1200" end="1230" title="Société astronomique de France" label="Société astronomique de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552357" start="1255" end="1284" title="Society of American Foresters" label="Society of American Foresters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370177" start="1332" end="1361" title="David Horowitz Freedom Center" label="David Horowitz Freedom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571487" start="1364" end="1393" title="Swedish Employers Association" label="Swedish Employers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566551" start="1423" end="1429" title="Safety" label="Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q118252000" start="1489" end="1517" title="Sociedade Anônima do Futebol" label="Sociedade Anônima do Futebol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="1529" end="1551" title="public limited company" label="public limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1555" end="1561" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663696" start="1563" end="1580" title="System access fee" label="System access fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828692" start="1614" end="1639" title="Sustainable aviation fuel" label="Sustainable aviation fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="1645" end="1658" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36432" start="1696" end="1713" title="Safaliba language" label="Safaliba language"/>
<link wikidata="Q410439" start="1793" end="1814" title="Safe (disambiguation)" label="Safe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q849171" start="1817" end="1838" title="Saif (disambiguation)" label="Saif (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068232" start="1841" end="1845" title="Saph" label="Saph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578327" wikidata="Q610286" url="?curid=578327" title="Future value">
<text>Future value is the value of an asset at a specific date. It measures the nominal future sum of money that a given sum of money is &quot;worth&quot; at a specified time in the future assuming a certain interest rate, or more generally, rate of return; it is the present value multiplied by the accumulation function.
The value does not include corrections for inflation or other factors that affect the true value of money in the future. This is used in time value of money calculations.

==Overview==
Money value fluctuates over time: $100 today has a different value than $100 in five years. This is because one can invest $100 today in an interest-bearing bank account or any other investment, and that money will grow/shrink due to the rate of return. Also, if $100 today allows the purchase of an item, it is possible that $100 will not be enough to purchase the same item in five years, because of inflation (increase in purchase price).

An investor who has some money has two options: to spend it right now or to invest it. The financial compensation for saving it (and not spending it) is that the money value will accrue through the interests that he will receive from a borrower (the bank account on which he has the money deposited).

Therefore, to evaluate the real worthiness of an amount of money today after a given period of time, economic agents compound the amount of money at a given interest rate. Most actuarial calculations use the risk-free interest rate which corresponds the minimum guaranteed rate provided the bank&#x27;s saving account, for example. If one wants to compare their change in purchasing power, then they should use the real interest rate (nominal interest rate minus inflation rate).

The operation of evaluating a present value into the future value is called capitalization (how much will $100 today be worth in 5 years?). The reverse operation which consists in evaluating the present value of a future amount of money is called a discounting (how much $100 that will be received in 5 years- at a lottery, for example -are worth today?).

It follows that if one has to choose between receiving $100 today and $100 in one year, the rational decision is to cash the $100 today. If the money is to be received in one year and assuming the savings account interest rate is 5%, the person has to be offered at least $105 in one year so that two options are equivalent (either receiving $100 today or receiving $105 in one year). This is because if you have cash of $100 today and deposit in your savings account, you will have $105 in one year.

==Simple interest==
To determine future value (FV) using simple interest (i.e., without compounding):

:formula_1

where &quot;PV&quot; is the present value or principal, &quot;t&quot; is the time in years (or a fraction of year), and &quot;r&quot; stands for the per annum interest rate. Simple interest is rarely used, as compounding is considered more meaningful . Indeed, the Future Value in this case grows linearly (it&#x27;s a linear function of the initial investment): it doesn&#x27;t take into account the fact that the interest earned might be compounded itself and produce further interest (which corresponds to an exponential growth of the initial investment -see below-).
==Compound interest==
To determine future value using compound interest:

:formula_2

where &quot;PV&quot; is the present value, &quot;t&quot; is the number of compounding periods (not necessarily an integer), and &quot;i&quot; is the interest rate for that period. Thus the future value increases exponentially with time when &quot;i&quot; is positive. The growth rate is given by the period, and &quot;i&quot;, the interest rate for that period. Alternatively the growth rate is expressed by the interest per unit time based on continuous compounding. For example, the following all represent the same growth rate:
*3 % per half year
*6.09 % per year (effective annual rate, annual rate of return, the standard way of expressing the growth rate, for easy comparisons)
*2.95588022 % per half year based on continuous compounding (because ln 1.03 = 0.0295588022)
*5.91176045 % per year based on continuous compounding (simply twice the previous percentage)

Also the growth rate may be expressed in a percentage per period (nominal rate), with another period as compounding basis; for the same growth rate we have:
*6% per year with half a year as compounding basis

To convert an interest rate from one compounding basis to another compounding basis (between different periodic interest rates), the following formula applies:

:formula_3

where
&quot;i&quot;1 is the periodic interest rate with compounding frequency &quot;n&quot;1 and
&quot;i&quot;2 is the periodic interest rate with compounding frequency &quot;n&quot;2.

If the compounding frequency is annual, &quot;n&quot;2 will be 1, and to get the annual interest rate (which may be referred to as the effective interest rate, or the annual percentage rate), the formula can be simplified to:

:formula_4

where &quot;r&quot; is the annual rate, &quot;i&quot; the periodic rate, and &quot;n&quot; the number of compounding periods per year.

Problems become more complex as you account for more variables. For example, when accounting for annuities (annual payments), there is no simple &quot;PV&quot; to plug into the equation. Either the &quot;PV&quot; must be calculated first, or a more complex annuity equation must be used. Another complication is when the interest rate is applied multiple times per period. For example, suppose the 10% interest rate in the earlier example is compounded twice a year (semi-annually). Compounding means that each successive application of the interest rate applies to all of the previously accumulated amount, so instead of getting 0.05 each 6 months, one must figure out the true annual interest rate, which in this case would be 1.1025 (one would divide the 10% by two to get 5%, then apply it twice: 1.052.) This 1.1025 represents the original amount 1.00 plus 0.05 in 6 months to make a total of 1.05, and get the same rate of interest on that 1.05 for the remaining 6 months of the year. The second six-month period returns more than the first six months because the interest rate applies to the accumulated interest as well as the original amount.

This formula gives the future value (FV) of an ordinary annuity (assuming compound interest):

:formula_5

where &quot;r&quot; = interest rate; &quot;n&quot; = number of periods. The simplest way to understand the above formula is to cognitively split the right side of the equation into two parts, the payment amount, and the ratio of compounding over basic interest. The ratio of compounding is composed of the aforementioned effective interest rate over the basic (nominal) interest rate. This provides a ratio that increases the payment amount in terms present value.

==See also==
*Lifetime value
*Present value
*Time value of money

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q610286" start="0" end="12" title="Future value" label="Future value"/>
<link wikidata="Q868257" start="20" end="25" title="value (economics)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="32" end="37" title="asset" label="asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="202" end="215" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317264" start="236" end="250" title="rate of return" label="rate of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100466" start="262" end="275" title="present value" label="present value"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672905" start="294" end="315" title="accumulation function" label="accumulation function"/>
<link wikidata="Q187142" start="454" end="473" title="time value of money" label="time value of money"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="514" end="524" title="inflation" label="fluctuates"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="904" end="913" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128453" start="1424" end="1433" title="actuarial" label="actuarial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971641" start="1455" end="1478" title="risk-free interest rate" label="risk-free interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="1619" end="1635" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140421" start="1662" end="1680" title="real interest rate" label="real interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205832" start="1682" end="1703" title="nominal interest rate" label="nominal interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="1710" end="1719" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998070" start="1977" end="1988" title="discounting" label="discounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q189409" start="2043" end="2050" title="lottery" label="lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="2644" end="2659" title="simple interest" label="simple interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100466" start="2730" end="2743" title="present value" label="present value"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="2861" end="2869" title="interest" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="2876" end="2891" title="Simple interest" label="Simple interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="3021" end="3036" title="linear function" label="linear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="3214" end="3232" title="exponential growth" label="exponential growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q959606" start="3327" end="3344" title="compound interest" label="compound interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100466" start="3387" end="3400" title="present value" label="present value"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="3561" end="3584" title="Exponential growth" label="increases exponentially"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422850" start="3631" end="3642" title="Compound annual growth rate" label="growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3803" end="3825" title="Compound interest#Continuous compounding" label="continuous compounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336231" start="3927" end="3948" title="effective annual rate" label="effective annual rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317264" start="3950" end="3971" title="rate of return" label="annual rate of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205832" start="4297" end="4309" title="nominal interest rate" label="nominal rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336231" start="4934" end="4957" title="effective interest rate" label="effective interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q765188" start="4966" end="4988" title="annual percentage rate" label="annual percentage rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215579" start="5271" end="5280" title="Annuity (finance theory)" label="annuities"/>
<link wikidata="Q215579" start="6383" end="6390" title="Annuity (finance theory)" label="annuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146253" start="6914" end="6928" title="Lifetime value" label="Lifetime value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100466" start="6930" end="6943" title="Present value" label="Present value"/>
<link wikidata="Q187142" start="6945" end="6964" title="Time value of money" label="Time value of money"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578339" wikidata="Q7566023" url="?curid=578339" title="South Asia Olympic Council">
<text>The South Asia Olympic Council, aka SAOC and formerly known as the South Asian Sports Federation, is the governing body of sports in South Asia. It currently has 7 National Olympic Committees members.

==History==
South Asian Games Federation (SAGF) was formed officially in 1983. In 2004, in 32nd meeting of South Asian Sports Federation held at Islamabad (Pakistan), it was decided to rename it to its current name i.e. South Asia Olympic Council.

The SAOC headquarters is located in host city of future South Asian Games and the President of NOC hosting the SAG holds the position of SAOC President. Its current President is Lieutenant-General Syed Arif Hasan from Pakistan.

==Member nations==
Following is the list of member countries of SAOC:
===Former members===
Following is the list of former member countries of SAOC:
==SAOC Presidents==
As per the Constitution of SAOC, the President of NOC hosting the next South Asian Games is the president of SAOC.
==Events==
*South Asian Games
*South Asian Winter Games
*South Asian Beach Games

==See also==
*Central Asian Games
*East Asian Games (now defunct)
*East Asian Youth Games
*South Asian Games
*Southeast Asian Games
*West Asian Games

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7566023" start="4" end="30" title="South Asia Olympic Council" label="South Asia Olympic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566023" start="36" end="40" title="South Asia Olympic Council" label="SAOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566023" start="67" end="96" title="South Asia Olympic Council" label="South Asian Sports Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="133" end="143" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183288" start="164" end="191" title="National Olympic Committees" label="National Olympic Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="347" end="356" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="358" end="366" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="629" end="647" title="Lieutenant-General" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q17402917" start="648" end="663" title="Syed Arif Hasan" label="Syed Arif Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="669" end="677" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196475" start="920" end="937" title="South Asian Games" label="South Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196475" start="976" end="993" title="South Asian Games" label="South Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196475" start="995" end="1019" title="South Asian Winter Games" label="South Asian Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196475" start="1021" end="1044" title="South Asian Beach Games" label="South Asian Beach Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369963" start="1060" end="1079" title="Central Asian Games" label="Central Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191392" start="1081" end="1097" title="East Asian Games" label="East Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q28447912" start="1113" end="1135" title="East Asian Youth Games" label="East Asian Youth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196475" start="1137" end="1154" title="South Asian Games" label="South Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q877484" start="1156" end="1177" title="Southeast Asian Games" label="Southeast Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155411" start="1179" end="1195" title="West Asian Games" label="West Asian Games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578348" wikidata="Q1098028" url="?curid=578348" title="Frot">
<text>Frot or frotting (slang for frottage; ) is a sexual practice that usually involves direct penis-to-penis contact. The term was popularized by gay male activists who disparaged the practice of anal sex, but has since evolved to encompass a variety of preferences for the act, which may or may not imply particular attitudes towards other sexual activities. This can also be used as some type of foreplay. 

Because it is not penetrative, frotting has the safe sex benefit of reducing the risk of transmitting HIV/AIDS; however, it still carries the risk of skin-to-skin sexually transmitted infections, such as HPV and pubic lice (crabs), both of which can be transmitted even when lesions are not visible.

It is analogous to tribadism, which is vulva-to-vulva contact between women.

==Concept and etymology==
The modern definition of &quot;frotting&quot; emerged in a context of a debate about the status of anal sex within the gay male community; some in the anti-anal, pro-frotting camp insist that anal sex ought to be avoided altogether. One view argued that the popularity of anal sex would decline, presumably with a corresponding drop in HIV rates, if gay men could somehow be persuaded to stop thinking of anal sex as a &quot;vanilla&quot; practice, but rather as something &quot;kinky&quot; and not-quite-respectable—as was the case in the 1950s and 1960s, when gay men who preferred to do only mutual masturbation and fellatio sometimes used the disparaging slang term &quot;brownie queen&quot; for aficionados of anal sex.

Gay activist Bill Weintraub began to heavily promote and recommend the genital-specific meaning of &quot;penis-to-penis rubbing&quot; as &quot;frotting&quot; on Internet forums sometime in the late 1990s, and said he coined the term. &quot;I don&#x27;t use the word &#x27;frottage,&#x27; because it is an ersatz French word which can indicate any sort of erotic rubbing,&quot; he stated. &quot;Frot, by contrast, is always phallus-to-phallus sex.&quot; Weintraub believes that is what actual sex is; genital-genital contact.

Alternative terms for frotting include &quot;frictation&quot;, which can refer to the wider meaning of &quot;frottage&quot; but also penis-penis sex specifically, as well as &quot;sword-fighting,&quot; &quot;Oxford style,&quot; &quot;Princeton rub,&quot; and &quot;Ivy League rub.&quot;

==Sexual practices==

===General===
Frotting can be enjoyable because it mutually and simultaneously stimulates the genitals of both partners as it tends to produce pleasurable friction against the frenulum nerve bundle on the underside of each partner&#x27;s penile shaft, just below the urinary opening (meatus) of the penis head (glans penis).

===Safer sex===
Since frotting is a non-penetrative sex act, the risk of passing a sexually transmitted infection (STI) that requires direct contact between the mucous membranes and pre-ejaculate or semen is reduced. HIV is among the infections that require such direct contact, and research indicates that there is no risk of HIV transmission via frotting. However, frotting can still transmit other sexually transmitted infections, such as HPV (which can cause genital warts) and pubic lice (crabs). Vaccines are available against HPV.

===Comparison with anal sex and debates===
Some gay men, or men who have sex with men (MSM) in general, prefer to engage in frotting or other forms of mutual masturbation because they find it more pleasurable or more affectionate than anal sex, to preserve technical virginity, or as safe sex alternatives to anal penetration. This preference has led to some debate in the gay male and MSM community regarding what constitutes &quot;real sex&quot; or the most sensual expression of sexual intimacy. Some frotting advocates consider &quot;two genitals coming together by mingling, caressing, sliding&quot; and rubbing to be sex more than other forms of male sexual activity. Other men who have sex with men associate male masculinity with the sexual positions of &quot;tops&quot; and &quot;bottoms&quot; during anal sex.

During anal sex, the insertive partner may be referred to as the &quot;top&quot; or &quot;active&quot; partner. The one being penetrated may be referred to as the &quot;bottom&quot; or &quot;passive&quot; partner. Those with no strong preference for either are referred to as &quot;versatile&quot;. Some frotting advocates insist that such roles introduce inequality during sexual intimacy, and that frotting is &quot;equal&quot; because of mutual genital-genital stimulation. The lack of mutual genital stimulation and role asymmetry has led other frotting advocates to denounce anal sex as degrading to the receptive partner. This view of dominance and inequality associated with sex roles is disputed by researchers who state that it is not clear that specific sexual acts are necessarily indicative of general patterns of masculinity or dominance in a gay male relationship, and that, for both partners, anal intercourse can be associated with being masculine. Additionally, some frotting advocates, such as Bill Weintraub, are concerned with diseases that may be acquired through anal sex. In a 2005 article in &quot;The Advocate&quot;, one anal sex opponent said that no longer showing anal sex as erotic would help avoid HIV/AIDS, and opined that some gay men perceived him to be antigay when he was only trying to keep gay and bisexual men alive and healthy.

Gay men, and MSM in general, who prefer anal sex may view it as &quot;[their] version of intercourse&quot; and as &quot;the natural apex of sex, a wonderful expression of intimacy, and a great source of pleasure&quot;. Psychologist Walt Odets said, &quot;I think that anal sex has for gay men the same emotional significance that vaginal sex has for heterosexuals.&quot; Anal sex is generally viewed as vanilla sex among MSM, and is often thought to be expected, even by MSM who do not prefer the act. &quot;Some people like [anal] because it seems taboo or naughty,&quot; stated author and sex therapist Jack Morin. &quot;Some people like the flavor of dominance and submission... some don&#x27;t.&quot;

MSM who defend the essential validity of anal sex have rejected claims made by radical frotting advocates. Others have at times disparaged frottage as a makeshift, second-rate form of male/male intimacy—something better left to inexperienced teenagers and &quot;closeted&quot; older men. Odets said, &quot;No one would propose that we initiate a public health measure by de-eroticizing vaginal sex. It would sound like a ridiculous idea. It&#x27;s no less ridiculous for gay men.&quot;

&quot;HuffPost&quot; contributor and sexologist Joe Kort proposed the term &quot;side&quot; for gay men who are not interested in anal sex and instead prefer &quot;to kiss, hug and engage in oral sex, rimming, mutual masturbation and rubbing up and down on each other&quot;, viewing &quot;sides&quot; as simply another gay male sexual preference akin to being a top, bottom or versatile, and adding that &quot;Whether a man enjoys anal sex or not is no reflection on his sexual orientation, and if he&#x27;s gay, it doesn&#x27;t define whether or not he&#x27;s &#x27;really&#x27; having sex.&quot;

==Prevalence==
A 2011 survey of gay and bisexual men by the &quot;Journal of Sexual Medicine&quot; found that out of over 1,300 different combinations of sexual acts practiced, the most common, at 16% of all encounters, was &quot;holding their partner romantically, kissing partner on mouth, solo masturbation, masturbating partner, masturbation by partner, and genital–genital contact.&quot;

==Among other animals==
Genital–genital rubbing has been observed between males of other animals as well. Among bonobos, frottage frequently occurs when two males hang from a tree limb and engage in penis fencing; it also occurs while two males are in the missionary position.

Genital rubbing similar to frotting between non-primate males has been observed among bull manatees, in conjunction with &quot;kissing&quot;. When engaging in genital–genital rubbing, male bottlenose dolphins often penetrate the genital slit or, less commonly, the anus. Penis-to-penis rubbing is also common among homosexually active mammals.

==See also==
*Intercrural sex
*Sex position
==References==
==Further reading==

* Olivia Judson (2002). &quot;Dr. Tatiana&#x27;s Sex Advice to All Creation&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1098028" start="0" end="4" title="Frot" label="Frot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098028" start="8" end="16" title="Frot" label="frotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="18" end="23" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840469" start="28" end="36" title="Frottage (sexual act)" label="frottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="45" end="60" title="Sexual practices" label="sexual practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="90" end="95" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="142" end="150" title="Gay men" label="gay male"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="192" end="200" title="anal sex" label="anal sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139011" start="394" end="402" title="foreplay" label="foreplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840469" start="420" end="435" title="non-penetrative sex" label="not penetrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q318529" start="454" end="462" title="safe sex" label="safe sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="508" end="516" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="569" end="600" title="sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="610" end="613" title="Human papillomavirus" label="HPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q381271" start="618" end="628" title="Crab louse" label="pubic lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q376032" start="726" end="735" title="tribadism" label="tribadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="746" end="751" title="vulva" label="vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484896" start="1236" end="1243" title="Vanilla sex" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840469" start="1406" end="1425" title="mutual masturbation" label="mutual masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8401" start="1430" end="1438" title="fellatio" label="fellatio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2172" end="2180" title="Non-penetrative sex#Frottage" label="frottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772935" start="2549" end="2557" title="Frenulum of prepuce of penis" label="frenulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582250" start="2640" end="2655" title="External urethral orifice (male)" label="urinary opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q650891" start="2678" end="2682" title="glans penis" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="2782" end="2812" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="2860" end="2875" title="mucous membrane" label="mucous membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q628958" start="2881" end="2894" title="pre-ejaculate" label="pre-ejaculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="2898" end="2903" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="2916" end="2919" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="3141" end="3144" title="Human papillomavirus" label="HPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q208726" start="3162" end="3174" title="genital wart" label="genital wart"/>
<link wikidata="Q381271" start="3181" end="3191" title="Crab louse" label="pubic lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q900189" start="3201" end="3223" title="HPV vaccine" label="Vaccines are available"/>
<link wikidata="Q853451" start="3298" end="3323" title="men who have sex with men" label="men who have sex with men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840469" start="3389" end="3408" title="mutual masturbation" label="mutual masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="3473" end="3481" title="anal sex" label="anal sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q170538" start="3495" end="3514" title="technical virginity" label="technical virginity"/>
<link wikidata="Q318529" start="3522" end="3530" title="safe sex" label="safe sex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4130" end="4133" title="Top, bottom and versatile#Top" label="top"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4228" end="4234" title="Top, bottom and versatile#Bottom" label="bottom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4341" end="4350" title="Top, bottom and versatile#Versatile" label="versatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="5181" end="5193" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="5287" end="5295" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484896" start="5830" end="5841" title="vanilla sex" label="vanilla sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="6626" end="6634" title="HuffPost" label="HuffPost"/>
<link wikidata="Q170912" start="6657" end="6667" title="Sexology" label="sexologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210749" start="6668" end="6676" title="Joe Kort" label="Joe Kort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743627" start="7285" end="7311" title="Journal of Sexual Medicine" label="Journal of Sexual Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19537" start="7725" end="7731" title="bonobo" label="bonobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004939" start="7812" end="7825" title="penis fencing" label="penis fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q219561" start="7869" end="7888" title="missionary position" label="missionary position"/>
<link wikidata="Q42797" start="7982" end="7989" title="manatee" label="manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="8080" end="8098" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="8120" end="8132" title="genital slit" label="genital slit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626921" start="8206" end="8233" title="List of mammals displaying homosexual behavior" label="homosexually active mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191660" start="8250" end="8265" title="Intercrural sex" label="Intercrural sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8394" start="8267" end="8279" title="Sex position" label="Sex position"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578354" wikidata="Q1753888" url="?curid=578354" title="Voodoo (King Diamond album)">
<text>Voodoo is the eighth studio album by Danish heavy metal band King Diamond, released on 24 February 1998. It is the first album to feature drummer John Luke Hébert and the last one to feature guitarist Herb Simonsen and bassist Chris Estes. The album cover was drawn by Kristian Wåhlin.

&quot;Voodoo&quot; was remastered by Andy LaRocque and re-released in 2009.

==Plot==
&quot;Voodoo&quot; takes place in the year 1932 and deals with the affairs of the Lafayettes, a family consisting of Sarah (who is pregnant), David, and Grandpa. They move to an old colonial house on the Mississippi River, just north of Baton Rouge, which also happens to have been built next to a voodoo graveyard.

Unknown to the Lafayettes, the colonial house&#x27;s servant, Salem, is involved in voodoo. Salem partakes in voodoo rituals at the graveyard, along with Doctor le Croix, a voodoo sorcerer, Madame Sarita, and Lula Chevalier, a girl who is never seen.

The Lafayettes hear the voodoo drums from the ceremonies in the graveyard. They call a secret meeting with Salem to discuss what should be done. The Lafayettes decide to destroy the voodoo burial ground. Salem does not want this to happen, so he sneaks out at midnight to talk to Doctor le Croix. Le Croix gives Salem money to buy some goofer dust, and tells him that the Lafayettes must all die.

Salem puts a snake in David&#x27;s room, mixes haunted graveyard dirt in Grandpa&#x27;s food, and, after talking to the dead Baron Samedi, pours goofer dust on Sarah while she sleeps. David and Grandpa become very ill, and Sarah becomes possessed with a voodoo spirit.

Grandpa manages to call Father Malone, an exorcist. Father Malone travels to the colonial house to rid Sarah of her possessor. He fails, and is rendered unconscious from exhaustion. While he is unconscious, Lula brings the heavy, nail-riddled ceremonial cross of Baron Samedi to the possessed Sarah. Sarah attacks Malone with the cross, almost killing him. Grandpa comes in and tells Sarah to stop, and she does, which saves Father Malone&#x27;s life. Grandpa calls the police and ambulance, which arrive two hours later.

The story concludes with Salem speaking about the aftermath of the situation, which also reveals that he escaped the events of the mansion. He explains that the Lafayettes abandoned the old colonial house after leaving the hospital. Sarah&#x27;s child was born and it was speaking &quot;in the strangest tongue...backwards. Some expert had uttered the word...&#x27;Voodoo&#x27;...&quot;

==Release==
&quot;Voodoo&quot; is one of the best-selling King Diamond&#x27;s albums. It peaked at #27 in the Finnish Charts, remaining four weeks in the Top 40, and it peaked at #55 in the Swedish Charts, but remaining for just one week.

==Track listing==
==Personnel==
*King Diamond – vocals, keyboards, harpsichord, organ
*Andy LaRocque – electric and acoustic guitars, keyboards
*Herb Simonsen – guitars
*Chris Estes – bass, acoustic guitars, keyboards
*John Luke Hébert – drums, percussion
*Dimebag Darrell – guitar solo on &quot;Voodoo&quot;
*The Voodoo Story

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="44" end="55" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241839" start="61" end="73" title="King Diamond (band)" label="King Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813669" start="227" end="238" title="Chris Estes" label="Chris Estes"/>
<link wikidata="Q32221" start="269" end="284" title="Kristian Wåhlin" label="Kristian Wåhlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345037" start="324" end="337" title="Andy LaRocque" label="Andy LaRocque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="577" end="594" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016589" start="671" end="677" title="Louisiana Voodoo" label="voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862555" start="844" end="859" title="Baron La Croix" label="Doctor le Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583775" start="1278" end="1289" title="goofer dust" label="goofer dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q808674" start="1465" end="1477" title="Baron Samedi" label="Baron Samedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q752920" start="1594" end="1607" title="loa" label="voodoo spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467532" start="1652" end="1660" title="exorcist" label="exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q808674" start="1873" end="1885" title="Baron Samedi" label="Baron Samedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313818" start="2794" end="2806" title="King Diamond" label="King Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345037" start="2848" end="2861" title="Andy LaRocque" label="Andy LaRocque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813669" start="2931" end="2942" title="Chris Estes" label="Chris Estes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311050" start="3018" end="3033" title="Dimebag Darrell" label="Dimebag Darrell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578365" wikidata="Q1797540" url="?curid=578365" title="MIRACL">
<text>MIRACL, or Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser, is a directed energy weapon developed by the US Navy. It is a deuterium fluoride laser, a type of chemical laser.

The MIRACL laser first became operational in 1980. It can produce over a megawatt of output for up to 70 seconds, making it the most powerful continuous wave (CW) laser in the US. Its original goal was to be able to track and destroy anti-ship cruise missiles, but in later years it was used to test phenomenologies associated with national anti-ballistic and anti-satellite laser weapons. Originally tested at a contractor facility in California, as of the later 1990s and early 2000s, it was located at the former MAR-1 facility () in the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.

The beam size in the resonator is about wide. The beam is then reshaped to a square.

Amid much controversy in October 1997, MIRACL was tested against MSTI-3, a US Air Force satellite at the end of its original mission in orbit at a distance of . MIRACL failed during the test and was damaged and the Pentagon claimed mixed results for other portions of the test. A second, lower-powered chemical laser was able to temporarily blind the MSTI-3 sensors during the test.

==References==
==Further reading==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1797540" start="0" end="6" title="MIRACL" label="MIRACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797540" start="11" end="47" title="MIRACL" label="Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341528" start="54" end="76" title="directed energy weapon" label="directed energy weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080617" start="111" end="135" title="hydrogen fluoride laser" label="deuterium fluoride laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090472" start="147" end="161" title="chemical laser" label="chemical laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="237" end="245" title="megawatt" label="megawatt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="680" end="685" title="Nike-X#MAR" label="MAR-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="705" end="730" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q29611580" start="898" end="904" title="Miniature Sensor Technology Integration-3" label="MSTI-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="908" end="920" title="United States Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="921" end="930" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="969" end="974" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578383" wikidata="Q404330" url="?curid=578383" title="Additive">
<text>Additive may refer to:
==Mathematics==
* Additive function, a function in number theory
* Additive map, a function that preserves the addition operation
* Additive set-function see Sigma additivity
* Additive category, a preadditive category with finite biproducts
* Additive inverse, an arithmetic concept
* Additive prime, a prime number where the sum of its digits is a number which is also a prime number.

==Science==
* Additive color, as opposed to subtractive color
* Additive model, a statistical regression model
* Additive synthesis, an audio synthesis technique
* Additive genetic effects 
* Additive quantity, a physical quantity that is additive for subsystems; see Intensive and extensive properties

==Engineering==
* Feed additive
* Gasoline additive, a substance used to improve the performance of a fuel, lower emissions or clean the engine
* Oil additive, a substance used to improve the performance of a lubricant
* Weakly additive, the quality of preferences in some logistics problems
* Polymer additive
* Pit additive, a material aiming to reduce fecal sludge build-up and control odor in pit latrines, septic tanks and wastewater treatment plants
* Biodegradable additives

==Other uses==
* , one of the grammatical cases in Estonian
* Food additive, any substance added to food to improve flavor, appearance, shelf life, etc.
* Additive rhythm, a larger period of time constructed from smaller ones</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q404330" start="0" end="8" title="Additive" label="Additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q95745348" start="41" end="58" title="Additive function" label="Additive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q22963169" start="90" end="102" title="Additive map" label="Additive map"/>
<link wikidata="Q709149" start="181" end="197" title="Sigma additivity" label="Sigma additivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681343" start="200" end="217" title="Additive category" label="Additive category"/>
<link wikidata="Q715358" start="267" end="283" title="Additive inverse" label="Additive inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q225987" start="309" end="323" title="Additive prime" label="Additive prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q353267" start="425" end="439" title="Additive color" label="Additive color"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681344" start="475" end="489" title="Additive model" label="Additive model"/>
<link wikidata="Q353280" start="524" end="542" title="Additive synthesis" label="Additive synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681342" start="575" end="599" title="Additive genetic effects" label="Additive genetic effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q911916" start="679" end="713" title="Intensive and extensive properties" label="Intensive and extensive properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441186" start="733" end="746" title="Feed additive" label="Feed additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q61459127" start="749" end="766" title="Gasoline additive" label="Gasoline additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495348" start="861" end="873" title="Oil additive" label="Oil additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977976" start="936" end="951" title="Weakly additive" label="Weakly additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="1009" end="1025" title="Polymer additive" label="Polymer additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907779" start="1028" end="1040" title="Pit additive" label="Pit additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914743" start="1173" end="1196" title="Biodegradable additives" label="Biodegradable additives"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="1260" end="1273" title="Food additive" label="Food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316480" start="1353" end="1368" title="Additive rhythm" label="Additive rhythm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578412" wikidata="Q329022" url="?curid=578412" title="Acetone peroxide">
<text>Acetone peroxide ( also called APEX and mother of Satan) is an organic peroxide and a primary explosive. It is produced by the reaction of acetone and hydrogen peroxide to yield a mixture of linear monomer and cyclic dimer, trimer, and tetramer forms. The monomer is dimethyldioxirane. The dimer is known as diacetone diperoxide (DADP). The trimer is known as triacetone triperoxide (TATP) or tri-cyclic acetone peroxide (TCAP). Acetone peroxide takes the form of a white crystalline powder with a distinctive bleach-like odor when impure, or a fruit-like smell when pure, and can explode powerfully if subjected to heat, friction, static electricity, concentrated sulfuric acid, strong UV radiation, or shock. Until about 2015, explosives detectors were not set to detect non-nitrogenous explosives, as most explosives used preceding 2015 were nitrogen-based. TATP, being nitrogen-free, has been used as the explosive of choice in several terrorist bomb attacks since 2001.

== History ==
Acetone peroxide (specifically, triacetone triperoxide) was discovered in 1895 by the German chemist Richard Wolffenstein. Wolffenstein combined acetone and hydrogen peroxide, and then he allowed the mixture to stand for a week at room temperature, during which time a small quantity of crystals precipitated, which had a melting point of .

In 1899, Adolf von Baeyer and Victor Villiger described the first synthesis of the dimer and described use of acids for the synthesis of both peroxides. Baeyer and Villiger prepared the dimer by combining potassium persulfate in diethyl ether with acetone, under cooling. After separating the ether layer, the product was purified and found to melt at . They found that the trimer could be prepared by adding hydrochloric acid to a chilled mixture of acetone and hydrogen peroxide. By using the depression of freezing points to determine the molecular weights of the compounds, they also determined that the form of acetone peroxide that they had prepared via potassium persulfate was a dimer, whereas the acetone peroxide that had been prepared via hydrochloric acid was a trimer, like Wolffenstein&#x27;s compound.

Work on this methodology and on the various products obtained, was further investigated in the mid-20th century by Milas and Golubović.

== Chemistry ==
The chemical name &quot;acetone peroxide&quot; is most commonly used to refer to the cyclic trimer, the product of a reaction between two precursors, hydrogen peroxide and acetone, in an acid-catalyzed nucleophilic addition, although monomeric and dimeric forms are also possible.
Specifically, two dimers, one cyclic (C6H12O4) and one open chain (C6H14O4), as well as an open dihydroperoxide monomer (C3H8O4), can also be formed; under a particular set of conditions of reagent and acid catalyst concentration, the cyclic trimer is the primary product. Under neutral conditions, the reaction is reported to produce the monomeric organic peroxide.

A tetrameric form has also been described, under different catalytic conditions, albeit not without disputes and controversy.

The most common route for nearly pure TATP is H2O2/acetone/HCl in 1:1:0.25 molar ratios, using 30% hydrogen peroxide. This product contains very little or none of DADP with some very small traces of chlorinated compounds. Product that contains large fraction of DADP can be obtained from 50% H2O2 using large amounts of concentrated sulfuric acid as catalyst or alternatively with 30% H2O2 and massive amounts of HCl as a catalyst.

The product made by using hydrochloric acid is regarded as more stable than the one made using sulfuric acid. It is known that traces of sulfuric acid trapped inside the formed acetone peroxide crystals lead to instability. In fact, the trapped sulfuric acid can induce detonation at temperatures as low as . This is the most likely mechanism behind accidental explosions of acetone peroxide that occur during drying on heated surfaces.

Organic peroxides in general are sensitive, dangerous explosives, and all forms of acetone peroxide are sensitive to initiation. TATP decomposes explosively; examination of the explosive decomposition of TATP at the very edge of detonation front predicts &quot;formation of acetone and ozone as the main decomposition products and not the intuitively expected oxidation products.&quot; Very little heat is created by the explosive decomposition of TATP at the very edge of the detonation front; the foregoing computational analysis suggests that TATP decomposition is an entropic explosion. However, this hypothesis has been challenged as not conforming to actual measurements. The claim of entropic explosion has been tied to the events just behind the detonation front. The authors of the 2004 Dubnikova et al. study confirm that a final redox reaction (combustion) of ozone, oxygen and reactive species into water, various oxides and hydrocarbons takes place within about 180ps after the initial reaction—within about a micron of the detonation wave. Detonating crystals of TATP ultimately reach temperature of and pressure of 80 kbar. The final energy of detonation is about 2800 kJ/kg (measured in helium), enough to briefly raise the temperature of gaseous products to . Volume of gases at STP is 855 L/kg for TATP and 713 L/kg for DADP (measured in helium).

The tetrameric form of acetone peroxide, prepared under neutral conditions using a tin catalyst in the presence of a chelator or general inhibitor of radical chemistry, is reported to be more chemically stable, although still a very dangerous primary explosive. Its synthesis has been disputed.

Both TATP and DADP are prone to loss of mass via sublimation. DADP has lower molecular weight and higher vapor pressure. This means that DADP is more prone to sublimation than TATP. This can lead to dangerous crystal growth when the vapors deposit if the crystals have been stored in a container with a threaded lid. This process of repeated sublimation and deposition also results in a change in crystal size via Ostwald ripening.

Several methods can be used for trace analysis of TATP, including gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS), high performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (HPLC/MS), and HPLC with post-column derivatization.

Acetone peroxide is soluble in toluene, chloroform, acetone, dichloromethane and methanol. Recrystalization of primary explosives may yield large crystals that detonate spontaneously due to internal strain.

== Industrial uses ==
Ketone peroxides, including acetone peroxide and methyl ethyl ketone peroxide, find application as initiators for polymerization reactions, e.g., silicone or polyester resins, in the making of fiberglass-reinforced composites. For these uses, the peroxides are typically in the form of a dilute solution in an organic solvent; methyl ethyl ketone peroxide is more common for this purpose, as it is stable in storage.

Acetone peroxide is used as a flour bleaching agent to bleach and &quot;mature&quot; flour.

Acetone peroxides are unwanted by-products of some oxidation reactions such as those used in phenol syntheses. Due to their explosive nature, their presence in chemical processes and chemical samples creates potential hazardous situations. For example, triacetone peroxide is the major contaminant found in diisopropyl ether as a result of photochemical oxidation in air. Accidental occurrence at illicit MDMA laboratories is possible.

Numerous methods are used to reduce their appearance, including shifting pH to more alkaline, adjusting reaction temperature, or adding inhibitors of their production.

== Use in improvised explosive devices ==
TATP has been used in bomb and suicide attacks and in improvised explosive devices, including the London bombings on 7 July 2005, where four suicide bombers killed 52 people and injured more than 700. It was one of the explosives used by the &quot;shoe bomber&quot; Richard Reid in his 2001 failed shoe bomb attempt and was used by the suicide bombers in the November 2015 Paris attacks, 2016 Brussels bombings, Manchester Arena bombing, June 2017 Brussels attack, Parsons Green bombing, the Surabaya bombings, and the 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings. Hong Kong police claim to have found of TATP among weapons and protest materials in July 2019, when mass protests were taking place against a proposed law allowing extradition to mainland China.

TATP shockwave overpressure is 70% of that for TNT, and the positive phase impulse is 55% of the TNT equivalent. TATP at 0.4 g/cm3 has about one-third of the brisance of TNT (1.2 g/cm3) measured by the Hess test.

TATP is attractive to terrorists because it is easily prepared from readily available retail ingredients, such as hair bleach and nail polish remover. It was also able to evade detection because it is one of the few high explosives that do not contain nitrogen, and could therefore pass undetected through standard explosive detection scanners, which were hitherto designed to detect nitrogenous explosives. By 2016, explosives detectors had been modified to be able to detect TATP, and new types were developed.

Legislative measures to limit the sale of hydrogen peroxide concentrated to 12% or higher have been made in the European Union.

A key disadvantage is the high susceptibility of TATP to accidental detonation, causing injuries and deaths among illegal bomb-makers, which has led to TATP being referred to as the &quot;Mother of Satan&quot;. TATP was found in the accidental explosion that preceded the 2017 terrorist attacks in Barcelona and surrounding areas.

Large-scale TATP synthesis is often betrayed by excessive bleach-like or fruity smells. This smell can even penetrate into clothes and hair in amounts that are quite noticeable; this was reported in the 2016 Brussels bombings.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="0" end="16" title="Acetone peroxide" label="Acetone peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="31" end="35" title="Acetone peroxide" label="APEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="40" end="55" title="Acetone peroxide" label="mother of Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q253817" start="63" end="79" title="organic peroxide" label="organic peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="86" end="103" title="primary explosive" label="primary explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="139" end="146" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="151" end="168" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q178827" start="198" end="205" title="monomer" label="monomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155368" start="210" end="216" title="Alicyclic compound" label="cyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q762043" start="217" end="222" title="Dimer (chemistry)" label="dimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q898416" start="224" end="230" title="Trimer (chemistry)" label="trimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q726004" start="236" end="244" title="oligomer" label="tetramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q762482" start="267" end="284" title="dimethyldioxirane" label="dimethyldioxirane"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="308" end="328" title="Acetone peroxide" label="diacetone diperoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="330" end="334" title="Acetone peroxide" label="DADP"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="360" end="382" title="Acetone peroxide" label="triacetone triperoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="384" end="388" title="Acetone peroxide" label="TATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="393" end="420" title="Acetone peroxide" label="tri-cyclic acetone peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="422" end="426" title="Acetone peroxide" label="TCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q407204" start="510" end="516" title="Sodium hypochlorite" label="bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q129302" start="704" end="709" title="Shock (mechanics)" label="shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="940" end="949" title="Terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q74608" start="1091" end="1111" title="Richard Wolffenstein (chemist)" label="Richard Wolffenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="1135" end="1142" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="1147" end="1164" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q57078" start="1341" end="1357" title="Adolf von Baeyer" label="Adolf von Baeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120374" start="1362" end="1377" title="Victor Villiger" label="Victor Villiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q415226" start="1537" end="1557" title="potassium persulfate" label="potassium persulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="1561" end="1574" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="1741" end="1758" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q465149" start="1827" end="1856" title="Freezing-point depression" label="depression of freezing points"/>
<link wikidata="Q247994" start="2441" end="2451" title="Precursor (chemistry)" label="precursors"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="2495" end="2504" title="catalyst" label="catalyzed"/>
<link wikidata="Q901669" start="2505" end="2526" title="nucleophilic addition" label="nucleophilic addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q178827" start="2923" end="2930" title="monomer" label="monomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q253817" start="2933" end="2949" title="organic peroxide" label="organic peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q673511" start="4067" end="4077" title="initiation (chemistry)" label="initiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192036" start="4137" end="4150" title="chemical decomposition" label="decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="4224" end="4231" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="4236" end="4241" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380778" start="4521" end="4539" title="entropic explosion" label="entropic explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902709" start="4928" end="4930" title="Picosecond" label="ps"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="5246" end="5249" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="STP"/>
<link wikidata="Q205004" start="5399" end="5402" title="tin(IV) chloride" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="5433" end="5441" title="chelator" label="chelator"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="5466" end="5483" title="Radical (chemistry)" label="radical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="5559" end="5576" title="primary explosive" label="primary explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="5661" end="5672" title="Sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="5689" end="5705" title="Molecular mass" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661322" start="5717" end="5731" title="vapor pressure" label="vapor pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q903984" start="6026" end="6042" title="Ostwald ripening" label="Ostwald ripening"/>
<link wikidata="Q381233" start="6157" end="6195" title="high performance liquid chromatography" label="high performance liquid chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="6498" end="6504" title="Ketone" label="Ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914590" start="6547" end="6575" title="methyl ethyl ketone peroxide" label="methyl ethyl ketone peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q466403" start="6597" end="6606" title="Radical initiator" label="initiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="6612" end="6626" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="6644" end="6652" title="silicone" label="silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="6656" end="6665" title="polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="6666" end="6671" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="6691" end="6701" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462021" start="6946" end="6967" title="flour bleaching agent" label="flour bleaching agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="7102" end="7108" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q418989" start="7316" end="7333" title="diisopropyl ether" label="diisopropyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q188651" start="7349" end="7362" title="photochemical" label="photochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="7414" end="7418" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="7519" end="7521" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q163767" start="7582" end="7591" title="inhibitor (chemistry)" label="inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="7755" end="7785" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="London bombings on 7 July 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930632" start="7923" end="7935" title="Richard Reid" label="Richard Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q463206" start="7943" end="7972" title="2001 failed shoe bomb attempt" label="2001 failed shoe bomb attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479779" start="8016" end="8043" title="November 2015 Paris attacks" label="November 2015 Paris attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23365300" start="8045" end="8067" title="2016 Brussels bombings" label="2016 Brussels bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015850" start="8069" end="8093" title="Manchester Arena bombing" label="Manchester Arena bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30351579" start="8095" end="8120" title="June 2017 Brussels attack" label="June 2017 Brussels attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q39886299" start="8122" end="8143" title="Parsons Green bombing" label="Parsons Green bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q53327666" start="8149" end="8166" title="Surabaya bombings" label="Surabaya bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q63245644" start="8176" end="8206" title="2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings" label="2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q25859" start="8208" end="8224" title="Hong Kong Police Force" label="Hong Kong police"/>
<link wikidata="Q64509602" start="8363" end="8401" title="2019–20 Hong Kong protests" label="allowing extradition to mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="8409" end="8418" title="shockwave" label="shockwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="8501" end="8515" title="TNT equivalent" label="TNT equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q899092" start="8562" end="8570" title="brisance" label="brisance"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="8870" end="8878" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421441" start="8933" end="8952" title="explosive detection" label="explosive detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q37001445" start="9533" end="9590" title="2017 Barcelona attacks" label="2017 terrorist attacks in Barcelona and surrounding areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23365300" start="9796" end="9818" title="2016 Brussels bombings" label="2016 Brussels bombings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578417" wikidata="Q4545492" url="?curid=578417" title="Owela">
<text>Owela, also referred to by the Khoekhoe language loanword ǁHus, is the Oshiwambo name of a traditional mancala board game played by the Nama people, Herero people, Rukwangali speakers, and other ethnic groups from Namibia (and its Southern African neighbours). It is related to the Omweso family of mancala games played in Eastern and Southern Africa. Although this is an abstract strategy game, the consequences of individual moves are so hard to predict that it can be considered, to some extent, a game of chance.

== Gameplay ==

=== Equipment ===
Owela is typically played on a board with 4 rows of 6 to 24 pits. In addition, a number of undifferentiated seeds are needed depending on the size of the board. Owela can also be played without a board by digging rows of pits in sand.

=== Objective ===
The winner is the last player to be able to make a legal move, possible by capturing all an opponent&#x27;s stones or reducing the opponent to no more than one seed in each pit.

=== Setup ===
Two seeds are placed in each of the outer pits. Two seeds are also placed in each of the four rightmost inner pits for each player.

&quot;Starting position for Owela&quot;
=== Sowing ===
A player moves by selecting a pit with at least two seeds, and &quot;sowing&quot; them one by one around their side of the board in a counter-clockwise direction from the starting pit. The player may only sow from one of the sixteen pits in their territory, and the sowing proceeds around this territory, not directly involving the opponent&#x27;s side.

If the last sowed seed lands in a previously occupied pit, all seeds in that pit, including the one just placed, are immediately sown, before the opponent&#x27;s turn. This is called &quot;Relay sowing&quot; and continues until the last sowing ends in an empty pit.

=== Capturing ===
If the last seed sown lands in one of the player&#x27;s eight inner pits, which is occupied, and furthermore both the opponent&#x27;s pits in this same column are occupied, then all seeds from these two pits are captured and sown starting from the player&#x27;s next pit in the sowing.

==Footnotes==

=== Notes ===
=== References ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4545492" start="0" end="5" title="Owela" label="Owela"/>
<link wikidata="Q13301" start="31" end="48" title="Khoekhoe language" label="Khoekhoe language"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="49" end="57" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545492" start="58" end="62" title="Owela" label="ǁHus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36489" start="71" end="80" title="Ovambo language" label="Oshiwambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q267989" start="103" end="110" title="mancala" label="mancala"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="111" end="121" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="136" end="147" title="Nama people" label="Nama people"/>
<link wikidata="Q170088" start="149" end="162" title="Herero people" label="Herero people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36334" start="164" end="174" title="Rukwangali" label="Rukwangali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="214" end="221" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="231" end="246" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656653" start="282" end="288" title="Omweso" label="Omweso"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="323" end="330" title="Eastern Africa" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q573573" start="372" end="394" title="abstract strategy game" label="abstract strategy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590573" start="501" end="515" title="game of chance" label="game of chance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578423" wikidata="Q57586" url="?curid=578423" title="Erich Priebke">
<text>Erich Priebke (29 July 1913 – 11 October 2013) was a German mid-level SS commander in the SS police force (SiPo) of Nazi Germany. In 1996, he was convicted of war crimes in Italy for commanding the unit which was responsible for the Ardeatine massacre in Rome on 24 March 1944 in which 335 Italian civilians were killed in retaliation for a partisan attack that killed 33 men of the German SS Police Regiment Bozen. Priebke was one of the men held responsible for this mass execution. After the defeat of Nazi Germany, he fled to Argentina, where he lived for almost 50 years.

In 1991, Priebke&#x27;s participation in the Rome massacre was denounced in Esteban Buch&#x27;s book . In 1994, 50 years after the massacre, Priebke felt he could then talk about the incident and was interviewed by American ABC News reporter Sam Donaldson. This caused outrage among people who had not forgotten the incident and led to his extradition to Italy and a trial which lasted more than four years.

== Early life ==
Priebke was born on 29 July 1913, at Hennigsdorf, which was then in the Kingdom of Prussia. Little is known of his early life but Priebke told interviewers that his parents died when he was young and that he was reared mainly by an uncle before earning a living as a waiter in Berlin, at The Savoy Hotel, London, and on the Italian Riviera.

Priebke married Alicia Stoll; the couple had two sons: Jorge, born in 1940 and Ingo, born in 1942.

== Service to the Schutzstaffel==

From 1936 he worked for the Waffen-SS and later for the Gestapo as an interpreter and because of his knowledge of Italian he was based in Rome beginning in 1941. While there he worked under Obersturmbannführer Herbert Kappler, who reportedly delegated relations with the Holy See to him.

===Fosse Ardeatine massacre===

The massacre of Fosse Ardeatine took place in Italy during World War II. On 23 March 1944, 33 German personnel of the SS Police Regiment Bozen were killed when the Italian Resistance set off a bomb and attacked the SS men with firearms and grenades while they were marching along Via Rasella in Rome. This attack was led by the Patriotic Action Groups or Gruppi di Azione Patriottica (GAP).

Adolf Hitler is reported, but never confirmed, to have ordered that within 24 hours, ten condemned Italians were to be shot for each dead German. Commander Kappler in Rome quickly compiled a list of 320 prisoners to be killed. Kappler voluntarily added ten more names to the list when the 33rd German died after the partisan attack. The total number of people executed at the Fosse Ardeatine was 335, mostly Italian. The largest cohesive group among those executed were the members of Bandiera Rossa (Red Flag), a dissident-communist military resistance group, along with more than 70 Jews.

On 24 March, led by SS officers Priebke and Karl Hass, the victims were killed inside the Ardeatine caves in groups of five. They were led into the caves with their hands tied behind their backs and then shot in the neck. Many were forced to kneel down over the bodies of those who had already been killed. During the killings, it was found that a mistake had been made and that five additional people who were not on the &quot;ten to one&quot; list had been brought up to the caves. Priebke was responsible for the list and his complicity in those 5 additional killings ruled out any possible justification for his behaviour on the basis of &quot;&quot;obedience to official orders.&quot; As a result, Priebke&#x27;s trial strongly focused on these extra killings.

To fill the numerical quota, many of the prisoners at Via Tasso and Regina Coeli prison who happened to be available at the time were sent to their deaths by the Nazis at the Fosse Ardeatine. Priebke put some on the list simply because they were Jewish (sending Jews to the camps, however, he said he had never done, for practical reasons: &quot;We needed the railway cars for other things&quot;).

Some of these prisoners had simply been residents of Via Rasella who were home at the time of the bombing; others had been arrested and tortured for resistance and communist-related activities. Not all of the partisans who were killed were members of the same resistance group. Members of the GAP, the PA, and Bandiera Rossa, in addition to the Clandestine Military Front, were all on the list of those to be executed. Furthermore, the scale and even the occurrence of this retaliation were unprecedented. Since the Allied invasion of Italy in 1943 and the subsequent overthrow of Mussolini, Communist anti-Fascists and members of the Italian Resistance had been practising guerrilla warfare against Axis troops.

==Post-war==

=== Escape to Argentina ===
In post–World War II trials, Priebke was set to be tried for his role in the massacre, but he managed to escape from a British prison camp in Rimini, Italy, in 1946. He later claimed that this escape had been assisted by a ratline run by German-Austrian Bishop Alois Hudal. After he had escaped, he lived with his family in Sterzing/Vipiteno. During this time he received on 13 September 1948 a second baptism (and adopted a new identity as Otto Pape) by a local priest. After his time in South Tyrol, he went to Argentina. Though alleged to have been responsible for war crimes, Priebke lived in Argentina in the town Bariloche as a free man for 50 years.

In March 1994, an investigative team from ABC News, led by producer Harry Phillips, tracked Priebke to San Carlos de Bariloche after finding mention of his participation in the Ardeatine massacre in a locally written book they found in a used bookstore. The book, &quot;El pintor de la Suiza argentina&quot;, by Esteban Buch named Priebke as part of a clique of Nazis living in Bariloche since the early 1950s.

Over the next several weeks, the ABC News team searched archives in Buenos Aires, Washington, D.C., London, Berlin and Jerusalem, uncovering numerous documents chronicling Priebke&#x27;s background and involvement with the notorious Nazi Gestapo in Italy. Among documents discovered in the Public Records Office in London was a confession, written a few months after the end of World War II, in which Priebke confirmed his role in the Ardeatine Caves Massacre. A document uncovered at the Yad Vashem Museum in Israel indicated that Priebke signed off on the transport of Italian Jews to death camps. As their research continued, the ABC team began surveillance of Priebke, monitoring his daily routine in Bariloche. In April 1994, ABC News reporter Sam Donaldson travelled to Bariloche with Phillips and camera crews to confront Priebke with their research on behalf of the ABC Television news show &quot;Primetime Live&quot;. Donaldson and his team first confronted another former Nazi living in the same town, Reinhard Kopps, who, when pressed about his own involvement, took Donaldson aside and told him about Priebke, confirming the ABC research.

Donaldson and his team waited for Priebke outside the school in which he was working and interviewed him in his car. After initial hesitation, Priebke admitted who he was and spoke openly about his role in the massacre. He justified his actions by saying that he only followed orders from the Gestapo chief of Rome, &quot;Obersturmbannführer&quot; Herbert Kappler, and that, in his view, the victims were terrorists. He denied to Donaldson that any children were killed, but three children as young as 14 were found among the dead (as were a 75-year-old man and a priest). He admitted that it was he who compiled the lists of those who were going to be executed. When testifying after the war, Kappler explained that Priebke had been ordered to make sure that all the victims were brought to the caves and executed, and to check the list of people who were to be killed.

====Extradition of Priebke====
Donaldson&#x27;s news report showed how openly Priebke could live in Argentina and how little remorse he felt for his actions. Argentinian authorities arrested Priebke. Because of his old age and poor health, he was at first not imprisoned, but rather held under house arrest at his home in Bariloche, where he had lived since 1949.

The extradition of Priebke had several delays. His lawyers used tactics like demanding all Italian documents be translated into Spanish, a process which could have taken two years. The Argentinian court eventually denied the process, but appeals and other delays caused the extradition case to take more than a year. His lawyers argued that the case could no longer be criminally prosecuted because the crime of murder was subject to a statute of limitations of 15 years under Argentinian law.

In March 1995, after nine months of delays, the president of the Jewish organization B&#x27;nai B&#x27;rith was promised by, among others, the Argentinian president Carlos Menem, that the case would soon be closed and that Priebke was to be transferred to Italy by the end of the month. In spite of these promises, the Supreme Court of Argentina decided that the case was to be transferred to the local court in Bariloche where the case was originally brought up. This opened the possibility for years of delays from future appeals, while Priebke could live at his home.

In May 1995, an Argentinian federal judge accepted the Italian demand for extradition on the grounds that cases of crimes against humanity could not expire. But there were more appeals and rumours that the court might change the ruling.

In August of the same year, it was judged that Priebke was not to be extradited because the case had expired. To put pressure on the Argentinian government, Germany demanded extradition the same day. The Italian military prosecutor, Antonio Intelisano, argued that UN agreements to which Argentina was signatory expressly state that cases of war criminals and crimes against humanity do not expire.

After 17 months of delays, the Argentinian supreme court decided that Priebke was to be extradited to Italy in 1996. He was put on a direct flight from Bariloche to Ciampino, a military airport close to the Ardeatine caves, where the executions had been carried out many years earlier.

== Trials ==

===Priebke in court===
In court, Priebke declared himself not guilty. He did not deny what he had done, but he denied any moral responsibility. He blamed the massacre on those whom he branded as &quot;the Italian terrorists&quot; who were behind the attack in which 33 German SS men were killed. The order came directly from Hitler, and he thought it was a legitimate punishment. During the trial, it became clear that Priebke had personally shot two Italians. This was also in his testimony from 1946 before he managed to escape.

Around noon on 24 March 1944, 335 men went to the Ardeatine Caves in Rome. All were tied with their hands behind their backs, and their names were read out loud. In groups of five, they went into the caves. Priebke went inside together with the second or third group and shot a man with an Italian machine pistol. Toward the end, he shot another man with the same machine pistol. The executions ended before dark. After the shootings, explosives were used to shut the caves. Priebke was found not guilty for the reason of acting under orders.

On 1 August 1996, orders were given for the immediate release of Priebke. The Italian minister of justice later said that Priebke might be re-arrested, depending on whether he would be extradited to Germany to be charged with murder. The courts were blocked by demonstrators for over seven hours after Priebke&#x27;s trial.

The judges voted two against one for convicting the 83-year-old Priebke for taking part in the massacres, which he had admitted, but he was acquitted again, purportedly because he had been following orders. There were strong reactions from family members of the victims, who claimed the judges put no value on human lives. Shimon Samuels, the leader of the Simon Wiesenthal Center said that with this ruling, Italy was permitting crimes against humanity.

===Appeal===
The case was appealed by the prosecutors. The day after, Germany asked Italy to keep Priebke imprisoned until their demand to have him extradited was processed, as they wanted him put on trial for the murders of two people that he had personally shot. Outside the courthouse there were demonstrations, but when it became known that Priebke had been rearrested, these protests calmed down. Many people later went to visit the Ardeatine Caves to honour the victims.

The Italian Supreme Court decided that the court that had freed Priebke was incompetent and the appeal went through. Among other things, it was questioned why the example of the Nuremberg trials had not been raised earlier, since they had concluded that an individual has personal responsibility for his actions. The reason that Priebke had been released was that he followed orders. Priebke claimed that if he had not obeyed, he would have been executed, but the appeals would not accept this as they felt it was a baseless excuse. The Court of Cassation voided the decision, ordering a new trial for Priebke. He was sentenced to 15 years. The sentence was reduced to 10 years because of his age and alleged ill health. In March 1998, the Court of Appeal condemned him to life imprisonment, together with Karl Hass, another former SS member. The decision was upheld in November of the same year by the Court of Cassation. Because of his age, Priebke was put under house arrest. In March 1997, it was decided that Priebke could not be extradited to Germany. The reason for this was that he was now going through a trial which was for the same charges that Germany wanted him tried. He therefore could not be tried for the same crime twice.

===Priebke&#x27;s appeals===
Priebke denied any responsibility and therefore appealed the case. At the appeals, it was decided that Hass and Priebke had committed murder in the first degree and that they should be given life imprisonment.

Priebke appealed the case to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, where he claimed he had no choice but to obey Hitler&#x27;s orders, a defence not accepted during the Nuremberg trials (see Nuremberg Defense and Nuremberg Principle IV). Moreover, it has been underlined by many that in the massacre of the Fosse Ardeatine 335 died, five more than required by the order &quot;10 Italians executed for each German killed&quot;. These five extra victims were the responsibility of Priebke alone because he was given the duty of checking the list.

On 20 March 2004, 80 people gathered in a room of the Centro Letterario in Trieste to show their support for Priebke. On 12 June 2007, he received authorization to leave his home to work at his lawyer&#x27;s office in Rome. This led to angry protests and the judge&#x27;s decision was overturned.

A number of Italian conservative figures defended Priebke on the grounds that he was only acting to obey orders: Italian journalist Indro Montanelli, who had lost two friends in the massacre of the Fosse Ardeatine, nonetheless wrote a private letter to Priebke that was later published in &quot;Il Giornale&quot; on 2013 by Fausto Biloslavo, arguing that he was only following orders; similar points of view were expressed by Vittorio Feltri, Giampiero Mughini, Vittorio Sgarbi, Guido Ceronetti, Anna Maria Ortese and Massimo Fini. In 2003 Senator Antonio Serena (National Alliance) argued that Priebke should have been pardoned by President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, arguing that Priebke was suffering from &quot;cruel and pointless behaviours&quot; from a &quot;Jewish lobby that spreads hate&quot;; because of this position, Serena was expelled from National Alliance.

==Death==
Priebke died in Rome on 11 October 2013, at the age of 100. His last request, that his remains be returned to Argentina so he could be buried alongside his wife, was denied by the Argentinian government. The Diocese of Rome issued an &quot;unprecedented ban&quot; on holding his funeral in any Roman Catholic church in Rome. His hometown in Germany also refused to take his body, over fears that his place of burial could become &quot;a pilgrimage site for neo-Nazis&quot;.

Following the refusal of the Diocese of Rome to officiate the funeral, Priebke&#x27;s relatives turned to the Society of Saint Pius X (SSPX), a traditionalist Catholic group which is not in full communion with the Holy See; the SSPX accepted to celebrate the funeral in the church of their priory in Albano Laziale. During the funeral service, the police prevented clashes from breaking out between fascist sympathizers and anti-fascist protesters. The funeral eventually took place, albeit without the presence of any of his relatives, because his family was unable to enter the church due to the rioting.

Eventually, the coffin containing Priebke&#x27;s body was seized by the Italian authorities, taken to a military base near Rome and then buried &quot;in a secret location&quot; as his lawyer Paolo Giachini stated. Giachini said the agreement &quot;satisfie[d] the family and ethical and spiritual requirements.&quot; According to &quot;L&#x27;Espresso&quot;, Priebke was buried in the cemetery of a former prison on an island, possibly Pianosa or Capraia.

Traditionalist Catholic priest Florian Abrahamowicz, a former member of the SSPX, celebrated a Mass in suffrage of Priebke in a chapel in Paese; the mayor of Resana Loris Mazzorato (Lega Nord) was among those attending the Mass.

Erich Priebke has one child still alive as of February 2025, Ingo Priebke aged 82, who lives in Florida. His other son, Jorge Priebke remained in Bariloche until his death in 2020.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Fabio Simonetti, &quot;Via Tasso: Quartier generale e carcere tedesco durante l’occupazione di Roma&quot;, Odradek, Roma, 2016.

==External links==
*The Massacre at the Ardeatine Caves, 24 March 1944
*Trial Watch - a Swiss site re. Priebke&#x27;s trial
*Italians protest outside Priebke&#x27;s office in July 2007
*An interview with the Evil. A journey in the Italian forbidden memory- Academia.edu
*Jewish Virtual Library Page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57586" start="0" end="13" title="Erich Priebke" label="Erich Priebke"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="70" end="72" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q684065" start="90" end="112" title="Sicherheitspolizei" label="SS police force (SiPo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="116" end="128" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="159" end="168" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q638761" start="233" end="251" title="Ardeatine massacre" label="Ardeatine massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q733211" start="339" end="356" title="Via Rasella attack" label="a partisan attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943891" start="390" end="414" title="SS Police Regiment Bozen" label="SS Police Regiment Bozen"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="495" end="517" title="defeat of Nazi Germany" label="defeat of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q699862" start="522" end="539" title="Ratlines (World War II)" label="fled to Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="802" end="810" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407424" start="820" end="833" title="Sam Donaldson" label="Sam Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q583462" start="1041" end="1052" title="Hennigsdorf" label="Hennigsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1076" end="1094" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746639" start="1296" end="1307" title="Savoy Hotel" label="Savoy Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="1509" end="1518" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="1537" end="1544" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161102" start="1671" end="1690" title="Obersturmbannführer" label="Obersturmbannführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61861" start="1691" end="1706" title="Herbert Kappler" label="Herbert Kappler"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="1752" end="1760" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943891" start="1920" end="1944" title="SS Police Regiment Bozen" label="SS Police Regiment Bozen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="1966" end="1984" title="Italian Resistance" label="Italian Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777284" start="2157" end="2185" title="Gruppi di Azione Patriottica" label="Gruppi di Azione Patriottica"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2194" end="2206" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q806325" start="2679" end="2693" title="Bandiera Rossa" label="Bandiera Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q64664" start="2830" end="2839" title="Karl Hass" label="Karl Hass"/>
<link wikidata="Q153817" start="3440" end="3468" title="Nuremberg defence" label="obedience to official orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658359" start="3621" end="3640" title="Regina Coeli prison" label="Regina Coeli prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="4626" end="4643" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="4850" end="4856" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q699862" start="4931" end="4938" title="Ratlines (World War II)" label="ratline"/>
<link wikidata="Q94526" start="4969" end="4980" title="Alois Hudal" label="Alois Hudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263305" start="5032" end="5040" title="Sterzing" label="Sterzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47772" start="5327" end="5336" title="Bariloche" label="Bariloche"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="5408" end="5416" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q47772" start="5469" end="5492" title="San Carlos de Bariloche" label="San Carlos de Bariloche"/>
<link wikidata="Q47772" start="5744" end="5753" title="Bariloche" label="Bariloche"/>
<link wikidata="Q392703" start="6068" end="6089" title="The National Archives (United Kingdom)" label="Public Records Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407424" start="6527" end="6540" title="Sam Donaldson" label="Sam Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022169" start="6683" end="6697" title="Primetime Live" label="Primetime Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140795" start="6790" end="6804" title="Reinhard Kopps" label="Reinhard Kopps"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="7223" end="7230" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161102" start="7252" end="7271" title="Obersturmbannführer" label="Obersturmbannführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61861" start="7278" end="7293" title="Herbert Kappler" label="Herbert Kappler"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="8096" end="8108" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q248686" start="8747" end="8769" title="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith" label="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith"/>
<link wikidata="Q185107" start="8827" end="8839" title="Carlos Menem" label="Carlos Menem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242421" start="8981" end="9007" title="Supreme Court of Argentina" label="Supreme Court of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="9349" end="9372" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="9814" end="9827" title="war crime" label="war criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132616" start="10037" end="10045" title="Ciampino–G. B. Pastine International Airport" label="Ciampino"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="11931" end="11954" title="Simon Wiesenthal Center" label="Simon Wiesenthal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="12686" end="12702" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135541" start="13045" end="13063" title="Court of Cassation (Italy)" label="Court of Cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64664" start="13314" end="13323" title="Karl Hass" label="Karl Hass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="13716" end="13746" title="double jeopardy" label="tried for the same crime twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="14022" end="14052" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q153817" start="14192" end="14209" title="Nuremberg Defense" label="Nuremberg Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146981" start="14214" end="14236" title="Nuremberg Principles" label="Nuremberg Principle IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q327914" start="14977" end="14993" title="Indro Montanelli" label="Indro Montanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051115" start="15140" end="15151" title="Il Giornale" label="Il Giornale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740341" start="15169" end="15185" title="Fausto Biloslavo" label="Fausto Biloslavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q948553" start="15271" end="15286" title="Vittorio Feltri" label="Vittorio Feltri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762532" start="15288" end="15305" title="Giampiero Mughini" label="Giampiero Mughini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426702" start="15307" end="15322" title="Vittorio Sgarbi" label="Vittorio Sgarbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q955088" start="15324" end="15339" title="Guido Ceronetti" label="Guido Ceronetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080033" start="15341" end="15358" title="Anna Maria Ortese" label="Anna Maria Ortese"/>
<link wikidata="Q662849" start="15409" end="15426" title="National Alliance (Italy)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224" start="15487" end="15507" title="Carlo Azeglio Ciampi" label="Carlo Azeglio Ciampi"/>
<link wikidata="Q665037" start="15932" end="15947" title="Diocese of Rome" label="Diocese of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="16181" end="16190" title="neo-Nazis" label="neo-Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q868160" start="16309" end="16332" title="Society of Saint Pius X" label="Society of Saint Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q199993" start="16343" end="16366" title="Traditionalist Catholicism" label="traditionalist Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033384" start="16373" end="16421" title="Canonical situation of the Society of Saint Pius X" label="which is not in full communion with the Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750108" start="16489" end="16495" title="priory" label="priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q191115" start="16499" end="16513" title="Albano Laziale" label="Albano Laziale"/>
<link wikidata="Q371314" start="17143" end="17158" title="L&amp;#x27;Espresso" label="L&amp;#x27;Espresso"/>
<link wikidata="Q208114" start="17243" end="17250" title="Pianosa" label="Pianosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593349" start="17254" end="17261" title="Capraia" label="Capraia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460992" start="17295" end="17315" title="Florian Abrahamowicz" label="Florian Abrahamowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q47687" start="17402" end="17407" title="Paese" label="Paese"/>
<link wikidata="Q47750" start="17446" end="17455" title="Lega Nord" label="Lega Nord"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578426" wikidata="Q1967136" url="?curid=578426" title="National Express East Anglia">
<text>National Express East Anglia (NXEA) was a train operating company in England owned by National Express that operated the Greater Anglia franchise from April 2004 until February 2012. Originally trading as One, it was rebranded National Express East Anglia in February 2008. It provided local, suburban and express services from London Liverpool Street to destinations in Essex, Hertfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Suffolk and Norfolk in the East of England.

==History==

When the British Rail services operating out of London Liverpool Street were privatised in January 1997, they were divided up between three train operating companies, Anglia Railways, First Great Eastern and West Anglia Great Northern.

In December 2001, the Strategic Rail Authority announced it planned to combine all of the services operating out of London Liverpool Street into one Greater Anglia franchise.

In April 2003, the Strategic Rail Authority announced Arriva, GB Railways and National Express had been shortlisted to bid for the new franchise. In December 2003, the franchise was awarded to National Express with all the services operated by Anglia Railways and First Great Eastern along with those out of London Liverpool Street by West Anglia Great Northern, transferring to&quot; One&quot; on 1 April 2004. The franchise was to run until March 2011, with provision for a three-year extension if performance targets were met.

===One===
The area names from the former franchises were initially retained as sub-brands by the new franchise, &quot;One Anglia&quot;, &quot;One Great Eastern&quot; and &quot;One West Anglia&quot;, however other than Stansted Express all services were soon branded as just &quot;One&quot;, reflecting the union of the three smaller franchises into one single franchise. This led to passenger confusion as they were unable to establish if announcements were for the 07:20 &quot;One&quot; service, or the 07:21 service resulting in the company&#x27;s name being omitted from announcements.

===National Express East Anglia===
In February 2008, as part of a group wide rebranding exercise, the franchise was redesignated again. This time it became National Express East Anglia.

In November 2009, the Department for Transport announced National Express would not be granted the three-year extension that it had met the criteria for, because of it defaulting on the National Express East Coast franchise.

Following a change of government at the 2010 General Election, the Department for Transport announced all refranchising would be put on hold while a review was conducted into the franchising process. As a result, National Express were granted an initial extension until October 2011, followed by another until February 2012.

After February 2012 the trains were run by Greater Anglia a subsidiary of Nederlandse Spoorwegen.

==Services==
In addition to its domestic services, the company was also a partner with Stena Line and Nederlandse Spoorwegen in the Dutchflyer service. Most of the London services use Liverpool Street as their terminus.

===Former Anglia franchise===
*Intercity Great Eastern Main Line services to Chelmsford, Colchester, Ipswich and Norwich as well as local services in Suffolk and Norfolk
*Bittern Line (Norwich - Cromer - Sheringham)
*Breckland Line (Norwich - Ely (continuing to Cambridge)
*East Suffolk Line (Ipswich - Lowestoft)
*Ely to Peterborough Line (Ely - Peterborough)
*Felixstowe Branch Line (Ipswich - Felixstowe)
*Ipswich to Ely Line (Ipswich - Bury St Edmunds, continuing to Ely/Newmarket - Cambridge)
*Wherry Lines (Norwich - Great Yarmouth / Lowestoft)

===Former Great Eastern franchise===
*Great Eastern Main Line to Chelmsford, Colchester, Clacton-on-Sea and Ipswich
*&#x27;Shenfield Metro&#x27; service Liverpool Street - Shenfield
*Upminster Branch Line (Romford - Upminster)
*Shenfield to Southend Line (Shenfield - Southend Victoria)
*Crouch Valley Line (Shenfield–Wickford - Southminster)
*Braintree Branch Line (Witham - )
*Gainsborough Line (Marks Tey - Sudbury)
*Sunshine Coast Line (Colchester - Colchester Town - Clacton-on-Sea and Walton-on-the Naze)
*Mayflower Line (Manningtree - Harwich Town)

===Former West Anglia Great Northern franchise===
*Lea Valley Lines (Liverpool Street to Chingford / Enfield / Cheshunt), also services on the Hertford East Branch Line
*Local services from Liverpool Street - Stansted Airport
*Stratford - Stansted Airport
*West Anglia Main Line Liverpool Street - Harlow / Cambridge (and limited service to King&#x27;s Lynn)

For eight weeks in summer 2004, Ipswich tunnel was closed with &quot;One&quot; running two Norwich to Liverpool Street services via Cambridge with Cotswold Rail Class 47s.

In December 2004 new services were introduced from Liverpool Street to Lowestoft (via East Suffolk Line or Norwich), Peterborough, Bury St Edmunds and Cambridge via Ipswich. However, in December 2010 these services were withdrawn.

The Liverpool Street to Harwich International &quot;Boat Trains&quot; used to be operated by Class 86s and Mark 2s, however EMUs took over the service.

==Rolling stock==
&quot;One&quot; inherited a fleet of Class 86, Mark 2 carriages, Driving Brake Standard Opens, Class 150, Class 153 and Class 170 &quot;Turbostar&quot;, Class 312, Class 315, Class 317, Class 321 and Class 360s from Anglia Railways, First Great Eastern and West Anglia Great Northern.

A franchise commitment was the replacement of the Class 86s and Mark 2 carriages with Class 90s and Mark 3 carriages that were being replaced by Virgin Trains with the Class 390 &quot;Pendolino&quot;. Initially the Mark 3s entered service in the same run-down condition in which they had left Virgin, before all were overhauled at Bombardier Transportation&#x27;s Derby Litchurch Lane Works. The last Class 86s and Mark 2 carriages were withdrawn in late 2006.

In 2005, the Class 150s were exchanged with nine Class 156s from Central Trains. In 2009, National Express East Anglia received 17 Class 321s transferred from London Midland.

Another franchise commitment was the procurement of new stock for the Stansted Express service. This resulted in 30 four-carriage Class 379 &quot;Electrostars&quot; being ordered; the first entered service in March 2011.

A Class 47 was hired from Cotswold Rail for use on rescue duties and to haul the initial weekday and later Summer Saturday only services from Norwich to Great Yarmouth. After Cotswold ceased trading in 2009, Direct Rail Services Class 47s were hired. DB Schenker often provided Class 90s to cover for unavailability of One&#x27;s fleet.

===Fleet at start of franchise===

===Fleet at end of franchise===
===Diagrams===
Class 315: 
Class 321: 
Class 360: 
Class 379: 

==Performance==
Infrastructure problems have affected performance. According to Network Rail, the main problems have been track-circuit failures, broken rails, track faults, points failures and overhead line equipment (OLE) failures. Network Rail, which is responsible for the infrastructure, intended to improve performance by work carried out during a planned closure of London Liverpool Street station over Christmas and New Year 2007/8. This allowed much of the outer London overhead line equipment to be replaced by modern, self-tensioning lines. The work was carried out, but overran at short notice by some 24 hours, causing ridicule in the national press.

Detailed figures (from the January edition of &quot;Modern Railways&quot;) of the miles covered per 5-minute delay for the year ending October 2009 showed that the most reliable trains in the fleet were again the Class 360 Desiros (mainly Clacton-on-Sea to London Liverpool Street), which achieved over 38,000 miles per five-minute delay. The &#x27;workhorse&#x27; Class 321s by comparison returned some 21,500 miles per five-minute delay, while the &#x27;Inter-City&#x27; Class 90 locomotive-hauled Norwich - Liverpool Street trains came in at some 14,000 miles per five-minute delay - this last figure being a 35% improvement on last year&#x27;s 10,400. The Class 90 locomotives won the Silver Spanner award for InterCity rolling stock at the Annual National Rail Awards 2009.

==Demise==
In March 2011, the Department for Transport announced Abellio, Go-Ahead, and Stagecoach had been shortlisted to bid for the new Greater Anglia franchise. In October 2011, the new franchise was awarded to Abellio with the services operated by National Express East Anglia transferring to Greater Anglia on 5 February 2012.

==References==
==External links==

*Company website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1967136" start="0" end="28" title="National Express East Anglia" label="National Express East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967136" start="30" end="34" title="National Express East Anglia" label="NXEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102188" start="42" end="65" title="train operating company" label="train operating company"/>
<link wikidata="Q60188" start="86" end="102" title="National Express" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000984" start="121" end="145" title="East Anglia franchise" label="Greater Anglia franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967136" start="205" end="208" title="National Express East Anglia" label="One"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="328" end="351" title="Liverpool Street station" label="London Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="371" end="376" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="378" end="391" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23112" start="393" end="407" title="Cambridgeshire" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="409" end="416" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="421" end="428" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q48006" start="436" end="451" title="East of England" label="East of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="476" end="488" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="515" end="538" title="Liverpool Street station" label="London Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763413" start="634" end="649" title="Anglia Railways" label="Anglia Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453058" start="651" end="670" title="First Great Eastern" label="First Great Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707736" start="675" end="701" title="West Anglia Great Northern" label="West Anglia Great Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q489287" start="726" end="750" title="Strategic Rail Authority" label="Strategic Rail Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000984" start="853" end="877" title="East Anglia franchise" label="Greater Anglia franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q680991" start="934" end="940" title="Arriva" label="Arriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512969" start="942" end="953" title="GB Railways" label="GB Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q60188" start="958" end="974" title="National Express" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118151" start="1629" end="1645" title="Stansted Express" label="Stansted Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="2210" end="2234" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785106" start="2374" end="2401" title="National Express East Coast" label="National Express East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="2454" end="2475" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q318679" start="2783" end="2797" title="Greater Anglia (train operating company)" label="Greater Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23076" start="2814" end="2836" title="Nederlandse Spoorwegen" label="Nederlandse Spoorwegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q833903" start="2926" end="2936" title="Stena Line" label="Stena Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23076" start="2941" end="2963" title="Nederlandse Spoorwegen" label="Nederlandse Spoorwegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317493" start="2971" end="2981" title="Dutchflyer" label="Dutchflyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="3023" end="3039" title="Liverpool Street station" label="Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502917" start="3101" end="3124" title="Great Eastern Main Line" label="Great Eastern Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668271" start="3137" end="3147" title="Chelmsford railway station" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750618" start="3149" end="3159" title="Colchester railway station" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003305" start="3161" end="3168" title="Ipswich railway station" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q389902" start="3173" end="3180" title="Norwich railway station" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="3210" end="3217" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="3222" end="3229" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q276629" start="3231" end="3243" title="Bittern Line" label="Bittern Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950073" start="3255" end="3261" title="Cromer railway station" label="Cromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q248831" start="3264" end="3274" title="Sheringham railway station" label="Sheringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q285588" start="3277" end="3291" title="Breckland Line" label="Breckland Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324504" start="3303" end="3306" title="Ely railway station" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088356" start="3322" end="3331" title="Cambridge railway station" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329453" start="3334" end="3351" title="East Suffolk Line" label="East Suffolk Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008297" start="3363" end="3372" title="Lowestoft railway station" label="Lowestoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368443" start="3375" end="3399" title="Ely to Peterborough Line" label="Ely to Peterborough Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206677" start="3407" end="3419" title="Peterborough railway station" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442402" start="3422" end="3444" title="Felixstowe Branch Line" label="Felixstowe Branch Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247616" start="3456" end="3466" title="Felixstowe railway station" label="Felixstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995078" start="3469" end="3488" title="Ipswich to Ely Line" label="Ipswich to Ely Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243921" start="3500" end="3515" title="Bury St Edmunds railway station" label="Bury St Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320175" start="3535" end="3544" title="Newmarket railway station, Suffolk" label="Newmarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608228" start="3559" end="3571" title="Wherry Lines" label="Wherry Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q280999" start="3583" end="3597" title="Great Yarmouth railway station" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986007" start="3600" end="3609" title="Lowestoft" label="Lowestoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502917" start="3650" end="3673" title="Great Eastern Main Line" label="Great Eastern Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124903" start="3701" end="3715" title="Clacton-on-Sea railway station" label="Clacton-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461338" start="3784" end="3793" title="Shenfield railway station" label="Shenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363198" start="3795" end="3816" title="Upminster Branch Line" label="Upminster Branch Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299776" start="3818" end="3825" title="Romford railway station" label="Romford"/>
<link wikidata="Q801547" start="3828" end="3837" title="Upminster station" label="Upminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494235" start="3840" end="3866" title="Shenfield to Southend Line" label="Shenfield to Southend Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254036" start="3880" end="3897" title="Southend Victoria railway station" label="Southend Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189027" start="3900" end="3918" title="Crouch Valley Line" label="Crouch Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857839" start="3930" end="3938" title="Wickford railway station" label="Wickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501276" start="3941" end="3953" title="Southminster railway station" label="Southminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955938" start="3956" end="3977" title="Braintree Branch Line" label="Braintree Branch Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369354" start="3979" end="3985" title="Witham railway station" label="Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517293" start="3991" end="4008" title="Gainsborough Line" label="Gainsborough Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025932" start="4010" end="4019" title="Marks Tey railway station" label="Marks Tey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463248" start="4022" end="4029" title="Sudbury railway station" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641459" start="4032" end="4051" title="Sunshine Coast Line" label="Sunshine Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489756" start="4066" end="4081" title="Colchester Town railway station" label="Colchester Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359051" start="4103" end="4121" title="Walton-on-the-Naze railway station" label="Walton-on-the Naze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797232" start="4124" end="4138" title="Mayflower Line" label="Mayflower Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938819" start="4140" end="4151" title="Manningtree railway station" label="Manningtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654950" start="4154" end="4166" title="Harwich Town railway station" label="Harwich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508238" start="4220" end="4236" title="Lea Valley Lines" label="Lea Valley Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250130" start="4258" end="4267" title="Chingford railway station" label="Chingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385571" start="4270" end="4277" title="Enfield Town railway station" label="Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19790" start="4280" end="4288" title="Cheshunt" label="Cheshunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744695" start="4312" end="4337" title="Hertford East Branch Line" label="Hertford East Branch Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652717" start="4378" end="4394" title="Stansted Airport railway station" label="Stansted Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q801480" start="4396" end="4405" title="Stratford railway station" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984317" start="4426" end="4447" title="West Anglia Main Line" label="West Anglia Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988068" start="4467" end="4473" title="Harlow Town railway station" label="Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088356" start="4476" end="4485" title="Cambridge railway station" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q285604" start="4510" end="4526" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn railway station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175490" start="4676" end="4689" title="Cotswold Rail" label="Cotswold Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246420" start="4690" end="4699" title="British Rail Class 47" label="Class 47s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008297" start="4773" end="4782" title="Lowestoft railway station" label="Lowestoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206677" start="4819" end="4831" title="Peterborough railway station" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243921" start="4833" end="4848" title="Bury St Edmunds railway station" label="Bury St Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088356" start="4853" end="4862" title="Cambridge railway station" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003305" start="4867" end="4874" title="Ipswich railway station" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058152" start="4958" end="4979" title="Harwich International railway station" label="Harwich International"/>
<link wikidata="Q849827" start="5027" end="5036" title="British Rail Class 86" label="Class 86s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301225" start="5041" end="5048" title="British Rail Mark 2" label="Mark 2s"/>
<link wikidata="Q849827" start="5142" end="5150" title="British Rail Class 86" label="Class 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301225" start="5152" end="5168" title="British Rail Mark 2" label="Mark 2 carriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308048" start="5170" end="5197" title="Driving Brake Standard Open" label="Driving Brake Standard Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303653" start="5200" end="5209" title="British Rail Class 150" label="Class 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303693" start="5211" end="5220" title="British Rail Class 153" label="Class 153"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303833" start="5225" end="5256" title="British Rail Class 170" label="Class 170 &amp;quot;Turbostar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q751903" start="5258" end="5267" title="British Rail Class 312" label="Class 312"/>
<link wikidata="Q751888" start="5269" end="5278" title="British Rail Class 315" label="Class 315"/>
<link wikidata="Q665023" start="5280" end="5289" title="British Rail Class 317" label="Class 317"/>
<link wikidata="Q844103" start="5291" end="5300" title="British Rail Class 321" label="Class 321"/>
<link wikidata="Q918229" start="5305" end="5315" title="British Rail Class 360" label="Class 360s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763413" start="5321" end="5336" title="Anglia Railways" label="Anglia Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453058" start="5338" end="5357" title="First Great Eastern" label="First Great Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707736" start="5362" end="5388" title="West Anglia Great Northern" label="West Anglia Great Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401812" start="5477" end="5486" title="British Rail Class 90" label="Class 90s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271383" start="5491" end="5507" title="British Rail Mark 3" label="Mark 3 carriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q843431" start="5536" end="5549" title="Virgin Trains" label="Virgin Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q681896" start="5559" end="5590" title="British Rail Class 390" label="Class 390 &amp;quot;Pendolino&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="5722" end="5747" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261424" start="5755" end="5781" title="Derby Litchurch Lane Works" label="Derby Litchurch Lane Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303716" start="5902" end="5912" title="British Rail Class 156" label="Class 156s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054033" start="5918" end="5932" title="Central Trains" label="Central Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q523068" start="6012" end="6026" title="London Midland" label="London Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118151" start="6099" end="6115" title="Stansted Express" label="Stansted Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970780" start="6159" end="6193" title="British Rail Class 379" label="Class 379 &amp;quot;Electrostars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246420" start="6253" end="6261" title="British Rail Class 47" label="Class 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175490" start="6277" end="6290" title="Cotswold Rail" label="Cotswold Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q456226" start="6459" end="6479" title="Direct Rail Services" label="Direct Rail Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q472941" start="6502" end="6513" title="DB Cargo UK" label="DB Schenker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401812" start="6529" end="6537" title="British Rail Class 90" label="Class 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q144298" start="7186" end="7198" title="outer London" label="outer London"/>
<link wikidata="Q318672" start="8230" end="8237" title="Abellio (transport company)" label="Abellio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166056" start="8239" end="8247" title="Go-Ahead Group" label="Go-Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q660261" start="8253" end="8263" title="Stagecoach Group" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000984" start="8304" end="8328" title="East Anglia franchise" label="Greater Anglia franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q318672" start="8380" end="8387" title="Abellio (transport company)" label="Abellio"/>
<link wikidata="Q318679" start="8463" end="8477" title="Greater Anglia (train operating company)" label="Greater Anglia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578427" wikidata="Q4004641" url="?curid=578427" title="Ünee tugalluulakh">
<text>Ünee tugalluulakh (, &quot;let the cows calve&quot;) is a mancala game played by Kazakhs in western Mongolia. The rules are the same as the &quot;iesön khorgol&quot; game.

The starting position is a 3x2 grid of holes with six pieces in each hole, as follows:

==References==
== External links ==
*Rules to Unee tugaluulax posted on the manqala.org wiki.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4004641" start="0" end="17" title="Ünee tugalluulakh" label="Ünee tugalluulakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q267989" start="58" end="65" title="mancala" label="mancala"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="81" end="88" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="100" end="108" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q575620" start="146" end="159" title="Eson xorgol" label="iesön khorgol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578430" wikidata="Q2505446" url="?curid=578430" title="VBI">
<text>VBI may refer to:
*Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech (formerly the Virginia Bioinformatics Institute), a research organization specializing in bioinformatics, computational biology, and systems biology in Virginia, United States
*Value-based investing, also known as value investing, an investment paradigm that involves buying securities that appear underpriced by some form of fundamental analysis
*VBI Vaccines Inc. and Variation Biotechnologies, related manufacturers of vaccines
*Vertebrobasilar insufficiency, a temporary set of symptoms due to decreased blood flow (ischemia) in the posterior circulation of the brain
*Vertical blank interrupt, a hardware feature found in some computer systems that generate a video display
*vertical blanking interval, a portion of a television signal
*Visible Broadband Imager, part of the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7934149" start="19" end="59" title="Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech" label="Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361817" start="274" end="289" title="value investing" label="value investing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="408" end="425" title="VBI Vaccines Inc." label="VBI Vaccines Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q106522144" start="430" end="455" title="Variation Biotechnologies" label="Variation Biotechnologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11540874" start="492" end="521" title="Vertebrobasilar insufficiency" label="Vertebrobasilar insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922818" start="633" end="657" title="Vertical blank interrupt" label="Vertical blank interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q626978" start="740" end="766" title="vertical blanking interval" label="vertical blanking interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825377" start="840" end="872" title="Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope" label="Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578436" wikidata="Q1761396" url="?curid=578436" title="Self-medication">
<text>Self-medication, sometime called do-it-yourself (DIY) medicine, is a human behavior in which an individual uses a substance or any exogenous influence to self-administer treatment for physical or psychological conditions, for example headaches or fatigue.

The substances most widely used in self-medication are over-the-counter drugs and dietary supplements, which are used to treat common health issues at home. These do not require a doctor&#x27;s prescription to obtain and, in some countries, are available in supermarkets and convenience stores.

The field of psychology surrounding the use of psychoactive drugs is often specifically in relation to the use of recreational drugs, alcohol, comfort food, and other forms of behavior to alleviate symptoms of mental distress, stress and anxiety, including mental illnesses or psychological trauma. Such treatment may cause serious detriment to physical and mental health if motivated by addictive mechanisms. In postsecondary (university and college) students, self-medication with &quot;study drugs&quot; such as Adderall, Ritalin, and Concerta has been widely reported and discussed in literature.

Products are marketed by manufacturers as useful for self-medication, sometimes on the basis of questionable evidence. Claims that nicotine has medicinal value have been used to market cigarettes as self-administered medicines. These claims have been criticized as inaccurate by independent researchers. Unverified and unregulated third-party health claims are used to market dietary supplements.

Self-medication is often seen as gaining personal independence from established medicine, and it can be seen as a human right, implicit in, or closely related to the right to refuse professional medical treatment. Self-medication can cause unintentional self-harm. Self-medication with antibiotics has been identified as one of the primary reasons for the evolution of antimicrobial resistance.

Sometimes self-medication or DIY medicine occurs because patients disagree with a doctor&#x27;s interpretation of their condition, to access experimental therapies that are not available to the public, or because of legal bans on healthcare, as in the case of some transgender people or women seeking self-induced abortion. Other reasons for relying on DIY medical care is to avoid health care prices in the United States and anarchist beliefs. 

==Definition==
Generally speaking, self-medication is defined as &quot;the use of drugs to treat self-diagnosed disorders or symptoms, or the intermittent or continued use of a prescribed drug for chronic or recurrent disease or symptoms&quot;.&lt;ref name=&#x27;WHO/EDM/QSM/00.1&#x27;&gt; &lt;/ref&gt;

Self-medication can be defined as the use of drugs to treat an illness or symptom when the user is not a medically qualified professional. The term is also used to include the use of drugs outside their license or off-label.

==Psychology and psychiatry==

===Self-medication hypothesis===
As different drugs have different effects, they may be used for different reasons. According to the self-medication hypothesis (SMH), the individuals&#x27; choice of a particular drug is not accidental or coincidental, but instead, a result of the individuals&#x27; psychological condition, as the drug of choice provides relief to the user specific to his or her condition. Specifically, addiction is hypothesized to function as a compensatory means to modulate effects and treat distressful psychological states, whereby individuals choose the drug that will most appropriately manage their specific type of psychiatric distress and help them achieve emotional stability.

The self-medication hypothesis (SMH) originated in papers by Edward Khantzian, Mack and Schatzberg, David F. Duncan, and a response to Khantzian by Duncan. The SMH initially focused on heroin use, but a follow-up paper added cocaine. The SMH was later expanded to include alcohol, and finally all drugs of addiction.

According to Khantzian&#x27;s view of addiction, drug users compensate for deficient ego function by using a drug as an &quot;ego solvent&quot;, which acts on parts of the self that are cut off from consciousness by defense mechanisms. According to Khantzian, drug dependent individuals generally experience more psychiatric distress than non-drug dependent individuals, and the development of drug dependence involves the gradual incorporation of the drug effects and the need to sustain these effects into the defensive structure-building activity of the ego itself. The addict&#x27;s choice of drug is a result of the interaction between the psychopharmacologic properties of the drug and the affective states from which the addict was seeking relief. The drug&#x27;s effects substitute for defective or non-existent ego mechanisms of defense. The addict&#x27;s drug of choice, therefore, is not random.

While Khantzian takes a psychodynamic approach to self-medication, Duncan&#x27;s model focuses on behavioral factors. Duncan described the nature of positive reinforcement (e.g., the &quot;high feeling&quot;, approval from peers), negative reinforcement (e.g. reduction of negative affect) and avoidance of withdrawal symptoms, all of which are seen in those who develop problematic drug use, but are not all found in all recreational drug users. While earlier behavioral formulations of drug dependence using operant conditioning maintained that positive and negative reinforcement were necessary for drug dependence, Duncan maintained that drug dependence was not maintained by positive reinforcement, but rather by negative reinforcement. Duncan applied a public health model to drug dependence, where the agent (the drug of choice) infects the host (the drug user) through a vector (e.g., peers), while the environment supports the disease process, through stressors and lack of support.

Khantzian revisited the SMH, suggesting there is more evidence that psychiatric symptoms, rather than personality styles, lie at the heart of drug use disorders. Khantzian specified that the two crucial aspects of the SMH were that (1) drugs of abuse produce a relief from psychological suffering and (2) the individual&#x27;s preference for a particular drug is based on its psychopharmacological properties. The individual&#x27;s drug of choice is determined through experimentation, whereby the interaction of the main effects of the drug, the individual&#x27;s inner psychological turmoil, and underlying personality traits identify the drug that produces the desired effects.

Meanwhile, Duncan&#x27;s work focuses on the difference between recreational and problematic drug use. Data obtained in the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study demonstrated that only 20% of drug users ever experience an episode of drug abuse (Anthony &amp; Helzer, 1991), while data obtained from the National Comorbidity Study demonstrated that only 15% of alcohol users and 15% of illicit drug users ever become dependent. A crucial determinant of whether a drug user develops drug abuse is the presence or absence of negative reinforcement, which is experienced by problematic users, but not by recreational users. According to Duncan, drug dependence is an avoidance behavior, where an individual finds a drug that produces a temporary escape from a problem, and taking the drug is reinforced as an operant behavior.

===Specific mechanisms===
Some people who have a mental illness attempt to correct their illnesses by using certain drugs. Depression is often self-medicated by the use of alcohol, tobacco, cannabis, or other mind-altering drugs. While this may provide immediate relief of some symptoms such as anxiety, it may evoke and/or exacerbate some symptoms of several kinds of mental illnesses that are already latently present, and may lead to addiction or physical dependency, among other side effects of long-term use of the drug. This does not differ significantly from the potential effects of drugs provided by physicians, which are equally capable of producing dependency and/or addiction and also have side effects arising from long-term use.

People with post-traumatic stress disorder have been known to self-medicate, as well as many individuals without this diagnosis who have experienced psychological trauma.

Due to the different effects of the different classes of drugs, the SMH postulates that the appeal of a specific class of drugs differs from person to person. In fact, some drugs may be aversive for individuals for whom the effects could worsen affective deficits.

====CNS depressants====
Alcohol and sedative/hypnotic drugs, such as barbiturates and benzodiazepines, are central nervous system (CNS) depressants that lower inhibitions via anxiolysis. Depressants produce feelings of relaxation and sedation, while relieving feelings of depression and anxiety. Though they are generally ineffective antidepressants, as most are short-acting, the rapid onset of alcohol and sedative/hypnotics softens rigid defenses and, in low to moderate doses, provides relief from depressive affect and anxiety. As alcohol also lowers inhibitions, alcohol is also hypothesized to be used by those who normally constrain emotions by attenuating intense emotions in high or obliterating doses, which allows them to express feelings of affection, aggression and closeness. Most patients that have been hospitalized for substance use or alcohol dependence reported using drugs in response to depressive symptoms. This type of misuse is more likely in men than in women. This makes diagnosing a psychiatric disorder very difficult in substance abusers, because of self medicating.

=====Alcohol=====
People with social anxiety disorder commonly use alcohol to overcome their highly set inhibitions.

====Psychostimulants====
Psychostimulants, such as cocaine, amphetamines, methylphenidate, caffeine, and nicotine, produce improvements in physical and mental functioning, including increased energy and alertness. Stimulants tend to be most widely used by people with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which can either be diagnosed or undiagnosed. Because a significant portion of people with ADHD have not been diagnosed they are more prone to using stimulants like caffeine, nicotine or pseudoephedrine to mitigate their symptoms. Unawareness concerning the effects of illicit substances such as cocaine, methamphetamine or mephedrone can result in self-medication with these drugs by individuals affected with ADHD symptoms. This self medication can effectively prevent them from getting diagnosed with ADHD and receiving treatment with stimulants like methylphenidate and amphetamines.

Stimulants also can be beneficial for individuals who experience depression, to reduce anhedonia and increase self-esteem, however in some cases depression may occur as a comorbid condition originating from the prolonged presence of negative symptoms of undiagnosed ADHD, which can impair executive functions, resulting in lack of motivation, focus and contentment with one&#x27;s life, so stimulants may be useful for treating treatment-resistant depression, especially in individuals thought to have ADHD. The SMH also hypothesizes that hyperactive and hypomanic individuals use stimulants to maintain their restlessness and heighten euphoria. Additionally, stimulants are useful to individuals with social anxiety by helping individuals break through their inhibitions. Some reviews suggest that students use psychostimulants to self medicate for underlying conditions, such as ADHD, depression or anxiety.

====Opiates====
Opiates, such as heroin and morphine, function as an analgesic by binding to opioid receptors in the brain and gastrointestinal tract. This binding reduces the perception of and reaction to pain, while also increasing pain tolerance. Opiates are hypothesized to be used as self-medication for aggression and rage. Opiates are effective anxiolytics, mood stabilizers, and anti-depressants, however, people tend to self-medicate anxiety and depression with depressants and stimulants respectively, though this is by no means an absolute analysis.

Modern research into novel antidepressants targeting opioid receptors suggests that endogenous opioid dysregulation may play a role in medical conditions including anxiety disorders, clinical depression, and borderline personality disorder. BPD is typically characterized by sensitivity to rejection, isolation, and perceived failure, all of which are forms of psychological pain. As research suggests that psychological pain and physiological pain both share the same underlying mechanism, it is likely that under the self-medication hypothesis some or most recreational opioid users are attempting to alleviate psychological pain with opioids in the same way opioids are used to treat physiological pain.

====Cannabis====
Cannabis is paradoxical in that it simultaneously produces stimulating, sedating and mildly psychedelic properties and both anxiolytic or anxiogenic properties, depending on the individual and circumstances of use. Depressant properties are more obvious in occasional users, and stimulating properties are more common in chronic users. Khantzian noted that research had not sufficiently addressed a theoretical mechanism for cannabis, and therefore did not include it in the SMH.

===Effectiveness===
Self-medicating excessively for prolonged periods of time with benzodiazepines or alcohol often makes the symptoms of anxiety or depression worse. This is believed to occur as a result of the changes in brain chemistry from long-term use. Of those who seek help from mental health services for conditions including anxiety disorders such as panic disorder or social phobia, approximately half have alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence issues.

Sometimes anxiety precedes alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence but the alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence acts to keep the anxiety disorders going, often progressively making them worse. However, some people addicted to alcohol or benzodiazepines, when it is explained to them that they have a choice between ongoing poor mental health or quitting and recovering from their symptoms, decide on quitting alcohol or benzodiazepines or both. It has been noted that every individual has an individual sensitivity level to alcohol or sedative hypnotic drugs, and what one person can tolerate without ill health, may cause another to experience very ill health, and even moderate drinking can cause rebound anxiety syndrome and sleep disorders. A person experiencing the toxic effects of alcohol will not benefit from other therapies or medications, as these do not address the root cause of the symptoms.

Nicotine addiction seems to worsen mental health problems. Nicotine withdrawal depresses mood, increases anxiety and stress, and disrupts sleep. Although nicotine products temporarily relieve their nicotine withdrawal symptoms, an addiction causes stress and mood to be worse on average, due to mild withdrawal symptoms between hits. Nicotine addicts need the nicotine to temporarily feel normal. Nicotine industry marketing has claimed that nicotine is both less harmful and therapeutic for people with mental illness, and is a form of self-medication. This claim has been criticised by independent researchers.

Self medicating is a very common precursor to full addictions and the habitual use of any addictive drug has been demonstrated to greatly increase the risk of addiction to additional substances due to long-term neuronal changes. Addiction to any/every drug of abuse tested so far has been correlated with an enduring reduction in the expression of GLT1 (EAAT2) in the nucleus accumbens and is implicated in the drug-seeking behavior expressed nearly universally across all documented addiction syndromes. This long-term dysregulation of glutamate transmission is associated with an increase in vulnerability to both relapse-events after re-exposure to drug-use triggers as well as an overall increase in the likelihood of developing addiction to other reinforcing drugs. Drugs which help to re-stabilize the glutamate system such as N-acetylcysteine have been proposed for the treatment of addiction to cocaine, nicotine, and alcohol.

==Infectious diseases==
In 89% of countries, antibiotics can be prescribed only by a doctor and supplied only by a pharmacy. Self-medication with antibiotics is defined as &quot;the taking of medicines on one&#x27;s own initiative or on another person&#x27;s suggestion, who is not a certified medical professional&quot;. It has been identified as one of the primary reasons for the evolution of antimicrobial resistance. 

Self-medication with antibiotics is an unsuitable way of using them but a common practice in developing countries. Many people resort to that out of necessity when access to a physician is unavailable because of lockdowns and GP surgery closures, or when the patients have a limited amount of time or money to see a prescribing doctor. While being cited as an important alternative to a formal healthcare system where it may be lacking, self-medication can pose a risk to both the patient and community as a whole. The reasons behind self-medication are unique to each region and can relate to health system, societal, economic, health factors, gender, and age. Risks include allergies, lack of cure, and even death.

Besides developing countries, self-medication with antibiotics is also a problem for higher-income countries. In the European Union the average prevalence was 7% in 2016 with the highest rates in southern countries. There are high rates of self-medication with antibiotics in Russia (83%), Central America (19%) and Latin America (14-26%) too.

Two significant issues with self-medication are the lack of knowledge of the public on, firstly, the dangerous effects of certain antimicrobials (for example, ciprofloxacin, which can cause tendonitis, tendon rupture and aortic dissection) and, secondly, broad microbial resistance and when to seek medical care if the infection is not clearing.

Also inappropriate use of over-the-counter ibuprofen or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs during winter influenza outbreaks can lead to death, e.g. due to haemorrhagic duodenitis induced by ibuprofen, or the consequences of exceeding the recommended doses of paracetamol by combining doses of the generic product with proprietary flu-remedies and Tylex (paracetamol and codeine).

In a questionnaire designed to evaluate self-medication rates amongst the population of Khartoum, Sudan, 48.1% of respondents reported self-medicating with antibiotics within the past 30 days, whereas 43.4% reported self-medicating with antimalarials, and 17.5% reported self-medicating with both. Overall, the total prevalence of reported self-medication with one or both classes of anti-infective agents within the past month was 73.9%. Furthermore, according to the associated study, data indicated that self-medication &quot;varies significantly with a number of socio-economic characteristics&quot; and the &quot;main reason that was indicated for the self-medication was financial constraints&quot;.

Similarly, in a survey of university students in southern China, 47.8% of respondents reported self-medicating with antibiotics.

== Other uses ==
One area of DIY medicine is self-administered pharmaceutical drugs that are obtained without a prescription, as in the case of DIY transgender hormone therapy which is common among trans people. Prescription-only lifestyle drugs such as those to treat erectile dysfunction, male pattern baldness, and obesity are often purchased online by people who have no diagnosis or prescription. In 2017, the United Kingdom legalized the sale of sildenafil (Viagra) over the counter in part to cut down on the number of men buying it online from unlicensed pharmacies.

Self-managed abortion with medication is safe and effective, but is illegal in some jurisdictions. Before the current medication had been developed and in places where abortion is illegal, people may resort to unsafe methods of self-managed abortion.

Another area is the creation of medical devices, such as PPE for protection against COVID-19 and epinephrine injectors. Some people with insulin-dependent diabetes have created their own automated insulin delivery systems. One review found that &quot;the quality of glucose control achieved with DIY AID systems is impressively good&quot;. With DIY brain stimulation, individuals with depression create their own devices to access an experimental treatment. Other people self-administer fecal transplant as a treatment for various diseases.

==Physicians and medical students==
In a survey of West Bengal, India undergraduate medical school students, 57% reported self-medicating. The type of drugs most frequently used for self-medication were antibiotics (31%), analgesics (23%), antipyretics (18%), antiulcerics (9%), cough suppressants (8%), multivitamins (6%), and anthelmintics (4%).

Another study indicated that 53% of physicians in Karnataka, India reported self-administration of antibiotics.

==Children==
A study of Luo children in western Kenya found that 19% reported engaging in self-treatment with either herbal or pharmaceutical medicine. Proportionally, boys were much more likely to self-medicate using conventional medicine than herbal medicine as compared with girls, a phenomenon which was theorized to be influenced by their relative earning potential.

==Regulation==

Self-medication is highly regulated in much of the world and many classes of drugs are available for administration only upon prescription by licensed medical personnel. Safety, social order, commercialization, and religion have historically been among the prevailing factors that lead to such prohibition.

People trying to buy pharmaceutical drugs online without a prescription may be the victim of fraud, phishing, or receive counterfeit medication. Selling prescription drugs to people without a valid prescription is illegal in many jurisdictions and can be considered an example of transnational organized crime. In a 2021 article, Jack E. Fincham argues that unlicensed sales of prescription drugs online are a significant public health threat. It is also possible to obtain controlled substances such as amphetamine, benzodiazepines, and Z-drugs online without a prescription.

==See also==
* Biodiversity and drugs
* Cognitive liberty
* Coping
* Dual diagnosis
* Alcoholism
* Emotional eating
* Psychedelic microdosing
* Zoopharmacognosy
* Self-surgery
* Self-diagnosis

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Self-medication at Medical Subject Headings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1761396" start="0" end="15" title="Self-medication" label="Self-medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761396" start="33" end="47" title="Self-medication" label="do-it-yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761396" start="49" end="52" title="Self-medication" label="DIY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761396" start="54" end="63" title="Self-medication" label="medicine,"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="69" end="83" title="human behavior" label="human behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="234" end="242" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="247" end="254" title="fatigue" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154971" start="312" end="328" title="over-the-counter" label="over-the-counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="437" end="450" title="Physician" label="doctor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355478" start="451" end="463" title="Medical prescription" label="prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="566" end="576" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="600" end="617" title="psychoactive drug" label="psychoactive drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="667" end="684" title="recreational drug" label="recreational drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="687" end="694" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887327" start="696" end="708" title="comfort food" label="comfort food"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817452" start="763" end="778" title="mental distress" label="mental distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="780" end="786" title="Stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="791" end="798" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="810" end="826" title="mental disorder" label="mental illnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="830" end="850" title="psychological trauma" label="psychological trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="898" end="906" title="health" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="911" end="924" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681134" start="941" end="960" title="addictive behavior" label="addictive mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q742487" start="1042" end="1052" title="study drug" label="study drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="1286" end="1294" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267310" start="1333" end="1350" title="nicotine marketing" label="market cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="1667" end="1678" title="human right" label="human right"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="1922" end="1946" title="antimicrobial resistance" label="antimicrobial resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q721654" start="2250" end="2271" title="self-induced abortion" label="self-induced abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690885" start="2331" end="2370" title="health care prices in the United States" label="health care prices in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="2375" end="2384" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="3379" end="3388" title="Substance use disorder" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343930" start="3726" end="3742" title="Edward Khantzian" label="Edward Khantzian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233495" start="3765" end="3780" title="David F. Duncan" label="David F. Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="3850" end="3856" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="3890" end="3897" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866472" start="4199" end="4216" title="defense mechanism" label="defense mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321905" start="5040" end="5062" title="positive reinforcement" label="positive reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="7436" end="7450" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="7510" end="7520" title="Clinical depression" label="Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="7559" end="7566" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="7568" end="7575" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="7577" end="7585" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="7682" end="7689" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="8143" end="8173" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="8593" end="8600" title="Ethanol" label="Alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="8605" end="8613" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="8614" end="8622" title="hypnotic" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="8638" end="8650" title="barbiturates" label="barbiturates"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="8655" end="8670" title="benzodiazepines" label="benzodiazepines"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="8676" end="8698" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976211" start="8705" end="8715" title="depressant" label="depressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="8744" end="8754" title="anxiolysis" label="anxiolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q281928" start="9697" end="9720" title="social anxiety disorder" label="social anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="9810" end="9826" title="Stimulant" label="Psychostimulants"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="9836" end="9843" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="9845" end="9857" title="amphetamines" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="9859" end="9874" title="methylphenidate" label="methylphenidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="9876" end="9884" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="9890" end="9898" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="10053" end="10093" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="10267" end="10275" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="10277" end="10285" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q263958" start="10289" end="10304" title="pseudoephedrine" label="pseudoephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338318" start="10333" end="10344" title="Awareness" label="Unawareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="10398" end="10405" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="10407" end="10422" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q262613" start="10426" end="10436" title="mephedrone" label="mephedrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644043" start="10583" end="10600" title="Diagnosis" label="getting diagnosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="10656" end="10671" title="methylphenidate" label="methylphenidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="10676" end="10688" title="Substituted amphetamine" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="10756" end="10766" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q545365" start="10778" end="10787" title="anhedonia" label="anhedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="10801" end="10812" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="10862" end="10880" title="Disease" label="comorbid condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="10980" end="10999" title="executive functions" label="executive functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="11022" end="11032" title="motivation" label="motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="11034" end="11039" title="Attention" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836891" start="11119" end="11149" title="treatment-resistant depression" label="treatment-resistant depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q188611" start="11246" end="11255" title="Hypomania" label="hypomanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557657" start="11393" end="11407" title="social anxiety" label="social anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="11618" end="11624" title="Opiate" label="Opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="11635" end="11641" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="11646" end="11654" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="11671" end="11680" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q421797" start="11695" end="11710" title="opioid receptor" label="opioid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="11729" end="11751" title="Human gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="11808" end="11812" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124847" start="11836" end="11850" title="pain tolerance" label="pain tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191797" start="11911" end="11921" title="aggression" label="aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q153641" start="11926" end="11930" title="Rage (emotion)" label="rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="11954" end="11964" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622367" start="11967" end="11982" title="mood stabilizer" label="mood stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="12328" end="12344" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="12347" end="12366" title="Major depressive disorder" label="clinical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="12372" end="12403" title="borderline personality disorder" label="borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491521" start="12525" end="12543" title="psychological pain" label="psychological pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="12889" end="12897" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="Cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="12901" end="12908" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="13013" end="13023" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778117" start="13027" end="13037" title="anxiogenic" label="anxiogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q368722" start="13082" end="13102" title="Five Ws" label="circumstances of use"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="13453" end="13467" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="13472" end="13479" title="Ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="13705" end="13721" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q741713" start="13731" end="13745" title="panic disorder" label="panic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q281928" start="13749" end="13762" title="social anxiety disorder" label="social phobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713263" start="13788" end="13795" title="Alcohol dependence" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q380409" start="13799" end="13824" title="benzodiazepine dependence" label="benzodiazepine dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961638" start="14936" end="14955" title="nicotine withdrawal" label="nicotine withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267310" start="15135" end="15162" title="Nicotine marketing" label="Nicotine industry marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="15604" end="15617" title="drugs of abuse" label="drug of abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031521" start="15706" end="15711" title="SLC1A2" label="EAAT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476178" start="15720" end="15737" title="nucleus accumbens" label="nucleus accumbens"/>
<link wikidata="Q375613" start="16185" end="16201" title="N-acetylcysteine" label="N-acetylcysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="16255" end="16262" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="16264" end="16272" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="16684" end="16708" title="antimicrobial resistance" label="antimicrobial resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="16805" end="16825" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="17106" end="17123" title="Health system" label="healthcare system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="17481" end="17492" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q256602" start="17934" end="17947" title="ciprofloxacin" label="ciprofloxacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682583" start="17965" end="17975" title="Tendinopathy" label="tendonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889763" start="17977" end="17991" title="tendon rupture" label="tendon rupture"/>
<link wikidata="Q594660" start="17996" end="18013" title="aortic dissection" label="aortic dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q186969" start="18165" end="18174" title="ibuprofen" label="ibuprofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="18184" end="18219" title="nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug" label="nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="18228" end="18234" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="18235" end="18244" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241045" start="18245" end="18253" title="outbreak" label="outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="18267" end="18272" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="18286" end="18298" title="bleeding" label="haemorrhagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266418" start="18299" end="18309" title="duodenitis" label="duodenitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q174723" start="18501" end="18508" title="codeine" label="codeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="18600" end="18608" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="18610" end="18615" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q521616" start="18749" end="18761" title="antimalarial" label="antimalarial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="19268" end="19282" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q122920239" start="19493" end="19524" title="DIY transgender hormone therapy" label="DIY transgender hormone therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591110" start="19579" end="19594" title="lifestyle drugs" label="lifestyle drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="19618" end="19638" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276095" start="19640" end="19661" title="male pattern baldness" label="male pattern baldness"/>
<link wikidata="Q191521" start="19801" end="19811" title="sildenafil" label="sildenafil"/>
<link wikidata="Q721654" start="19925" end="19946" title="Self-managed abortion" label="Self-managed abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="20209" end="20224" title="medical devices" label="medical devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333024" start="20234" end="20237" title="Personal protective equipment" label="PPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="20261" end="20269" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="20274" end="20285" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569064" start="20364" end="20398" title="Automated insulin delivery system" label="automated insulin delivery systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q263962" start="20611" end="20633" title="Transcranial magnetic stimulation" label="experimental treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121103" start="20664" end="20680" title="fecal transplant" label="fecal transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="20770" end="20781" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="20783" end="20788" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="20789" end="20802" title="undergraduate" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="20803" end="20817" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="20941" end="20950" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q582687" start="20959" end="20970" title="antipyretic" label="antipyretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584209" start="20998" end="21015" title="cough suppressant" label="cough suppressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q172395" start="21023" end="21035" title="multivitamin" label="multivitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q572294" start="21047" end="21059" title="anthelmintic" label="anthelmintic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="21118" end="21127" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21129" end="21134" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826303" start="21205" end="21208" title="Luo people of Kenya and Tanzania" label="Luo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329068" start="21298" end="21304" title="Traditional African medicine" label="herbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="21308" end="21322" title="Pharmaceutical drug" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643563" start="21636" end="21652" title="Prescription drug" label="classes of drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355478" start="21696" end="21708" title="Medical prescription" label="prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550789" start="21740" end="21746" title="Pharmacovigilance" label="Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518716" start="21748" end="21760" title="social order" label="social order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152592" start="21762" end="21779" title="commercialization" label="commercialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="21785" end="21793" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551312" start="21864" end="21875" title="Prohibition of drugs" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="21971" end="21976" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="21978" end="21986" title="phishing" label="phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697179" start="22158" end="22187" title="transnational organized crime" label="transnational organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q850692" start="22352" end="22373" title="controlled substances" label="controlled substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="22382" end="22393" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="22395" end="22410" title="benzodiazepines" label="benzodiazepines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262284" start="22416" end="22423" title="Z-drugs" label="Z-drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914770" start="22471" end="22493" title="Biodiversity and drugs" label="Biodiversity and drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226078" start="22496" end="22513" title="Cognitive liberty" label="Cognitive liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759895" start="22516" end="22522" title="Coping" label="Coping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914812" start="22525" end="22539" title="Dual diagnosis" label="Dual diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="22542" end="22552" title="Alcoholism" label="Alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010564" start="22555" end="22571" title="Emotional eating" label="Emotional eating"/>
<link wikidata="Q29525998" start="22574" end="22597" title="Psychedelic microdosing" label="Psychedelic microdosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q220315" start="22600" end="22616" title="Zoopharmacognosy" label="Zoopharmacognosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448220" start="22619" end="22631" title="Self-surgery" label="Self-surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145888" start="22634" end="22648" title="Self-diagnosis" label="Self-diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q199897" start="22725" end="22749" title="Medical Subject Headings" label="Medical Subject Headings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578447" wikidata="Q748560" url="?curid=578447" title="Scottish Claymores">
<text>The Scottish Claymores, known in shorthand as Scotland, were an American football team based in Scotland. The franchise played in the World League of American Football (later renamed NFL Europe) between 1995 and 2004, initially playing all home games at Murrayfield Stadium, Edinburgh and latterly sharing home games with Hampden Park, Glasgow. In ten seasons of NFL Europe play, the Claymores reached the World Bowl on two occasions, with victory in World Bowl &#x27;96 but defeat in World Bowl 2000. Their name derives from that of the Claymore, a double-edged sword historically used in Scottish clan warfare. One notable player was Gavin Hastings, a Scottish rugby international who was used as a place kicker in 1996.

The Claymores experienced several notable swings in fortune during their ten years. Their World Bowl-winning season of 1996 was the league&#x27;s first worst-to-first turnaround: having finished 1995 with a 2–8 record and no wins at home, the 1996 Claymores went 7–3 in the regular season and won all their home games. Equally remarkable was the contrast between their first home games of the 2003 and 2004 seasons. In week 1 of the 2003 season, the Claymores defeated the Berlin Thunder 62–31 – the highest scoring game in NFL Europe history – but in 2004 their home opener was a 3–0 defeat at the hands of the Amsterdam Admirals, tying the record for the league&#x27;s lowest-scoring game.

==History==
In 1992, the World League of American Football was put on hold by the NFL, with the intention of restructuring the league to become completely European-based. As a result, the three existing European teams in Barcelona, London and Frankfurt survived to be joined by three new teams, and in 1994 it was announced that Edinburgh had been awarded one of them (along with Amsterdam and Düsseldorf). The Claymores were assigned former Arena Football League coach Lary Kuharich to be their first head coach, but just days before their first game against Rhein, Kuharich was dismissed and replaced by former Boise State head coach Jim Criner.

===1995 season===

The Claymores&#x27; first roster included five players sent to the club from the NFL, including quarterbacks Matt Blundin from the Kansas City Chiefs and Lee Williamson from the Houston Oilers; as with all World League teams, it included seven &quot;national&quot; players, including wide-receiver Scott Couper. The Claymores played their first-ever game in Edinburgh on 9 April 1995, a 19–17 loss to the Rhein Fire (Coincidentally, the Claymores&#x27; three worst seasons (1995, 1998 and 2004: all 2–8) would all begin in the same way: with the Claymores falling to week 1 defeat on a missed field goal. In the other 7 seasons, the Claymores started 1–0). The team&#x27;s first win came two weeks later, 20–14 over the Galaxy in Frankfurt. Six straight defeats followed however, including a 31–0 shutout to the Amsterdam Admirals and an overtime loss to the Fire, before winning the final game of the regular season 22–9 against British rivals the London Monarchs.

The Claymores finished bottom of the six-team division with its 2–8 record. Criner used four quarterbacks over the course of the season; Blundin, Williamson, Terry Karg and a brief outing for Jim Ballard. The team&#x27;s offensive leader was Siran Stacy, who rushed for 785 yards and five touchdowns, and caught receptions totalling 324 yards. Allan DeGraffenreid also made 624 receiving yards and four touchdowns. Attendances were around the 10,000 mark to begin, but slumped as low as 6,800 for the final home game of the season.

===1996 season===
The Claymores made an aggressive marketing push for the 1996 campaign under new general manager Mike Keller, which even included bringing in former Scotland Rugby union captain Gavin Hastings as a placekicker. Criner&#x27;s 1996 roster featured an increased number of signed NFL players. Quarterback Steve Matthews (like Blundin, contracted to the Chiefs) opened the season, but when returnee Jim Ballard showed greater consistency coming off the bench to replace an injured Matthews in week seven, Ballard would get the nod for the remainder of the season. Starting 1996 where they had left off 1995, the Claymores opened with an overtime victory over the London Monarchs, followed up with home wins against the Barcelona Dragons (23–13) and the Amsterdam Admirals (21–14). Despite defeat away to Rhein the 3–1 start propelled the Claymores into a mid-season showdown with the unbeaten Frankfurt Galaxy on 11 May, where under WLAF rules the winner would advance to the World Bowl as hosts. A 20–0 win meant the championship game was coming to Edinburgh. The Claymores ran out the regular season with a 7–3 record to top the division. On 23 June, the Claymores again faced the Galaxy in World Bowl 96 at Murrayfield. The hosts rode three touchdown passes from Ballard to game MVP Yo Murphy and held off a late rally to win 32–27, thus completing the WLAF&#x27;s first worst-to-first turnaround in front of a crowd of 38,982.

Siran Stacy was again influential in offense, with a nearly identical haul to his previous season&#x27;s; 780 rushing yards and 317 receiving yards, for nine touchdowns. Sean LaChapelle was a thousand-yard receiver but forced out of the World Bowl with a groin injury, while Yo Murphy managed five touchdowns on the season. On defense, safety George Coghill picked five interceptions, one returned for a touchdown. Coghill also forced a Galaxy fumble from the opening kickoff in the World Bowl, with all-round special teams player Markus Thomas returning the spilled ball for a touchdown; he also led the team in tackles, and caught one pass on offense. Safety James Fuller shared Coghill&#x27;s total of five interceptions, while defensive tackle Jerold Jeffcoat – brother of the Dallas Cowboys&#x27; Jim – had five sacks on the season.

===1997 season===
Scotland&#x27;s 1997 season opened with a 16–3 victory in Amsterdam, followed up by back-to-back defeats and closing out the first half of the season 3–2. Two more straight wins improved World Bowl prospects, but a narrow 10–9 defeat to the Monarchs in the penultimate week left the Claymores needing a victory in Barcelona against the Dragons – however, they were trounced 46–18 and finished the season 5–5, surrendering the second World Bowl spot to Barcelona in the process.

Quarterback time was shared between the San Francisco 49ers&#x27; Dave Barr and the Miami Dolphins&#x27; Spence Fischer (who doubled as occasional punter). However, they managed just four touchdown passes combined while throwing 10 interceptions and sharing 31 sacks. Siran Stacy completed another 785-yard rushing season with four touchdowns; Yo Murphy was the leading receiver with 559 yards and two touchdowns; only he, Scott Couper and Allan DeGraffenreid completed touchdown passes on the season. George Coghill again led the defense in tackles.

===1998 season===
A much-changed 1998 roster saw World Bowl-winning quarterback Jim Ballard back in Scotland after missing 1997; however, two of the team&#x27;s offensive leaders from the previous year, Siran Stacy, and Yo Murphy, did not return. Jim Criner led his team into the opening game in Barcelona, where kicker Gary Parker missed what would have been a game-winning field goal from 31 yards, the Claymores losing out 19-18. Three more defeats followed in Amsterdam (26-3), at home to the Fire (20-10) and at the now-England Monarchs (14-10), with the first win of the season only coming in Week 5, 30-10 over the Dragons. Their 1-4 start made World Bowl qualification very unlikely; their week 6 defeat to the Fire (perfect to this point in the season) sealed their fate. The side slumped to bottom of the division, finishing 2-8.

The new-lock backs and receivers failed to match previous seasons&#x27; yardage figures; leading rusher Carey Bender made 441 yards, while Chris Miller topped the receiving statistics with 34 receptions for 527 yards. In total the Claymores managed just twelve offensive touchdowns in ten games, punting the ball 53 times.

Off the field, it was a troubled season for Scotland in the now rebranded NFL Europe League, where leaked information that a third German team was to be founded to add to the already successful Fire and Galaxy sparked concerns the Claymores may be closed down: eventually however, it would be the England Monarchs who would be replaced by the Berlin Thunder, ending the &quot;Battle of Britain&quot; rivalry series tied at 4-4. It was also during the 1998 season the Claymores played at Hampden Park in Glasgow for the first time, a week 8 loss to the Galaxy (originally, the Glasgow game was scheduled to be the week 10 visit of the Amsterdam Admirals at Firhill Stadium).

Four home games played in Edinburgh and one in Glasgow.

===1999 season===
For 1999, Scotland were allocated Carolina Panthers quarterback Dameyune Craig, who opened the season with a narrow 21-20 win over the Rhein Fire, rushing for the winning touchdown himself late in the fourth quarter. The Claymores then hammered the league&#x27;s newest team, the Berlin Thunder, 48-14, Shon Bell catching two touchdown passes from tight-end. An overtime loss to Frankfurt followed; but by the time Scotland had returned to Frankfurt in Week 6, winning with a reverse of the 42-35 scoreline that the Galaxy had earned in Week 3, Scotland were 4-2 and in contention to reach World Bowl VII. However, the team then collapsed to four consecutive defeats, two of them back-to-back against Amsterdam, and finished ahead of only Berlin in the final standings.

The side&#x27;s leading rusher in 1999 was Jesse Haynes, with quarterback Craig contributing 50 rushing attempts and 3 touchdowns. Haynes totalled eleven touchdowns, seven rushing and four receiving. Yo Murphy returned to the Claymores with four touchdown catches (and an 89-yard kickoff return for a touchdown) but the leading wide receiver was Donald Sellers, who totalled 931 receiving yards for seven touchdowns.

Although the Claymores finished the 1999 season with a losing record, there would still be a historical moment: Craig would throw for 611 yards in the road victory in Frankfurt, a record passing total in professional American football. The helmet and number 2 jersey Craig wore that night are on display in the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio.

Three home games played in Edinburgh and two in Glasgow.

===2000 season===

The 2000 Claymores were fronted primarily by Kevin Daft; a 32-year-old Siran Stacy was on the roster for 2000 but had very little playing time. Like previous seasons, the Claymores opened positively with opening wins against Amsterdam and in Frankfurt. A 42-3 demolition of the Berlin Thunder sent the Claymores to 3-1, but with World Bowl qualification in the balance, the Claymores strung together three big late-season wins; with defeat over the Fire at Hampden on 10 June secured a World Bowl finale between those teams. Scotland led 7-3 when Aaron Stecker went over with a 36-yard first-quarter rush, exchanging field-goals for a 10-6 halftime lead. Pepe Pearson scored the second half&#x27;s only touchdown for the Fire, leaving Rob Hart to attempt a game-tying field goal with eight seconds left; it sailed left, and Scotland lost World Bowl VIII in what turned out to be Criner&#x27;s last game as head coach as he would depart for the XFL

2000 was much more successful offensively for Scotland; Aaron Stecker, an allocation from the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, was the first Scotland running back to near Stacy&#x27;s early-season figures with 774 rushing yards, 276 receiving yards and 11 total touchdowns. Sellers again led Scotland in receiving yards (353, 5 touchdowns). Scott Couper caught three touchdown passes; in total, the Claymores outscored their opponents by 37 touchdowns to 18. Three Claymores shared a season-leading total of seven sacks; Antonio Dingle, Michael Mason and Jabbar Threats.

Three home games played in Edinburgh and two in Glasgow.

===2001 season===
For 2001 – the first season under Criner&#x27;s replacement, Gene Dahlquist and the first home campaign that would be played entirely in Glasgow – the new Scotland quarterback was the Dallas Cowboys&#x27; Clint Stoerner; however offensive leaders of 2000 like Stecker failed to return. Close games were the nature of Scotland&#x27;s early season, trading wins for losses over the opening six games, never by a margin of more than ten points. With the Claymores at 3-3 as the season entered its crucial period in June, the 2001 Claymores lost three games on the bounce as their predecessors had won them. A consolation victory against the Fire completed another losing season, the third in five years, 4-and-6.

Stoerner completed around 55% of passes on the season and threw 10 touchdowns, compared to Daft&#x27;s previous-season tally of 24. His primary target was tight-end James Whalen, a fellow Cowboys recruit, while Dante Hall provided five touchdown catches; the only other Claymores to catch a touchdown pass were Scott Couper and Gerald Williams. Anothony Gray led the Claymores in rushing at 445 yards and half of the franchise&#x27;s four rushing touchdowns on the year.

===2002 season===
Another year, another quarterback for Scotland; their fifth starter in five years was the Detroit Lions&#x27; Scott Driesbach. His season opened well with a 45-17 demolition of Barcelona; Driesbach&#x27;s first play in a Claymores uniform was a touchdown pass to Scott McCready. The win was the only victory of Scotland&#x27;s first four games, as they slumped to defeats of less than a touchdown to Rhein and Frankfurt (twice). Scotland did not contest a game decided by less than ten points throughout the season&#x27;s remainder; three straight wins took them back to a promising 4-3, but back-to-back defeats against the Berlin Thunder ended World Bowl hopes. Victory in Barcelona – for the first time ever – ended a .500 season.

Driesbach completed just 95 passes all season, and was replaced with James Brown; totalling just 1518 offensive yards were top receivers McCready and Dondre Gilliam. Scotland&#x27;s rushing game was a one-man show, with #29 Herbert Goodman making 873 yards and every one of Scotland&#x27;s six rushing touchdowns. To sixteen offensive touchdowns were added three interception returns, including a 69-yarder by James Rooths. Rob Hart was a perfect 10-10 in field goals, sharing kicking time with Scottish-born kicker Lawrence Tynes.

Four home games played in Glasgow and one in Edinburgh.

===2003 season===
For 2003, Craig Nall was recruited from the Green Bay Packers to play at quarterback; Scott McCready was one of few players to return for a second Claymores season. An NFL Europe scoring record came with Scotland&#x27;s opening 62-31 defeat of the World Bowl champion Thunder. There were four rushing touchdowns for Ken Simonton and a TD catch on return from &quot;retirement&quot; for Scott Couper. Over the next five games, Scotland added just one victory however, and were all but out of World Bowl contention by mid-May Shutting out the Rhein Fire 33-0 rekindled hopes, and strong victories over Barcelona and Amsterdam twice brought around a 6-4 conclusion, matching the season&#x27;s best; however, they were denied a spot in World Bowl XI on the tie-breaker of net results with the Frankfurt Galaxy and Rhein Fire, which was increasingly unfortunate as the World Bowl was to be staged at Hampden Park.

Ken Simonton resprised Herbert Goodman&#x27;s rushing role, totalling just two yards (and two touchdowns) less than Goodman&#x27;s tally. Maurice Hicks received 74 handoffs as well, scoring four rushing touchdowns, including a 93-yarder. Through the air, Nall&#x27;s best receivers were Edell Shepherd (518 yards, 4 touchdowns) and John Minardi (470 yards, 5 touchdowns). Ten Claymores caught touchdown passes on the season. TJ Bingham took seven sacks on defense.

Dahlquist was fired after the 2003 season, and after the Barcelona Dragons became the second NFL Europe team to be relocated to Germany (becoming the Cologne Centurions) their head coach Jack Bicknell stepped into the vacancy. In his single season in charge, the Claymores finished 2-8.

===2004 season===
2004 opened very poorly for Scotland, with four consecutive losses to open up the season. Only a 13–12 win over the Rhein Fire prevented a first-half shut-out. The same 1–4 record was posted for the second half of the season, completing a 2–8 season for the third time (equal worst in the team&#x27;s history) and failure to qualify for World Bowl XII.

===Closure===
On 21 October 2004, NFL Europe announced that the Scottish Claymores would be discontinued in favour of a franchise in a more competitive German market. While Scotland&#x27;s attendance average over their 10-season history of 11,306 was comparable to some Scottish Premier League clubs, teams in Germany were able to consistently bring in more support. Scotland were ultimately replaced by the Hamburg Sea Devils on 24 November for the 2005 NFL Europe season. Despite closing, the Scottish Claymores identity is being maintained to induct players to their Hall of Fame, and as a means for promoting amateur American football in Scotland. The team played a total of 26 regular season home games in Edinburgh and 24 regular season home games in Glasgow.
One World Bowl was played in Edinburgh and one in Glasgow.

==Season-by-season==
==Head coaches==
==Hall of Fame==
The Scottish Claymores Hall of Fame inducted new members every year from 1999 to 2006, except 2005.
*1999: Siran Stacy, George Coghill
*2000: Sean LaChapelle, Mark Sander
*2001: Jim Ballard, Purvis Hunt, Jim Criner (head coach)
*2002: Dameyune Craig, Yo Murphy
*2003: Marco Rivera, Aaron Stecker
*2004: Joe Andruzzi, James Fuller, Dante Hall, Duane Hawthorne, Paul McCallum, Barry Sims, Barry Stokes and non-playing staff including the fans in general
*2006: Scott Couper, Robert Flickinger, Rob Hart, Craig Nall, Scott McCready, Chris Ward, Steve Livingstone (general manager)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748560" start="4" end="22" title="Scottish Claymores" label="Scottish Claymores"/>
<link wikidata="Q748560" start="46" end="54" title="Scottish Claymores" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="64" end="81" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="96" end="104" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="134" end="167" title="World League of American Football" label="World League of American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="183" end="193" title="NFL Europe" label="NFL Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024926" start="254" end="273" title="Murrayfield Stadium" label="Murrayfield Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="275" end="284" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="322" end="334" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="336" end="343" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="363" end="373" title="NFL Europe" label="NFL Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142464" start="406" end="416" title="World Bowl" label="World Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035427" start="451" end="470" title="World Bowl &amp;#x27;96" label="World Bowl &amp;#x27;96"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035433" start="485" end="500" title="World Bowl 2000" label="World Bowl 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q463230" start="538" end="546" title="Claymore" label="Claymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="590" end="603" title="Scottish clan" label="Scottish clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q427291" start="636" end="650" title="Gavin Hastings" label="Gavin Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="654" end="662" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142464" start="814" end="824" title="World Bowl" label="World Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="1442" end="1475" title="World League of American Football" label="World League of American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="1499" end="1502" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="1638" end="1647" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="1797" end="1806" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="1811" end="1821" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="1859" end="1880" title="Arena Football League (1987–2008)" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491945" start="1887" end="1900" title="Lary Kuharich" label="Lary Kuharich"/>
<link wikidata="Q891082" start="2030" end="2041" title="Boise State" label="Boise State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194423" start="2053" end="2063" title="Jim Criner" label="Jim Criner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="2166" end="2169" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="2181" end="2192" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788369" start="2194" end="2206" title="Matt Blundin" label="Matt Blundin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="2216" end="2234" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2239" end="2253" title="Lee Williamson (American footballer)" label="Lee Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="2263" end="2277" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436179" start="2383" end="2395" title="Scott Couper" label="Scott Couper"/>
<link wikidata="Q565453" start="2490" end="2500" title="Rhein Fire (NFL Europe)" label="Rhein Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253443" start="2805" end="2811" title="Frankfurt Galaxy (NFL Europe)" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="2815" end="2824" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q478462" start="2897" end="2915" title="Amsterdam Admirals" label="Amsterdam Admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689310" start="3034" end="3049" title="London Monarchs" label="London Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3210" end="3220" title="Terry Karg" label="Terry Karg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193520" start="3244" end="3255" title="Jim Ballard" label="Jim Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529953" start="3294" end="3305" title="Siran Stacy" label="Siran Stacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3396" end="3415" title="Allan DeGraffenreid" label="Allan DeGraffenreid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847482" start="3699" end="3710" title="Mike Keller" label="Mike Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="3760" end="3771" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q427291" start="3780" end="3794" title="Gavin Hastings" label="Gavin Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638113" start="3800" end="3811" title="placekicker" label="placekicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613295" start="3903" end="3917" title="Steve Matthews (American football)" label="Steve Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q807916" start="4316" end="4333" title="Barcelona Dragons (NFL Europe)" label="Barcelona Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q253443" start="4490" end="4506" title="Frankfurt Galaxy (NFL Europe)" label="Frankfurt Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142464" start="4573" end="4583" title="World Bowl" label="World Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035427" start="4790" end="4803" title="World Bowl IV" label="World Bowl 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="4879" end="4882" title="Most valuable player" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054125" start="4883" end="4892" title="Yo Murphy" label="Yo Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441143" start="5199" end="5214" title="Sean LaChapelle" label="Sean LaChapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24994" start="5365" end="5371" title="Safety (American football position)" label="safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903858" start="5372" end="5386" title="George Coghill (American football)" label="George Coghill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5560" end="5573" title="Markus Thomas" label="Markus Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550304" start="5760" end="5776" title="defensive tackle" label="defensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5777" end="5792" title="Jerold Jeffcoat" label="Jerold Jeffcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="5810" end="5824" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689125" start="5831" end="5834" title="Jim Jeffcoat" label="Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="6405" end="6424" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228295" start="6431" end="6440" title="Dave Barr (American football)" label="Dave Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="6449" end="6463" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6470" end="6484" title="Spence Fischer" label="Spence Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q525495" start="6512" end="6518" title="punter (football position)" label="punter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054125" start="6709" end="6718" title="Yo Murphy" label="Yo Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7237" end="7248" title="Gary Parker (footballer)" label="Gary Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039163" start="7862" end="7874" title="Carey Bender" label="Carey Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q60736391" start="7897" end="7909" title="Chris Miller (wide receiver)" label="Chris Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q644290" start="8425" end="8439" title="Berlin Thunder (NFL Europe)" label="Berlin Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419068" start="8738" end="8753" title="Firhill Stadium" label="Firhill Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="8866" end="8883" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212193" start="8896" end="8910" title="Dameyune Craig" label="Dameyune Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q644290" start="9112" end="9126" title="Berlin Thunder (NFL Europe)" label="Berlin Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9135" end="9144" title="Shon Bell" label="Shon Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035430" start="9422" end="9436" title="World Bowl VII" label="World Bowl VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054125" start="9803" end="9812" title="Yo Murphy" label="Yo Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295129" start="9949" end="9963" title="Donald Sellers" label="Donald Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="10332" end="10357" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q491239" start="10361" end="10373" title="Canton, Ohio" label="Canton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950674" start="10498" end="10508" title="Kevin Daft" label="Kevin Daft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603090" start="11000" end="11013" title="Aaron Stecker" label="Aaron Stecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166231" start="11108" end="11120" title="Pepe Pearson" label="Pepe Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358492" start="11397" end="11400" title="XFL (2001)" label="XFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603090" start="11458" end="11471" title="Aaron Stecker" label="Aaron Stecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="11496" end="11516" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776576" start="11912" end="11926" title="Antonio Dingle" label="Antonio Dingle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11928" end="11941" title="Michael Mason (American footballer)" label="Michael Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q88490454" start="11946" end="11960" title="Jabbar Threats" label="Jabbar Threats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531155" start="12100" end="12114" title="Gene Dahlquist" label="Gene Dahlquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="12223" end="12237" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134005" start="12244" end="12258" title="Clint Stoerner" label="Clint Stoerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145370" start="12915" end="12927" title="James Whalen (American football)" label="James Whalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015713" start="12961" end="12971" title="Dante Hall" label="Dante Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549689" start="13078" end="13093" title="Gerald Williams (American football)" label="Gerald Williams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13095" end="13108" title="Anothony Gray" label="Anothony Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="13330" end="13343" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13350" end="13365" title="Scott Driesbach" label="Scott Driesbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871356" start="13503" end="13517" title="Scott McCready" label="Scott McCready"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130343" start="14044" end="14055" title="James Brown (quarterback)" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18001169" start="14125" end="14139" title="Dondre Gilliam" label="Dondre Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734232" start="14199" end="14214" title="Herbert Goodman" label="Herbert Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14385" end="14397" title="James Rooths" label="James Rooths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108997" start="14491" end="14505" title="Lawrence Tynes" label="Lawrence Tynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181265" start="14593" end="14603" title="Craig Nall" label="Craig Nall"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="14627" end="14644" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388497" start="14899" end="14911" title="Ken Simonton" label="Ken Simonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035437" start="15315" end="15328" title="World Bowl XI" label="World Bowl XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388497" start="15493" end="15505" title="Ken Simonton" label="Ken Simonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793199" start="15631" end="15644" title="Maurice Hicks" label="Maurice Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336751" start="15780" end="15794" title="Edell Shepherd" label="Edell Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248920" start="15825" end="15837" title="John Minardi" label="John Minardi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15918" end="15928" title="TJ Bingham" label="TJ Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q807916" start="16016" end="16033" title="Barcelona Dragons (NFL Europe)" label="Barcelona Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q529321" start="16109" end="16127" title="Cologne Centurions (NFL Europe)" label="Cologne Centurions"/>
<link wikidata="Q118956" start="16146" end="16159" title="Jack Bicknell" label="Jack Bicknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035438" start="16602" end="16616" title="World Bowl XII" label="World Bowl XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q187304" start="16889" end="16912" title="Scottish Premier League" label="Scottish Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q523608" start="17027" end="17045" title="Hamburg Sea Devils (NFL Europe)" label="Hamburg Sea Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529953" start="17607" end="17618" title="Siran Stacy" label="Siran Stacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903858" start="17620" end="17634" title="George Coghill (American football)" label="George Coghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441143" start="17642" end="17657" title="Sean LaChapelle" label="Sean LaChapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38915590" start="17659" end="17670" title="Mark Sander" label="Mark Sander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193520" start="17678" end="17689" title="Jim Ballard" label="Jim Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17691" end="17702" title="Purvis Hunt" label="Purvis Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194423" start="17704" end="17714" title="Jim Criner" label="Jim Criner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212193" start="17735" end="17749" title="Dameyune Craig" label="Dameyune Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054125" start="17751" end="17760" title="Yo Murphy" label="Yo Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845883" start="17768" end="17780" title="Marco Rivera" label="Marco Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603090" start="17782" end="17795" title="Aaron Stecker" label="Aaron Stecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873418" start="17803" end="17815" title="Joe Andruzzi" label="Joe Andruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015713" start="17831" end="17841" title="Dante Hall" label="Dante Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310341" start="17843" end="17858" title="Duane Hawthorne" label="Duane Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152301" start="17860" end="17873" title="Paul McCallum (Canadian football)" label="Paul McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864745" start="17875" end="17885" title="Barry Sims" label="Barry Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864791" start="17887" end="17899" title="Barry Stokes (American football)" label="Barry Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436179" start="17959" end="17971" title="Scott Couper" label="Scott Couper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17973" end="17990" title="Robert Flickinger" label="Robert Flickinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340184" start="17992" end="18000" title="Rob Hart" label="Rob Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181265" start="18002" end="18012" title="Craig Nall" label="Craig Nall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871356" start="18014" end="18028" title="Scott McCready" label="Scott McCready"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18030" end="18040" title="Chris Ward (defensive end)" label="Chris Ward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18042" end="18059" title="Steve Livingstone (American football)" label="Steve Livingstone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578450" wikidata="Q5373734" url="?curid=578450" title="Emory and Henry University">
<text>Emory &amp; Henry University (E&amp;H or Emory) is a private university in Emory, Virginia, United States. The campus comprises of Washington County, which is part of the Appalachian highlands of Southwest Virginia. Founded in 1836, Emory &amp; Henry University is the oldest institution of higher learning in Southwest Virginia.

== History ==

Emory &amp; Henry University is named after John Emory, a renowned Methodist bishop, and Patrick Henry, an American patriot and Virginia&#x27;s first governor, though some research suggests the name honors Henry&#x27;s sister Elizabeth Henry Campbell Russell, who lived in nearby Saltville and Chilhowie. The college was founded upon the principles of vital faith and civic engagement by Creed Fulton, a Methodist minister; Colonel William Byars; Tobias Smyth, a Methodist farmer; and Alexander Findlay, a Methodist businessman.
The foundation for Wiley Hall was laid on September 30, 1836. The Board of Trustees hired Charles Collins as the institution&#x27;s first president (1838–1852), with classes beginning in the spring of 1838, with 60 students enrolled.

The college closed in April 1861 during the Civil War and was commandeered by the Confederate States of America in 1862, operating as a hospital until 1865. During this time the campus saw battle during the Battle of Saltville. The hospital was the setting of Lieutenant Smith&#x27;s murder on October 7, 1864, by Champ Ferguson. After the war ended, the college reopened.

===Martha Washington College===
The administrative operation of Martha Washington College, a Methodist-affiliated school for women located in Abingdon, Virginia, was merged with that of Emory &amp; Henry College in 1918. At its November 1918 session held in Johnson City, Tennessee, the Holston Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, decided to merge Martha Washington College with Emory &amp; Henry College; all of the property of Martha Washington, including its 8-acre Abingdon campus, would be transferred to Emory &amp; Henry in exchange for Emory &amp; Henry assuming the debts of Martha Washington and operating Martha Washington College as a &quot;co-ordinate woman&#x27;s college&quot;. This arrangement lasted for about a decade, until Martha Washington College completely closed in 1931.

===World War II and beyond===
During World War II, Emory &amp; Henry was one of 131 US colleges and universities that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission. Presently, the institution is proud to have a diverse academic community, encompassing a total of 1,082 undergraduate students, alongside 273 graduate scholars, and maintains a dedicated faculty comprising 97 full-time professors.

Emory and Henry College&#x27;s name officially changed on August 1, 2024, to Emory and Henry University.

== Campus ==
Located in the Virginia Highlands, the Emory &amp; Henry central campus encompasses and is surrounded by an additional 167 undeveloped acres in the village of Emory. The entire central campus is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and the Virginia Landmarks Register.

=== Buildings ===
With many campus buildings dating from the mid-19th century, several major academic buildings are part of a historic district that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, including Wiley Hall, which was built 1838 and was used as a Confederate hospital during the Civil War. In recent years, Emory &amp; Henry has experienced a building boom, most notably with the construction of the James H. Brooks Field House, a major expansion of Byars Hall, and the construction of the Woodrow W. McGlothlin Center for the Arts.

Residence halls

Emory &amp; Henry boasts modern and newly renovated campus housing. Among the residence halls are the newly built Elm and Hickory halls, which feature double occupancy rooms, each with its own bathroom. In the Emory &quot;village&quot; students enjoy Prillaman and Linden houses, modern residences that feature single and double occupancy rooms in a home-like setting. Other residence halls include Stuart Hall, Martha Washington Hall and Hillman Hall.

Academics

Academic buildings include McGlothlin-Street Hall which includes Emory &amp; Henry&#x27;s science programs as well as programs in education, political science, business and history. Historic Byars Hall was recently expanded to include classrooms, rehearsal spaces and office space for the Division of Visual and Performing Arts. The Hermesian and Calliopean rooms, which are home to the college&#x27;s historic debate societies, have been restored to their early elegance. Students also attend classes on the main E&amp;H campus in the Creed Fulton Observatory, Miller Hall and Wiley Hall.

Other buildings

Other campus buildings include Memorial Chapel, Kelly Library, the King Athletic Center, Brook Field House, Martin-Brock Student Center, Van Dyke, Emily Williams House, and Tobias-Smyth Cabin (a reconstructed log house which was home to one of the college&#x27;s founders; now a museum and meeting place).
== Academics ==
Emory &amp; Henry University&#x27;s liberal arts academic program is based upon a required four-year core curriculum of history, literature, and culture. The college has more than 25 academic programs of study, offers more than 50 bachelor degrees, and offers master&#x27;s degrees in education and community and organizational leadership. The college&#x27;s programs in public policy and community service and international studies have been nationally recognized.

Students have the opportunity to study abroad or travel abroad with professors. They may attend a range of lectures and cultural events, called Lyceums, led by political figures, area experts, or artists.

===Civic engagement===

Emory &amp; Henry has a long legacy of commitment to civic engagement. Students are involved in a wide range of long-term, meaningful projects in partnership with a variety of community groups and organizations. The college has a unique undergraduate program in Civic Innovation that is centered around a project-based curriculum related to issues of citizenship, social change, and public activism. This program is based in the nationally recognized Appalachian Center for Civic Life, which also oversees the Bonner Scholars program and the Civic Leaders Scholars program.

===Student research===

E&amp;H professors prepare students by providing research opportunities. Students studying biology might collect microbes under water. Physics majors could find themselves photographing binary stars. Students doing research for a political science class might present their work to a major conferences such as the Western Political Science Association.

===Study abroad===

The International Education and Study Abroad Program is an important part of the liberal arts curriculum. In a partnership with CIEE, students have spent semesters or summers abroad, or participated in Emory abroad courses — short-term international programs led by the E&amp;H faculty. Through active engagement, the program enhances global awareness through an understanding of cultural diversity and global interdependence.

===Lyceum===

Each year, Emory and Henry holds close to 100 concerts, lectures, theatre performances, dance performances, films, exhibits, and poetry readings to complete the academic experience. Of the lyceum events, the biggest are a literary festival each November and a Spring Forum focused on a particular social issue.

===Outdoor program===

The college is located in the Appalachian Mountains with forests to hike, mountains for cross-country skiing, creeks to paddle, cliffs for rappelling, and caves for spelunking. The Appalachian and Iron Mountain Trails, the Virginia Creeper Trail, the Mount Rogers National Recreation Area, the Jefferson and George Washington National Forests, and the New, Nantahala, and Clinch rivers are all close by.

== Athletics ==

Emory and Henry University&#x27;s sports teams, nicknamed the &quot;Wasps,&quot; participate in NCAA Division II in the South Atlantic Conference (SAC). The college sponsors a wide range of athletic teams, including men&#x27;s teams in football, soccer, basketball, baseball, cheer and dance, golf, equestrian, lacrosse, track and field, cross country, and tennis, as well as women&#x27;s teams in cross country, volleyball, basketball, softball, soccer, cheer and dance, golf, rugby, equestrian, lacrosse, track and field, tennis, and swimming.

=== Mascot ===
The official Emory &amp; Henry mascot is the Wasp. While there are many rumored origins of the nickname, the most commonly accepted story is that Emory &amp; Henry was first called the Wasps after the football team played its first game in Neyland Stadium at the University of Tennessee. Despite the Volunteers from Tennessee being heavily favored, they only held a 6-0 lead at halftime, this is due to the defensive efforts of Emory &amp; Henry. The local Knoxville newspapers described the college team as the &quot;Wasps&quot; because of the tenacious and swarming defense they displayed, akin to the persistence of wasps in protecting their nest. This description was inspired by the distinctive uniforms worn by the Emory &amp; Henry players, which included blue-gold striped socks and jerseys adorned with blue-gold stripes on the chest and sleeves.

== Student activities ==
There are more than 70 student organizations active on Emory and Henry&#x27;s campus. Community service projects are also a way that many students, especially Bonner Scholars, spend their free time. Often students mountain bike or hike on the numerous trails in nearby Damascus or Abingdon, or participate in rock climbing, kayaking or other outdoor sports. Sports such as football, basketball, soccer, baseball, and volleyball are offered as both intercollegiate and intramural sports.

===Greek life===
Emory and Henry allows both local and national social fraternities and sororities, but currently only one national organization exists on campus.

The currently recognized social sororities on campus are Alpha Beta Chi, Delta Omicron Pi, Delta Rho Delta, Kappa Phi Alpha, Pi Sigma Kappa, Sigma Upsilon Nu, and Zeta Phi.

The currently recognized local social fraternities on campus are Beta Lambda Zeta, C Phi C, Dom-I-Necher, Phi Gamma Phi, Phi Pi Alpha, Pi Delta Chi, Sigma Alpha Kappa, Sigma Iota, and Theta Chi Epsilon.

The national fraternity on campus is Kappa Sigma.

===Student media===
* &quot;The Whitetopper&quot; student newspaper, established in 1921
* EHC-TV, student produced television news program
* WEHC-FM 90.7, the college&#x27;s official radio station

==Traditions==
Traditions at Emory and Henry University include:

Service Plunge – the college&#x27;s annual &quot;Service Plunge&quot; is a tradition and a requirement of all incoming freshmen in which they perform community service for a day during the first month of school (usually a Saturday).

Running of the Bulls – The Running of the Bulls is a bi-annual event in which girls who are pledging a sorority are sent running out of the front door of Wiley-Jackson (MaWa) and are told to run towards the sorority which they intend to pledge. The event, although short, is often attended by much of the student population due to its humorous nature.

The Rock – Every athletic team that plays their games at Fred Selfe Stadium touches a giant rock taken from the late Fred Selfe&#x27;s hometown. Coach Selfe was a long-time assistant coach for the Emory and Henry football team who died of cancer and whose saying &quot;Trust in your teammates, trust in yourself&quot; is painted in the football locker room. Touching the Rock is seen as not only a unifying gesture, but it is supposed to also be a &quot;recognition of all those who wore the blue and gold before you.&quot;

The Duck Pond – Emory and Henry is known for having ducks year round at its duck pond. This is because the pond is naturally heated due to a spring (which can be seen in the corner closest to Wiley Hall in the foundations of the old well house).

== Rankings and recognition ==
In the 2024 edition of Best Colleges, Emory &amp; Henry University has achieved a ranking of #21 among Regional Universities in the South.

Notably, Emory &amp; Henry University received the Corporation for National and Community Service Presidential Award from President Obama in March 2010. This distinction marked a historic milestone as Emory &amp; Henry became the first higher education institution in Virginia to receive this award for their contributions to national and community service.

==Notable alumni==

===Literature, television and arts===
* J. Fred Essary (1903) – journalist
* Kermit Hunter (Re-1931) – playwright and English professor
* Samuel W. Small (1871) – journalist, evangelist, prohibitionist

===Education===
* Henry DeLamar Clayton – President of the University of Alabama from 1886 to 1889; Confederate general during Civil War
* Joe L. Kincheloe (1972) – author on education, culture, and politics

===Military===
* James Patton Brownlow – Brevet Brigadier General of the 1st Tennessee Volunteer Cavalry Regiment (Union) during the Civil War
* Thomas T. Handy (enrolled 1908–1911) – Deputy Chief of Staff of the US Army in World War II; signed the orders to drop the atomic bomb on Hiroshima
* Frank Rowlett (1929) – cryptologist who cracked the Japanese code during World War II
* Robert G. Shaver – lawyer, Confederate States Army colonel, and Ku Klux Klan leader.
* J.E.B. Stuart (enrolled 1848–1850) – US Army officer and later a Confederate general during the Civil War

===Science, research, and medicine===
* John Young (1955) – Naval officer and NASA astronaut who was the ninth man to walk on the Moon
* J.B. Wolfe – Academic Psychologist and Behavioral Scientist PhD; chair of the Department Of Psychology at the University of Mississippi for 30 years

===Politics and government===
* Toni Atkins (1984) – former Speaker and current majority leader of the California State Assembly; former acting mayor of San Diego
* Henry Bowen – elected to the Virginia House of Delegates from 1869 to 1873; served two terms in the US House of Representatives
* B. B. Comer (1869) – Governor of Alabama from 1907 to 1911
* John M. Fleming (1851) – Tennessee state legislator and newspaper editor
* John Goode (1848) – Virginia Congressman, Solicitor General of the U.S.
* Morgan Griffith (1980) – elected to the US House of Representatives in 2011 representing Virginia&#x27;s 9th Congressional District; served in the Virginia House of Delegates from 1994 to 2011 and was elected House Majority Leader in the House of Delegates in 2000, becoming the first Republican in Virginia to hold that position. 
* Joseph P. Johnson (1952) – served in the Virginia House of Delegates from 1966 to 1970; and again from 1990 to 2014
* George C. Peery (1894) – Governor of Virginia from 1934 to 1938
* James Buchanan Richmond - Nineteenth-century politician and judge; member of the Virginia House of Delegates in 1874 and 1875; elected to the 46th Congress (March 4, 1879-March 3, 1881) representing Virginia&#x27;s 9th Congressional District; appointed county judge of Scott County 1886-1892; was delegate to the Virginia constitutional convention at Richmond in 1901 and 1902
* Robert P. Shuler (1903) - evangelist and political figure whose attracted a large audience and drew controversy with his attacks on politicians and police officials
* Harley Orrin Staggers (1931) – US Congressman from 1949 to 1981; represented West Virginia&#x27;s 2nd Congressional District for 32 years
* Henry Carter Stuart (1874) – Governor of Virginia from 1914 to 1918

===Business===
* Harold Arthur Poling (1940s) – CEO and Chairman of the Ford Motor Company from 1990 to 1993
* Richard Joshua Reynolds (enrolled 1868–1870) – founder of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company

===Sports and athletics===
* Larry Bales (1968) – former football and baseball college coach
* Glenn Roberts (1930s) – credited as the originator of the modern-day jumpshot in basketball; All-American; scored over 2,000 career points
* Sonny Wade (1969) – 1968 All-American quarterback; drafted by the Philadelphia Eagles in 1969; later played for the Alouettes in the CFL; Grey Cup champion
* Montie Weaver (1927) – pitched for the Washington Senators and the Boston Red Sox from 1931 to 1939
* Mike Young (1986) – Division I college basketball Head Coach at Virginia Tech
==References==
==External links==
* Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5373734" start="0" end="28" title="Emory and Henry University" label="Emory &amp;amp; Henry University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373734" start="30" end="37" title="Emory and Henry University" label="E&amp;amp;H"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373734" start="41" end="46" title="Emory and Henry University" label="Emory"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="53" end="71" title="private university" label="private university"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373674" start="75" end="90" title="Emory, Virginia" label="Emory, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510915" start="131" end="148" title="Washington County, Virginia" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571371" start="196" end="214" title="Southwest Virginia" label="Southwest Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231763" start="390" end="400" title="John Emory" label="John Emory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="413" end="422" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="435" end="448" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="462" end="469" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="474" end="482" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362958" start="572" end="604" title="Elizabeth Henry Campbell Russell" label="Elizabeth Henry Campbell Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1192" end="1221" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872251" start="1317" end="1336" title="Battle of Saltville (disambiguation)" label="Battle of Saltville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069857" start="1424" end="1438" title="Champ Ferguson" label="Champ Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q137919" start="1626" end="1644" title="Abingdon, Virginia" label="Abingdon, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q770571" start="1742" end="1765" title="Johnson City, Tennessee" label="Johnson City, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q839112" start="1797" end="1830" title="Methodist Episcopal Church, South" label="Methodist Episcopal Church, South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="2433" end="2467" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12 Navy College Training Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3080" end="3116" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934360" start="3125" end="3152" title="Virginia Landmarks Register" label="Virginia Landmarks Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="3281" end="3298" title="historic districts in the United States" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3321" end="3357" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="5155" end="5167" title="Liberal arts college" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="5350" end="5366" title="bachelor degrees" label="bachelor degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="5490" end="5503" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043121" start="5508" end="5525" title="community service" label="community service"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="5530" end="5551" title="international studies" label="international studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986556" start="7789" end="7811" title="Virginia Creeper Trail" label="Virginia Creeper Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923260" start="7817" end="7854" title="Mount Rogers National Recreation Area" label="Mount Rogers National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="8084" end="8088" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="8089" end="8100" title="NCAA Division II" label="Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566061" start="8108" end="8133" title="South Atlantic Conference" label="South Atlantic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984022" start="8790" end="8805" title="Neyland Stadium" label="Neyland Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367086" start="10499" end="10510" title="Kappa Sigma" label="Kappa Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186335" start="12727" end="12741" title="Jesse Frederick Essary" label="J. Fred Essary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394064" start="12764" end="12777" title="Kermit Hunter" label="Kermit Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412850" start="12825" end="12840" title="Samuel W. Small" label="Samuel W. Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606663" start="12908" end="12929" title="Henry DeLamar Clayton (general)" label="Henry DeLamar Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210809" start="13029" end="13045" title="Joe L. Kincheloe" label="Joe L. Kincheloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141055" start="13116" end="13137" title="James Patton Brownlow" label="James Patton Brownlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622107" start="13244" end="13259" title="Thomas T. Handy" label="Thomas T. Handy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="13382" end="13391" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444058" start="13394" end="13407" title="Frank Rowlett" label="Frank Rowlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059081" start="13482" end="13498" title="Robert G. Shaver" label="Robert G. Shaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="13546" end="13558" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313583" start="13569" end="13582" title="J.E.B. Stuart" label="J.E.B. Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q107667" start="13716" end="13726" title="John Young (astronaut)" label="John Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220995" start="13813" end="13823" title="John Bascom Wolfe" label="J.B. Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="13923" end="13948" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395723" start="13995" end="14006" title="Toni Atkins" label="Toni Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="14066" end="14091" title="California State Assembly" label="California State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="14116" end="14125" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606527" start="14128" end="14139" title="Henry Bowen" label="Henry Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="14157" end="14184" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q795199" start="14258" end="14269" title="B. B. Comer" label="B. B. Comer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865615" start="14319" end="14334" title="John M. Fleming" label="John M. Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q968146" start="14394" end="14404" title="John Goode (Virginia politician)" label="John Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684857" start="14468" end="14483" title="Morgan Griffith" label="Morgan Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="14508" end="14535" title="US House of Representatives" label="US House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934068" start="14557" end="14599" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 9th Congressional District" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 9th Congressional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="14615" end="14642" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286011" start="14802" end="14819" title="Joseph P. Johnson" label="Joseph P. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="14843" end="14870" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q880362" start="14920" end="14935" title="George C. Peery" label="George C. Peery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418162" start="14986" end="15009" title="James Buchanan Richmond" label="James Buchanan Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348240" start="15365" end="15381" title="Robert P. Shuler" label="Robert P. Shuler"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="15391" end="15401" title="Evangelism" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585515" start="15532" end="15553" title="Harley Orrin Staggers" label="Harley Orrin Staggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q749220" start="15672" end="15691" title="Henry Carter Stuart" label="Henry Carter Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019523" start="15758" end="15778" title="Harold Arthur Poling" label="Harold Arthur Poling"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="15813" end="15831" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123813" start="15852" end="15875" title="Richard Joshua Reynolds" label="Richard Joshua Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="15910" end="15939" title="R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q59656401" start="15970" end="15981" title="Larry Bales" label="Larry Bales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568000" start="16036" end="16049" title="Glen Roberts" label="Glenn Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562128" start="16177" end="16187" title="Sonny Wade" label="Sonny Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="16243" end="16262" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q576837" start="16293" end="16302" title="Montreal Alouettes" label="Alouettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="16310" end="16313" title="Canadian Football League" label="CFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="16315" end="16323" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013336" start="16335" end="16348" title="Monte Weaver" label="Montie Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030254" start="16374" end="16393" title="History of the Washington Senators" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="16402" end="16416" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849350" start="16437" end="16447" title="Mike Young (basketball)" label="Mike Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934614" start="16501" end="16514" title="Virginia Tech Hokies men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Virginia Tech"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578456" wikidata="Q3334305" url="?curid=578456" title="HMCS Red Deer">
<text>HMCS &quot;Red Deer&quot; was a that served in the Royal Canadian Navy during the Second World War. The minesweeper saw action in the Battle of the Atlantic and the Battle of the St. Lawrence. She was named for Red Deer, Alberta. After the war the vessel was briefly reacquired by the Royal Canadian Navy, but was not recommissioned and was sold for scrap and broken up in 1959.

==Design and description==
A British design, the &quot;Bangor&quot;-class minesweepers were smaller than the preceding s in British service, but larger than the in Canadian service. They came in two versions powered by different engines; those with a diesel engines and those with vertical triple-expansion steam engines. &quot;Red Deer&quot; was of the latter design and was larger than her diesel-engined cousins. &quot;Red Deer&quot; was long overall, had a beam of and a draught of . The minesweeper had a displacement of . She had a complement of 6 officers and 77 enlisted.

&quot;Red Deer&quot; had two vertical triple-expansion steam engines, each driving one shaft, using steam provided by two Admiralty three-drum boilers. The engines produced a total of and gave a maximum speed of . The minesweeper could carry a maximum of of fuel oil.

In general, &quot;Bangor&quot;-class minesweepers were armed with either a single quick-firing (QF) 12-pounder () 12 cwt HA gun or a QF 20 cwt gun mounted forward. The ships were also fitted with a QF 2-pounder Mark VIII aft and were eventually fitted with single-mounted QF 20 mm Oerlikon guns on the bridge wings. Those ships assigned to convoy duty were armed with two depth charge launchers and four chutes to deploy their 40 depth charges. &quot;Red Deer&quot; was equipped with LL and SA minesweeping gear to counter magnetic and acoustic naval mines.

==Service history==
&quot;Red Deer&quot; was ordered as part of 1940–1941 construction programme. The minesweeper&#x27;s keel was laid down on 10 January 1941 by Canadian Vickers Ltd. at Montreal, Quebec. The ship was launched on 5 October later that year. &quot;Red Deer&quot; was commissioned into the Royal Canadian Navy on 24 November 1941 at Montreal with the pennant number J255.

After commissioning, &quot;Red Deer&quot; was assigned to the Western Local Escort Force as a convoy escort. At various periods after that she served with Sydney Force, Halifax Local Defence Force and the Gulf Escort Force, as part of the Battle of the St. Lawrence. On 12 January 1942 she rescued 95 survivors from the British merchant ship SS &quot;Cyclops&quot;, which had been torpedoed by . Beginning in February 1944, &quot;Red Deer&quot; was assigned to Newfoundland Force. In May 1944 she began a refit at Liverpool, completing it in July 1944 and working up in Bermuda later that month. She returned to Newfoundland Force after working up and remained with the unit until the end of the war. She was paid off at Halifax, Nova Scotia on 30 October 1945 and laid up at Shelburne.

After the war &quot;Red Deer&quot; was placed in strategic reserve at Sorel, Quebec. In 1952, she was reacquired by the Royal Canadian Navy and refitted in preparation for active duty and given the new pennant number 196. She was never recommissioned and was sold to Marine Industries of Sorel in February 1959 to be broken up.

==Affiliations==
126 RCSCC Red Deer is a Royal Canadian Sea Cadet Corp in Red Deer, Alberta, that is named after HMCS &quot;Red Deer&quot;.

==See also==
* List of ships of the Canadian Navy

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 

==External links==
* Haze Gray and Underway
* ReadyAyeReady.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3334305" start="0" end="19" title="HMCS Red Deer" label="HMCS &amp;quot;Red Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="51" end="70" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="82" end="98" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="134" end="156" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993443" start="165" end="191" title="Battle of the St. Lawrence" label="Battle of the St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23025" start="211" end="228" title="Red Deer, Alberta" label="Red Deer, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q336332" start="360" end="369" title="Ship breaking" label="broken up"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="631" end="644" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="661" end="692" title="Marine steam engine#Triple or multiple expansion" label="vertical triple-expansion steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358152" start="821" end="833" title="Length overall" label="long overall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="841" end="845" title="Beam (nautical)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="855" end="862" title="Draft (hull)" label="draught"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="890" end="902" title="Displacement (ship)" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070987" start="1083" end="1110" title="Admiralty three-drum boiler" label="Admiralty three-drum boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q214199" start="1219" end="1227" title="fuel oil" label="fuel oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q383028" start="1312" end="1324" title="Quick-firing gun" label="quick-firing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360084" start="1330" end="1357" title="QF 12-pounder 12 cwt naval gun" label="12-pounder () 12 cwt HA gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962070" start="1363" end="1376" title="QF 3-inch 20 cwt" label="QF 20 cwt gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297890" start="1428" end="1450" title="QF 2 pounder naval gun" label="QF 2-pounder Mark VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q210670" start="1502" end="1519" title="Oerlikon 20 mm cannon" label="QF 20 mm Oerlikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="1532" end="1538" title="Bridge (nautical)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="1602" end="1614" title="depth charge" label="depth charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="1775" end="1785" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="1910" end="1914" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032384" start="1951" end="1972" title="Canadian Vickers" label="Canadian Vickers Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1976" end="1984" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1986" end="1992" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="2007" end="2015" title="Ship naming and launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="2071" end="2083" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474286" start="2154" end="2168" title="pennant number" label="pennant number"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258582" start="2238" end="2264" title="Western Local Escort Force" label="Western Local Escort Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866453" start="2690" end="2699" title="Liverpool, Nova Scotia" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="2746" end="2753" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="2897" end="2917" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693101" start="2952" end="2961" title="Shelburne, Nova Scotia" label="Shelburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q142010" start="3034" end="3047" title="Sorel, Quebec" label="Sorel, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764149" start="3231" end="3248" title="Marine Industries" label="Marine Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932681" start="3334" end="3358" title="Royal Canadian Sea Cadets" label="Royal Canadian Sea Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504236" start="3449" end="3483" title="List of ships of the Canadian Navy" label="List of ships of the Canadian Navy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578460" wikidata="Q2238838" url="?curid=578460" title="Loop invariant">
<text>In computer science, a loop invariant is a property of a program loop that is true before (and after) each iteration. It is a logical assertion, sometimes checked with a code assertion. Knowing its invariant(s) is essential in understanding the effect of a loop.

In formal program verification, particularly the Floyd-Hoare approach, loop invariants are expressed by formal predicate logic and used to prove properties of loops and by extension algorithms that employ loops (usually correctness properties).
The loop invariants will be true on entry into a loop and following each iteration, so that on exit from the loop both the loop invariants and the loop termination condition can be guaranteed.

From a programming methodology viewpoint, the loop invariant can be viewed as a more abstract specification of the loop, which characterizes the deeper purpose of the loop beyond the details of this implementation. A survey article covers fundamental algorithms from many areas of computer science (searching, sorting, optimization, arithmetic etc.), characterizing each of them from the viewpoint of its invariant.

Because of the similarity of loops and recursive programs, proving partial correctness of loops with invariants is very similar to proving the correctness of recursive programs via induction. In fact, the loop invariant is often the same as the inductive hypothesis to be proved for a recursive program equivalent to a given loop.

==Informal example==
The following C subroutine codice_1 returns the maximum value in its argument array codice_2, provided its length codice_3 is at least 1.
Comments are provided at lines 3, 6, 9, 11, and 13. Each comment makes an assertion about the values of one or more variables at that stage of the function.
The highlighted assertions within the loop body, at the beginning and end of the loop (lines 6 and 11), are exactly the same. They thus describe an invariant property of the loop.
When line 13 is reached, this invariant still holds, and it is known that the loop condition codice_4 from line 5 has become false. Both properties together imply that codice_5 equals the maximum value in codice_6, that is, that the correct value is returned from line 14.
int max(int n, const int a[]) {
 int m = a[0];
 // m equals the maximum value in a[0...0]
 int i = 1;
 while (i != n) {
 // m equals the maximum value in a[0...i-1]
 if (m &lt; a[i])
 m = a[i];
 // m equals the maximum value in a[0...i]
 ++i;
 // m equals the maximum value in a[0...i-1]
 // m equals the maximum value in a[0...i-1], and i==n
 return m;

Following a defensive programming paradigm, the loop condition codice_4 in line 5 should better be modified to codice_8, in order to avoid endless looping for illegitimate negative values of codice_3. While this change in code intuitively shouldn&#x27;t make a difference, the reasoning leading to its correctness becomes somewhat more complicated, since then only codice_10 is known in line 13. In order to obtain that also codice_11 holds, that condition has to be included into the loop invariant. It is easy to see that codice_11, too, is an invariant of the loop, since codice_8 in line 6 can be obtained from the (modified) loop condition in line 5, and hence codice_11 holds in line 11 after codice_15 has been incremented in line 10. However, when loop invariants have to be manually provided for formal program verification, such intuitively too obvious properties like codice_11 are often overlooked.

==Floyd–Hoare logic==
In Floyd–Hoare logic, the partial correctness of a while loop is governed by the following rule of inference:

:formula_1

This means:
* If some property is preserved by the code formula_2 —more precisely, if holds after the execution of formula_2 whenever both and held beforehand— &quot;(upper line)&quot; then
* and are guaranteed to be false and true, respectively, after the execution of the whole loop formula_4, provided was true before the loop &quot;(lower line)&quot;.

In other words: The rule above is a deductive step that has as its premise the Hoare triple formula_5. This triple is actually a relation on machine states. It holds whenever starting from a state in which the boolean expression formula_6 is true and successfully executing some code called formula_2, the machine ends up in a state in which is true. If this relation can be proven, the rule then allows us to conclude that successful execution of the program formula_4 will lead from a state in which is true to a state in which formula_9 holds. The boolean formula in this rule is called a loop invariant.

With some variations in the notation used, and with the premise that the loop halts, this rule is also known as the Invariant Relation Theorem. As one 1970s textbook presents it in a way meant to be accessible to student programmers:

Let the notation codice_17 mean that if codice_18 is true before the sequence of statements codice_19 run, then codice_20 is true after it. Then the invariant relation theorem holds that

:codice_21
::implies 
:codice_22

===Example===
The following example illustrates how this rule works. Consider the program

 while (x &lt; 10)
 x := x+1;

One can then prove the following Hoare triple:

:formula_10

The condition &quot;C&quot; of the codice_23 loop is formula_11. A useful loop invariant has to be guessed; it will turn out that formula_12 is appropriate. Under these assumptions it is possible to prove the following Hoare triple:

:formula_13

While this triple can be derived formally from the rules of Floyd-Hoare logic governing assignment, it is also intuitively justified: Computation starts in a state where formula_14 is true, which means simply that formula_11 is true. The computation adds 1 to , which means that formula_12 is still true (for integer x).

Under this premise, the rule for codice_23 loops permits the following conclusion:

:formula_17

However, the post-condition formula_18 ( is less than or equal to 10, but it is not less than 10) is logically equivalent to formula_19, which is what we wanted to show.

The property formula_20 is another invariant of the example loop, and the trivial property formula_21 is another one.
Applying the above inference rule to the former invariant yields formula_22.
Applying it to invariant formula_21 yields formula_24, which is slightly more expressive.

==Programming language support==

===Eiffel===
The Eiffel programming language provides native support for loop invariants. A loop invariant is expressed with the same syntax used for a class invariant. In the sample below, the loop invariant expression codice_25 must be true following the loop initialization, and after each execution of the loop body; this is checked at runtime.

 from
 x := 0
 invariant
 x &lt;= 10
 until
 x &gt; 10
 loop
 x := x + 1
 end

===Whiley===
The Whiley programming language also provides first-class support for loop invariants. Loop invariants are expressed using one or more codice_26 clauses, as the following illustrates:
function max(int[] items) -&gt; (int r)
// Requires at least one element to compute max
requires |items| &gt; 0
// (1) Result is not smaller than any element
ensures all { i in 0..|items| | items[i] &lt;= r }
// (2) Result matches at least one element
ensures some { i in 0..|items| | items[i] == r }:
 nat i = 1
 int m = items[0]
 while i &lt; |items|
 // (1) No item seen so far is larger than m
 where all { k in 0..i | items[k] &lt;= m }
 // (2) One or more items seen so far matches m
 where some { k in 0..i | items[k] == m }:
 if items[i] &gt; m:
 m = items[i]
 i = i + 1
 return m
The codice_1 function determines the largest element in an integer array. For this to be defined, the array must contain at least one element. The postconditions of codice_1 require that the returned value is: (1) not smaller than any element; and, (2) that it matches at least one element. The loop invariant is defined inductively through two codice_26 clauses, each of which corresponds to a clause in the postcondition. The fundamental difference is that each clause of the loop invariant identifies the result as being correct up to the current element codice_15, whilst the postconditions identify the result as being correct for all elements.

==Use of loop invariants==

A loop invariant can serve one of the following purposes:
# purely documentary 
# to be checked within in the code, e.g. by an assertion call
# to be verified based on the Floyd–Hoare approach

For 1., a natural language comment (like codice_31 in the above example) is sufficient.

For 2., programming language support is required, such as the C library assert.h, or the above-shown codice_32 clause in Eiffel. Often, run-time checking can be switched on (for debugging runs) and off (for production runs) by a compiler or a runtime option.

For 3., some tools exist to support mathematical proofs, usually based on the above-shown Floyd–Hoare rule, that a given loop code in fact satisfies a given (set of) loop invariant(s).

The technique of abstract interpretation can be used to detect loop invariant of given code automatically. However, this approach is limited to very simple invariants (such as codice_33).

==Distinction from loop-invariant code==

Loop-invariant code consists of statements or expressions that can be moved outside a loop body without affecting the program semantics. Such transformations, called loop-invariant code motion, are performed by some compilers to optimize programs.
A loop-invariant code example (in the C programming language) is

for (int i=0; i&lt;n; ++i) {
 x = y+z;
 a[i] = 6*i + x*x;

where the calculations codice_34 and codice_35 can be moved before the loop, resulting in an equivalent, but faster, program:

x = y+z;
t1 = x*x;
for (int i=0; i&lt;n; ++i) {
 a[i] = 6*i + t1;

In contrast, e.g. the property codice_36 is a loop invariant for both the original and the optimized program, but is not part of the code, hence it doesn&#x27;t make sense to speak of &quot;moving it out of the loop&quot;.

Loop-invariant code may induce a corresponding loop-invariant property. For the above example, the easiest way to see it is to consider a program where the loop invariant code is computed both before and within the loop:

x1 = y+z;
t1 = x1*x1;
for (int i=0; i&lt;n; ++i) {
 x2 = y+z;
 a[i] = 6*i + t1;

A loop-invariant property of this code is codice_37, indicating that the values computed before the loop agree with those computed within (except before the first iteration).

== See also ==
* Invariant (computer science)
* Loop-invariant code motion
* Loop variant
* Weakest-preconditions of While loop

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. &quot;Introduction to Algorithms&quot;, Second Edition. MIT Press and McGraw-Hill, 2001. . Pages 17–19, section 2.1: Insertion sort.
* David Gries. &quot;A note on a standard strategy for developing loop invariants and loops.&quot; &quot;Science of Computer Programming&quot;, vol 2, pp. 207–214. 1984.
* Michael D. Ernst, Jake Cockrell, William G. Griswold, David Notkin. &quot;Dynamically Discovering Likely Program Invariants to Support Program Evolution.&quot; &quot;International Conference on Software Engineering&quot;, pp. 213–224. 1999.
* Robert Paige. &quot;Programming with Invariants.&quot; &quot;IEEE Software&quot;, 3(1):56–69. January 1986.
* Yanhong A. Liu, Scott D. Stoller, and Tim Teitelbaum. Strengthening Invariants for Efficient Computation. &quot;Science of Computer Programming&quot;, 41(2):139–172. October 2001.
* Michael Huth, Mark Ryan. &quot;Logic in Computer Science.&quot;, Second Edition.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238838" start="23" end="37" title="Loop invariant" label="loop invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="57" end="64" title="Computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65" end="69" title="Control flow#Loops" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q843812" start="126" end="143" title="logical assertion" label="logical assertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q741248" start="175" end="184" title="Assertion (software development)" label="assertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q173326" start="267" end="294" title="formal verification" label="formal program verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375924" start="313" end="333" title="Hoare logic" label="Floyd-Hoare approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="375" end="390" title="predicate logic" label="predicate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="446" end="455" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q360812" start="484" end="495" title="Correctness (computer science)" label="correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="1159" end="1168" title="recursion" label="recursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932759" start="1301" end="1310" title="structural induction" label="induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1487" end="1488" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="1489" end="1499" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182643" start="2588" end="2609" title="defensive programming" label="defensive programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375924" start="3513" end="3530" title="Hoare logic" label="Floyd–Hoare logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q360812" start="3536" end="3555" title="partial correctness" label="partial correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q838101" start="3561" end="3571" title="while loop" label="while loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375924" start="4069" end="4081" title="Hoare triple" label="Hoare triple"/>
<link wikidata="Q107223533" start="4119" end="4127" title="relation (mathematics)" label="relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q220433" start="6006" end="6026" title="Logical equivalence" label="logically equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q732089" start="6413" end="6419" title="Eiffel (programming language)" label="Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153815" start="6548" end="6563" title="class invariant" label="class invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653623" start="6842" end="6848" title="Whiley (programming language)" label="Whiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q360690" start="7758" end="7772" title="postconditions" label="postconditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375924" start="8462" end="8482" title="Hoare logic" label="Floyd–Hoare approach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8542" end="8547" title="#Informal example" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="8635" end="8636" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q306248" start="8645" end="8653" title="assert.h" label="assert.h"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8662" end="8667" title="#Eiffel" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8911" end="8916" title="#Floyd–Hoare logic" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q333341" start="9036" end="9059" title="abstract interpretation" label="abstract interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q538985" start="9416" end="9442" title="loop-invariant code motion" label="loop-invariant code motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325106" start="9479" end="9487" title="optimizing compiler" label="optimize"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="9536" end="9558" title="C (programming language)" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q188211" start="10537" end="10565" title="Invariant (computer science)" label="Invariant (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q538985" start="10568" end="10594" title="Loop-invariant code motion" label="Loop-invariant code motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675865" start="10597" end="10609" title="Loop variant" label="Loop variant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10612" end="10647" title="Predicate transformer semantics#While loop" label="Weakest-preconditions of While loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524992" start="10690" end="10706" title="Thomas H. Cormen" label="Thomas H. Cormen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93028" start="10708" end="10728" title="Charles E. Leiserson" label="Charles E. Leiserson"/>
<link wikidata="Q578036" start="10730" end="10746" title="Ronald L. Rivest" label="Ronald L. Rivest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024396" start="10752" end="10766" title="Clifford Stein" label="Clifford Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141518" start="10774" end="10800" title="Introduction to Algorithms" label="Introduction to Algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149745" start="10903" end="10914" title="David Gries" label="David Gries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106477" start="11464" end="11478" title="Tim Teitelbaum" label="Tim Teitelbaum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578465" wikidata="Q3153815" url="?curid=578465" title="Class invariant">
<text>In computer programming, specifically object-oriented programming, a class invariant (or type invariant) is an invariant used for constraining objects of a class. Methods of the class should preserve the invariant. The class invariant constrains the state stored in the object.

Class invariants are established during construction and constantly maintained between calls to public methods. Code within functions may break invariants as long as the invariants are restored before a public function ends. With concurrency, maintaining the invariant in methods typically requires a critical section to be established by locking the state using a mutex.

An object invariant, or representation invariant, is a computer programming construct consisting of a set of invariant properties that remain uncompromised regardless of the state of the object. This ensures that the object will always meet predefined conditions, and that methods may, therefore, always reference the object without the risk of making inaccurate presumptions. Defining class invariants can help programmers and testers to catch more bugs during software testing.

==Class invariants and inheritance==

The useful effect of class invariants in object-oriented software is enhanced in the presence of inheritance. Class invariants are inherited, that is, &quot;the invariants of all the parents of a class apply to the class itself.&quot;

Inheritance can allow descendant classes to alter implementation data of parent classes, so it would be possible for a descendant class to change the state of instances in a way that made them invalid from the viewpoint of the parent class. The concern for this type of misbehaving descendant is one reason object-oriented software designers give for favoring composition over inheritance (i.e., inheritance breaks encapsulation).

However, because class invariants are inherited, the class invariant for any particular class consists of any invariant assertions coded immediately on that class in conjunction with all the invariant clauses inherited from the class&#x27;s parents. This means that even though descendant classes may have access to the implementation data of their parents, the class invariant can prevent them from manipulating those data in any way that produces an invalid instance at runtime.

==Programming language support==

===Assertions===

Common programming languages like Python, PHP, JavaScript, C++ and Java support assertions by default, which can be used to define class invariants. A common pattern to implement invariants in classes is for the constructor of the class to throw an exception if the invariant is not satisfied. Since methods preserve the invariants, they can assume the validity of the invariant and need not explicitly check for it.

===Native support===

The class invariant is an essential component of design by contract. So, programming languages that provide full native support for design by contract, such as Eiffel, Ada, and D, will also provide full support for class invariants.

===Non-native support===

For C++, the Loki Library provides a framework for checking class invariants, static data invariants, and exception safety.

For Java, there is a more powerful tool called Java Modeling Language that provides a more robust way of defining class invariants.

==Examples==

===Native support===

====Ada====
The Ada programming language has native support for type invariants (as well as pre- and postconditions, subtype predicates, etc.). A type invariant may be given on a private type (for example to define a relationship between its abstract properties), or on its full definition (typically to help in verifying the correctness of the implementation of the type). Here is an example of a type invariant given on the full definition of a private type used to represent a logical stack. The implementation uses an array, and the type invariant specifies certain properties of the implementation that enable proofs of safety. In this case, the invariant ensures that, for a stack of logical depth N, the first N elements of the array are valid values. The Default_Initial_Condition of the Stack type, by specifying an empty stack, ensures the initial truth of the invariant, and Push preserves the invariant. The truth of the invariant then enables Pop to rely on the fact that the top of the stack is a valid value, which is needed to prove Pop&#x27;s postcondition. A more complex type invariant would enable the proof of full functional correctness, such as that Pop returns the value passed into a corresponding Push, but in this case we are merely trying to prove that Pop does not return an Invalid_Value.
generic
 type Item is private;
 Invalid_Value : in Item;
package Stacks is
 type Stack(Max_Depth : Positive) is private
 with Default_Initial_Condition =&gt; Is_Empty (Stack);

 function Is_Empty(S : in Stack) return Boolean;
 function Is_Full(S : in Stack) return Boolean;

 procedure Push(S : in out Stack; I : in Item)
 with Pre =&gt; not Is_Full(S) and then I /= Invalid_Value,
 Post =&gt; not Is_Empty(S);
 procedure Pop(S : in out Stack; I : out Item)
 with Pre =&gt; not Is_Empty(S),
 Post =&gt; not Is_Full(S) and then I /= Invalid_Value;
private
 type Item_Array is array (Positive range &lt;&gt;) of Item;

 type Stack(Max_Depth : Positive) is record
 Length : Natural := 0;
 Data : Item_Array (1 .. Max_Depth) := (others =&gt; Invalid_Value);
 end record
 with Type_Invariant =&gt; Length &lt;= Max_Depth and then
 (for all J in 1 .. Length =&gt; Data (J) /= Invalid_Value);

 function Is_Empty(S : in Stack) return Boolean
 is (S.Length = 0);
 function Is_Full(S : in Stack) return Boolean
 is (S.Length = S.Max_Depth);
end Stacks;

====D====
D programming language has native support of class invariants, as well as other contract programming techniques.
Here is an example from the official documentation.

class Date {
 int day;
 int hour;

 invariant() {
 assert(day &gt;= 1 &amp;&amp; day &lt;= 31);
 assert(hour &gt;= 0 &amp;&amp; hour &lt;= 23);
}
====Eiffel====

In Eiffel, the class invariant appears at the end of the class following the keyword codice_1.
class
 DATE

create
 make

feature {NONE} -- Initialization

 make (a_day: INTEGER; a_hour: INTEGER)
 -- Initialize `Current&#x27; with `a_day&#x27; and `a_hour&#x27;.
 require
 valid_day: a_day &gt;= 1 and a_day &lt;= 31
 valid_hour: a_hour &gt;= 0 and a_hour &lt;= 23
 do
 day := a_day
 hour := a_hour
 ensure
 day_set: day = a_day
 hour_set: hour = a_hour
 end

feature -- Access

 day: INTEGER
 -- Day of month for `Current&#x27;

 hour: INTEGER
 -- Hour of day for `Current&#x27;

feature -- Element change

 set_day (a_day: INTEGER)
 -- Set `day&#x27; to `a_day&#x27;
 require
 valid_argument: a_day &gt;= 1 and a_day &lt;= 31
 do
 day := a_day
 ensure
 day_set: day = a_day
 end

 set_hour (a_hour: INTEGER)
 -- Set `hour&#x27; to `a_hour&#x27;
 require
 valid_argument: a_hour &gt;= 0 and a_hour &lt;= 23
 do
 hour := a_hour
 ensure
 hour_set: hour = a_hour
 end

invariant
 valid_day: day &gt;= 1 and day &lt;= 31
 valid_hour: hour &gt;= 0 and hour &lt;= 23
end
===Non-native support===

====C++====
The Loki (C++) library provides a framework written by Richard Sposato for checking class invariants, static data invariants, and exception safety level.

This is an example of how a class can use Loki::Checker to verify that invariants remain true after an object changes. The example uses a geopoint object to store a location on Earth as a coordinate of latitude and longitude.

The geopoint invariants are:
* latitude may not be more than 90° north.
* latitude may not be less than -90° south.
* longitude may not be more than 180° east.
* longitude may not be less than -180° west.
#include &lt;loki/Checker.h&gt; // Needed to check class invariants.

#include &lt;Degrees.hpp&gt;

class GeoPoint {
 public:
 GeoPoint(Degrees latitude, Degrees longitude);

 /// Move function will move location of GeoPoint.
 void Move(Degrees latitude_change, Degrees longitude_change) {
 // The checker object calls IsValid at function entry and exit to prove this
 // GeoPoint object is valid. The checker also guarantees GeoPoint::Move
 // function will never throw.
 CheckFor::CheckForNoThrow checker(this, &amp;IsValid);

 latitude_ += latitude_change;
 if (latitude_ &gt;= 90.0) latitude_ = 90.0;
 if (latitude_ &lt;= -90.0) latitude_ = -90.0;

 longitude_ += longitude_change;
 while (longitude_ &gt;= 180.0) longitude_ -= 360.0;
 while (longitude_ &lt;= -180.0) longitude_ += 360.0;

 private:
 /** @note CheckFor performs validity checking in many functions to determine
 if the code violated any invariants, if any content changed, or if the
 function threw an exception.
 using CheckFor = ::Loki::CheckFor&lt;const GeoPoint&gt;;

 /// This function checks all object invariants.
 bool IsValid() const {
 assert(this != nullptr);
 assert(latitude_ &gt;= -90.0);
 assert(latitude_ &lt;= 90.0);
 assert(longitude_ &gt;= -180.0);
 assert(longitude_ &lt;= 180.0);
 return true;

 Degrees latitude_; ///&lt; Degrees from equator. Positive is north, negative is
 ///&lt; south.
 Degrees longitude_; ///&lt; Degrees from Prime Meridian. Positive is east,
 ///&lt; negative is west.


====Java====
This is an example of a class invariant in the Java programming language with Java Modeling Language.
The invariant must hold to be true after the constructor is finished and at the entry and exit of all public member
functions. Public member functions should define precondition and postcondition to help ensure the class invariant.

public class Date {
 int /*@spec_public@*/ day;
 int /*@spec_public@*/ hour;

 /*@invariant day &gt;= 1 &amp;&amp; day &lt;= 31; @*/ //class invariant
 /*@invariant hour &gt;= 0 &amp;&amp; hour &lt;= 23; @*/ //class invariant
 @requires d &gt;= 1 &amp;&amp; d &lt;= 31;
 @requires h &gt;= 0 &amp;&amp; h &lt;= 23;
 public Date(int d, int h) { // constructor
 day = d;
 hour = h;

 @requires d &gt;= 1 &amp;&amp; d &lt;= 31;
 @ensures day == d;
 public void setDay(int d) {
 day = d;

 @requires h &gt;= 0 &amp;&amp; h &lt;= 23;
 @ensures hour == h;
 public void setHour(int h) {
 hour = h;
}

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="3" end="23" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="38" end="65" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153815" start="69" end="84" title="Class invariant" label="class invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153815" start="89" end="103" title="Class invariant" label="type invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188211" start="111" end="120" title="invariant (computer science)" label="invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="143" end="150" title="object (computer science)" label="objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="156" end="161" title="class (computer science)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q815844" start="163" end="170" title="Method (computer science)" label="Methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049476" start="319" end="331" title="Constructor (object-oriented programming)" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q128392" start="509" end="520" title="Concurrent computing" label="concurrency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427251" start="644" end="649" title="mutex" label="mutex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153815" start="655" end="671" title="Class invariant" label="object invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153815" start="676" end="700" title="Class invariant" label="representation invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334113" start="956" end="965" title="Reference (computer science)" label="reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q188522" start="1114" end="1130" title="software testing" label="software testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780968" start="1767" end="1795" title="composition over inheritance" label="composition over inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="2002" end="2021" title="Logical conjunction" label="in conjunction with"/>
<link wikidata="Q741248" start="2453" end="2463" title="Assertion (computing)" label="assertions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200691" start="2862" end="2880" title="design by contract" label="design by contract"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2926" end="2963" title="Design by contract#Languages with native support" label="native support for design by contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q732089" start="2973" end="2979" title="Eiffel (programming language)" label="Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="2981" end="2984" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q319268" start="2990" end="2991" title="D (programming language)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="3077" end="3080" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426608" start="3086" end="3098" title="Loki (C++)" label="Loki Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517517" start="3245" end="3267" title="Java Modeling Language" label="Java Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="3383" end="3386" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q319268" start="5741" end="5742" title="D (programming language)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200691" start="5821" end="5841" title="contract programming" label="contract programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q732089" start="6072" end="6078" title="Eiffel (programming language)" label="Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426608" start="7177" end="7187" title="Loki (C++)" label="Loki (C++)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7228" end="7243" title="Richard Sposato" label="Richard Sposato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419499" start="7303" end="7319" title="exception safety" label="exception safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="9309" end="9334" title="Java programming language" label="Java programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517517" start="9340" end="9362" title="Java Modeling Language" label="Java Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413450" start="9529" end="9541" title="precondition" label="precondition"/>
<link wikidata="Q360690" start="9546" end="9559" title="postcondition" label="postcondition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578467" wikidata="Q1348518" url="?curid=578467" title="Taylor Report">
<text>The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry report is the report of an inquiry which was overseen by Lord Justice Taylor, into the causes of the Hillsborough disaster in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, England, on 15 April 1989, as a result of which, at the time of the report, 95 Liverpool fans had died (a 96th fan died in 1993, and 97th in 2021). An interim report was published in August 1989, and the final report was published in January 1990.

The Taylor Report found that the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control. It recommended that all major stadiums convert to an all-seater model, and that all ticketed spectators should have seats, as opposed to some or all being obliged to stand. The Football League in England and the Scottish Football League introduced regulations that required clubs in the highest divisions (top two divisions in the English system) to comply with this recommendation by August 1994.

The report stated that standing accommodation was not intrinsically unsafe, but the government, nonetheless, decided that no standing accommodation should be allowed.

Other recommendations of the Taylor Report included points on items such as the sale of alcohol within stadiums, crush barriers, fences (as many Liverpool fans had been crushed to death against the perimeter fencing at Hillsborough), turnstiles, ticket prices and other stadium items.

==Inquiry==
After the Hillsborough disaster, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to conduct an inquiry into the events. The Taylor Inquiry sat for a total of 31 days and published two reports: an interim report which laid out the events of the day and immediate conclusions, and the final report which outlined general recommendations on football ground safety. This became known as the Taylor Report.

==Findings==
Taylor concluded that &quot;policing on 15 April broke down&quot; and &quot;although there were other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.&quot; Attention was focused on the decision to open the secondary gates; moreover, the kick-off should have been delayed, as had been done at other venues and matches.

Sheffield Wednesday were criticised for the inadequate number of turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end and the poor quality of the crush barriers on the terraces, &quot;respects in which failure by the Club contributed to this disaster.&quot;

===Police control===
Taylor found there was &quot;no provision&quot; for controlling the entry of spectators into the turnstile area. Questioned why more action had not been taken to screen individuals and improve the flow of supporters approaching the stadium from the west &quot;where the turnstile area was so small and awkwardly laid out&quot;, senior police officers responded that policy and practice had been no different from in the past, and they had no reason to anticipate problems as earlier events had proceeded without major incident. In fact, Taylor noted only two occasions when the entry at Leppings Lane had been the sole access to the north and west sides of the ground, at the 1987 and 1988 semi-finals, with evidence of congestion at both, but owing to good fortune and circumstance police policy &quot;was not put to the same test and strain as a year later&quot;.

The senior police officers said it had never happened before so there was no reason to foresee it. In fact, the only two previous occasions when the Leppings Lane terraces had been used to fill the whole of the north and west sides of the ground were at the two semi-finals, in 1987 and 1988. In 1987, the match was on a Sunday scheduled for 12 noon, and kick-off was postponed for a quarter of an hour because of late arrivals.

The need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. That occurred because, as both Club and police should have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope with the large numbers demanded of it unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The Operational Order and police tactics on the day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival of large numbers should that occur in a short period. That it might so occur was foreseeable and it did.

As a result of the inadequate number of turnstiles, it has been calculated that it would have taken until 3:40 pm to get all ticket holders into the Leppings Lane end had an exit gate not been opened. Gate C was opened to let fans in, but the number of fans entering the terrace was not thought to have been more than the capacity of the entire standing area. Once inside the stadium, most fans entering the terraces headed for the central pens 3 and 4, as directed by a large sign above the access tunnel.

Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been closed off whether gate C was to be opened or not. ... [I]t should have been clear in the control room where there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.

Standard procedure for league fixtures was to estimate the size of the visiting fan base, determine how many enclosures need to be opened, then fill each standing area one at a time. For all-ticket games that had sold out, such as semi-final matches, a different approach was adopted whereby supporters were allowed to enter any enclosure they wished upon arrival. There was no mechanical or electronic means for calculating when individual enclosures had reached capacity. A police officer made a visual assessment before guiding fans to other pens.

Whilst in theory the police would intervene if a pen became &quot;full&quot;, in practice they permitted the test of fullness to be what the fans would tolerate. By 2.52 pm when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over-full even by this test. Many were uncomfortable. To allow any more into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in a large stream was courting disaster.

The official combined capacity of the central pens was 2,200, but the Health and Safety Executive found this should have been reduced to 1,693 as crush barriers and perimeter gates did not conform to the &quot;Green Guide&quot;. It is estimated that more than 3,000 people were in the pens shortly after kick off at 3:00 pm. Overcrowding caused the fatal crush.

When spectators first appeared on the track, the immediate assumption in the control room was that a pitch invasion was threatened. This was unlikely at the beginning of a match. It became still less likely when those on the track made no move towards the pitch. ... [T]here was no effective leadership either from control or on the pitch to harness and organise rescue efforts. No orders were given for officers to enter the tunnel and relieve pressure.

The anxiety to protect the sanctity of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to overcrowding. Certain it was, that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4 were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.

Lord Taylor regarded spectator allocation irrelevant to the disaster. &quot;I do not consider choice of ends was causative of the disaster. Had it been reversed, the disaster could well have occurred in a similar manner but to Nottingham supporters.&quot;

===Aggravating factors===
There were accusations that the behaviour of Liverpool fans contributed to the disaster; these accusations centred around consumption of alcohol before the game and attempts to enter the ground without a ticket. Although Lord Taylor acknowledged that these factors aggravated the situation, he concluded that they were secondary issues. Witness estimates of the number of drunken fans varied from a minority to a large proportion of the crowd. Although it was clear many fans had been drinking, Lord Taylor unequivocally stated that most of them were: &quot;not drunk, nor even the worse for drink.&quot; He concluded that they formed an exacerbating factor and that police, seeking to rationalise their loss of control, overestimated the element of drunkenness in the crowd.

The Hillsborough Independent Panel later noted that, despite being dismissed by the Taylor Report, the idea that alcohol contributed to the disaster proved remarkably durable. Documents later disclosed confirm that repeated attempts were made to find supporting evidence for alcohol being a factor and that available evidence was significantly misinterpreted. It noted, &quot;The weight placed on alcohol in the face of objective evidence of a pattern of consumption modest for a leisure event was inappropriate. It has since fuelled persistent and unsustainable assertions about drunken fan behaviour.&quot;

The possibility of fans attempting to gain entry without tickets or with forged tickets was suggested as a contributing factor. South Yorkshire Police suggested the late arrival of fans amounted to a conspiracy to gain entry without tickets. However, analysis of the electronic monitoring system, Health and Safety Executive analysis, and eyewitness accounts showed that the total number of people who entered the Leppings Lane end was below the official capacity of the stand. Eyewitness reports suggested that tickets were available on the day, and tickets for the Leppings Lane end were on sale from Anfield until the day before. The report dismissed the theory.

===Police evasion===
Taylor concluded his criticism of South Yorkshire Police by describing senior officers in command as &quot;defensive and evasive witnesses&quot; who refused to accept any responsibility for error.

In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must report that for the most part the quality of their evidence was in inverse proportion to their rank.

It is a matter of regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in what occurred. ... [T]he police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk, and to blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. ... Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced.

===Effect on stadiums in Britain===

The Taylor Report had a deep impact on safety standards for stadiums in the UK. Perimeter and lateral fencing was removed, and many top stadiums were converted to all-seated purpose-built stadiums for Premier League, and most Football League teams since the report are all-seater. Chester City F.C.&#x27;s Deva Stadium was the first English football stadium to fulfil the safety recommendations of the Taylor Report, with Millwall F.C.&#x27;s The Den being the first new stadium to be built that fulfilled the recommendations.

Lord Taylor noted that the evidence he received was overwhelmingly in favour of more seating accommodation, and that most was in favour of reversing the two-thirds to one-third standing-seating ratio. His final report made 76 recommendations, including a reduction in standing in line with this evidence but that, after a given timescale, all stadiums designated under the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 should admit spectators to seated accommodation only. A number of his recommendations were not implemented, including all-seating for sports other than football.
The Football Spectators Act 1989 contained a regulation requiring football grounds to become all-seated as directed by the Secretary of State. This was to be overseen by the Football Licensing Authority (now the Sports Grounds Safety Authority).

In July 1992, the government announced a relaxation of the regulation for the lower two English leagues (known now as League One and League Two). The Football Spectators Act does not cover Scotland, but the Scottish Premier League chose to make all-seater stadiums a requirement of league membership. However, the regulations were applied to Berwick Rangers, a team located in England and playing in Scotland&#x27;s national leagues. In England and Wales, all-seating is a requirement of the Premier League and of the Football League for clubs who have been present in the Championship for more than three seasons.

Several campaigns have been active in attempting to get the government to relax the regulation, and allow standing areas to return to Premiership and Championship grounds.

== Consequences ==

As a result of the Taylor Report, most clubs refurbished or rebuilt stadiums (partly, and in some cases completely), while others built new stadiums at different locations. This was the case with clubs who were frequently playing in the upper two divisions of the English league during the first half of the 1990s, as well as clubs from the third tier who were on the verge of making the breakthrough to the league&#x27;s top two divisions.

These changes resulted in a number of terraces being replaced by all-seater stands, two of the early examples being Manchester United&#x27;s Stretford End and Arsenal&#x27;s North Bank, which were both demolished in the summer of 1992. Two years later, Aston Villa&#x27;s Holte End and Liverpool&#x27;s Spion Kop were both demolished.

The 1990s saw the closure of some of the oldest football stadiums in England, including Middlesbrough&#x27;s Ayresome Park and Sunderland&#x27;s Roker Park, in favour of new sites which were more suitable for all-seater capacities that would have been practically impossible on the site of the existing grounds. Although a number of clubs from the lower divisions had relocated during the intervening years, Middlesbrough&#x27;s relocation in 1995 was the first permanent relocation of any top division club for more than 70 years.

The clubs who remained at their existing homes inevitably saw a significantly reduced capacity, with attendances at matches being lower still while the conversion work was taking place, although the clubs who took part in the new FA Premier League from the 1992–93 season had money from the disbursement of the sale of television rights to help fund redevelopment work. Clubs that had progressed through the football league pyramid from lower levels in a short space of time during the 1990s, were allowed to keep standing accommodation in the top two divisions after the end of the 1993–94 campaign. The most recent Premier League club to have standing accommodation were Fulham in 2001–02, as they had been in the fourth tier of English football six seasons previously and reached the second tier in 1999. Clubs to have had standing accommodation in the second tier of English football since the mid 1990s include Reading, Stoke City, Oxford United, Gillingham and more recently Colchester United and Brentford. With the exception of Gillingham, this was due to the club planning relocation to a new all-seater stadium.

Bolton Wanderers had standing accommodation at Burnden Park right up to its closure at the end of the 1996–97 season, after which they relocated to the all-seater Reebok Stadium. Bolton had first announced their intention to leave Burden Park in favour of a new all-seater stadium just before winning promotion from the league&#x27;s third tier in 1993.

This included a season in the Premier League, and a total of three seasons in Division One. Sunderland, who left Roker Park for the Stadium of Light at the same time, also had standing accommodation in the Premier League during their old stadium&#x27;s final season in use. However, the club had been seeking a move to a new stadium for at least five years before relocation was completed, which was delayed when the original plan for a new stadium next to the local Nissan factory collapsed.

Southampton had converted The Dell into an all-seater stadium in the early 1990s as a short-term measure to comply with the Taylor Report, reducing capacity to just over 15,000, while a site for a new larger stadium was identified. It closed in 2001 on the completion of St Mary&#x27;s Stadium.

Leicester City had briefly considered relocation at the beginning of the 1990s but then decided to redevelop Filbert Street, building a new 9,500-seat stand there in 1993 and filling in the remaining standing areas, although by 1998 relocation was again being considered, with attendances rising and Leicester doing well on the pitch, and finally happened when the Walkers Stadium was completed in 2002.

Arsenal had converted Highbury into an all-seater stadium with a capacity of nearly 39,000 (down from more than 60,000 in the late 1980s) in 1993, with further expansion of Highbury considered. However, further expansion of Highbury was complicated by the fact that two of the stands were listed structures. Local residents objected to any further expansion at Highbury and the local council was not sympathetic. After a failed bid to take over Wembley Stadium in 1998, the Arsenal board announced in November 1999 that an industrial site at Ashburton Grove had been selected as the site for a new 60,000-seat stadium. The new stadium was originally planned to be completed in 2003, but a long battle for planning permission meant that the new Emirates Stadium finally opened in time for the 2006–07 season.

Manchester City had originally taken the option of redeveloping their existing stadium, Maine Road, which became all-seater in 1995 following a redevelopment which included two stands being rebuilt, which gave it a capacity of 35,000. There were plans for further redevelopment which would have taken the capacity beyond 40,000, but these were postponed following relegation from the Premier League in 1996, and by the end of the decade, plans for further expansion at Maine Road were abandoned after the club agreed to become tenants at the new Eastlands site, where a new sports stadium was being built for the 2002 Commonwealth Games. Manchester City moved to Eastlands (now called the Etihad Stadium for sponsorship reasons) at the start of the 2003–04 season. 
Wimbledon moved out of the dilapidated Plough Lane stadium in 1991, to become tenants at Crystal Palace&#x27;s Selhurst Park, which was redeveloped as an all-seater stadium. This was expected to be a short term measure for a few seasons until Wimbledon found a site for a new stadium of their own, but ended up lasting 12 years and ended in controversial circumstances. Plans for a new 20,000-seat stadium in the London Borough of Merton had been unveiled in 1988, with the intention of relocation being completed in the early 1990s, but never materialised and the site was later developed for other uses. Various plans for a new stadium were reported throughout the 1990s, even a move to Dublin, before in 2003 the club relocated to Milton Keynes where they played at the National Hockey Stadium (adopting the name Milton Keynes Dons in 2004) before moving into a new permanent home – Stadium MK – in 2007. To maintain a presence in the London Borough of Merton, a group of Wimbledon fans set up a new club (AFC Wimbledon) after the move to Milton Keynes was given the go-ahead in May 2002, and the club played at Kingstonian&#x27;s Kingsmeadow Stadium, later taking over ownership of the stadium, although a move to a new stadium in the London Borough of Merton was always the club&#x27;s long-term aim. In November 2020, AFC Wimbledon finally moved into a new stadium at Plough Lane, almost 30 years after the departure of the original Wimbledon club from the area.

Some clubs had started upgrading their stadiums before this rule was introduced. For example, St Johnstone in Scotland arranged for the construction of McDiarmid Park in the mid 1980s. The stadium opened in time for the 1989–90 season and was already nearing completion when the Hillsborough disaster occurred.

Coventry City had made their Highfield Road stadium all-seater during the early 1980s, but within a few years, it had reintroduced standing accommodation after the all-seater format proved unpopular with fans; the club later reverted to an all-seater capacity in the early 1990s following the Taylor Report, and left Highfield Road for the larger Ricoh Arena in 2005.

A number of clubs seriously considered relocation in response to the Taylor Report – and did so in the years ahead – but ultimately decided to remain at their original location. These include Newcastle United in the mid 1990s, and Liverpool, who in the early 2000s had plans to leave Anfield in favour of a new stadium in nearby Stanley Park, which at one stage they were considering sharing with local rivals Everton, but these plans collapsed after a decade in favour of expansion work at Anfield. Everton, on the other hand, have since decided to relocate from Goodison Park to a new stadium which is due to be completed in 2024, nearly 30 years after relocation was first planned by the club&#x27;s then owners.

==See also==

* Development of stadiums in English football

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1348518" start="4" end="48" title="Taylor Report" label="Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077155" start="99" end="118" title="Peter Taylor, Baron Taylor of Gosforth" label="Lord Justice Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="143" end="164" title="Hillsborough disaster" label="Hillsborough disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="168" end="177" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23095" start="179" end="194" title="South Yorkshire" label="South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="275" end="284" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q107428100" start="302" end="310" title="Tony Bland" label="96th fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="572" end="579" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="715" end="734" title="The Football League" label="The Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261276" start="754" end="778" title="Scottish Football League" label="Scottish Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="1197" end="1204" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="1379" end="1386" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="1417" end="1438" title="Hillsborough disaster" label="Hillsborough disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077155" start="1440" end="1459" title="Peter Taylor, Baron Taylor of Gosforth" label="Lord Justice Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478750" start="6241" end="6268" title="Health and Safety Executive" label="Health and Safety Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728370" start="10680" end="10690" title="All-seater stadium" label="all-seated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="10718" end="10732" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="10743" end="10758" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070732" start="10798" end="10815" title="Chester City F.C." label="Chester City F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q619259" start="10823" end="10835" title="Deva Stadium" label="Deva Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="10939" end="10952" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q908481" start="10960" end="10967" title="The Den" label="The Den"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11418" end="11450" title="Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975" label="Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465904" start="11617" end="11645" title="Football Spectators Act 1989" label="Football Spectators Act 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579727" start="11787" end="11815" title="Football Licensing Authority" label="Football Licensing Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579727" start="11825" end="11856" title="Sports Grounds Safety Authority" label="Sports Grounds Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q187304" start="12067" end="12090" title="Scottish Premier League" label="Scottish Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q518259" start="12202" end="12217" title="Berwick Rangers" label="Berwick Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577534" start="13149" end="13157" title="Terrace (stadium)" label="terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="13227" end="13244" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="13270" end="13277" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="13364" end="13375" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="13397" end="13406" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13414" end="13423" title="Anfield#Kop Stand" label="Spion Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="13535" end="13548" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q602392" start="13556" end="13569" title="Ayresome Park" label="Ayresome Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="13574" end="13584" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541691" start="13592" end="13602" title="Roker Park" label="Roker Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="14210" end="14227" title="Premier League" label="FA Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997332" start="14237" end="14251" title="1992–93 in English football" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365269" start="14563" end="14579" title="1993–94 in English football" label="1993–94 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="14653" end="14659" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271507" start="14663" end="14670" title="2001-02 in English football" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="14896" end="14903" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="14905" end="14915" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="14917" end="14930" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="14932" end="14942" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578" start="14961" end="14978" title="Colchester United F.C." label="Colchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="14983" end="14992" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="15103" end="15119" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016749" start="15150" end="15162" title="Burnden Park" label="Burnden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474922" start="15205" end="15219" title="1996-97 in English football" label="1996–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q242772" start="15266" end="15280" title="Toughsheet Community Stadium" label="Reebok Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="15550" end="15560" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541691" start="15571" end="15581" title="Roker Park" label="Roker Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q31969" start="15590" end="15606" title="Stadium of Light" label="Stadium of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="15925" end="15931" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q822406" start="15932" end="15939" title="Nissan Motor Manufacturing UK" label="factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="15952" end="15963" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161792" start="15978" end="15986" title="The Dell (Southampton)" label="The Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q567339" start="16223" end="16245" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="16248" end="16262" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448298" start="16357" end="16371" title="Filbert Street" label="Filbert Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q620031" start="16613" end="16628" title="King Power Stadium" label="Walkers Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="16653" end="16660" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="16675" end="16683" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="17098" end="17113" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q163995" start="17195" end="17210" title="Ashburton Grove" label="Ashburton Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q163995" start="17397" end="17413" title="Emirates Stadium" label="Emirates Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028129" start="17445" end="17459" title="2006–07 in English football" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="17462" end="17477" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q865093" start="17550" end="17560" title="Maine Road" label="Maine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q48159" start="18008" end="18017" title="City of Manchester Stadium" label="Eastlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116640" start="18075" end="18098" title="2002 Commonwealth Games" label="2002 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949686" start="18211" end="18225" title="2003–04 in English football" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19482" start="18228" end="18237" title="Wimbledon F.C." label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q975681" start="18267" end="18278" title="Plough Lane (1912–98)" label="Plough Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="18317" end="18331" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066373" start="18339" end="18352" title="Selhurst Park" label="Selhurst Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="18641" end="18665" title="London Borough of Merton" label="London Borough of Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="18917" end="18923" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="18962" end="18975" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664710" start="19001" end="19024" title="National Hockey Stadium (Milton Keynes)" label="National Hockey Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q248188" start="19044" end="19062" title="Milton Keynes Dons F.C." label="Milton Keynes Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144973" start="19114" end="19124" title="Stadium MK" label="Stadium MK"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851" start="19237" end="19250" title="AFC Wimbledon" label="AFC Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988619" start="19343" end="19354" title="Kingstonian F.C." label="Kingstonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630338" start="19362" end="19381" title="Kingsmeadow Stadium" label="Kingsmeadow Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q48699006" start="19602" end="19613" title="Plough Lane" label="Plough Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q268776" start="19792" end="19804" title="St Johnstone F.C." label="St Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="19808" end="19816" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848848" start="19850" end="19864" title="McDiarmid Park" label="McDiarmid Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585748" start="19918" end="19932" title="1989–90 in Scottish football" label="1989–90 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="20010" end="20023" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q628342" start="20039" end="20053" title="Highfield Road" label="Highfield Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q842077" start="20357" end="20368" title="Coventry Building Society Arena" label="Ricoh Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="20663" end="20670" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q899201" start="20686" end="20697" title="Stanley Park Stadium" label="new stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538801" start="20708" end="20720" title="Stanley Park, Liverpool" label="Stanley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="20789" end="20796" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="20943" end="20956" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q29347805" start="20962" end="20973" title="Everton Stadium" label="new stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610928" start="21112" end="21155" title="Development of stadiums in English football" label="Development of stadiums in English football"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578468" wikidata="Q160826" url="?curid=578468" title="Sweden men's national football team">
<text>The Sweden men&#x27;s national football team () represents Sweden in men&#x27;s international football and it is controlled by the Swedish Football Association, the governing body of football in Sweden. Sweden&#x27;s home ground is Strawberry Arena in Solna and the team is coached by Jon Dahl Tomasson. From 1945 to the late 1950s, they were considered one of the greatest teams in Europe.

Sweden has made twelve appearances at the World Cup with their first coming in 1934. They have also made six appearances at the European Championship. Sweden finished second at the 1958 FIFA World Cup, which they hosted, and third in both 1950 and 1994. Sweden&#x27;s other accomplishments also include a gold medal at the 1948 Summer Olympics, and bronze medals in 1924 and 1952. They also reached the semi-finals at UEFA Euro 1992, also while hosting.

== History ==

Sweden has traditionally been a strong team in international football, with 12 World Cup appearances and 3 medals in the Olympics. Sweden national team finished second in the 1958 World Cup, when it was the host team, being beaten by Brazil 5–2 in the final. Sweden has also finished third twice, in 1950 and 1994. In 1938, they finished fourth.

=== Early history ===

Sweden played its first international game against Norway on 12 July 1908, an 11–3 victory at Idrottsplatsen in Göteborg. Other matches in 1908 were played against England, Great Britain, the Netherlands (twice) and Belgium; Sweden lost all five matches. In the same year, Sweden competed in the 1908 Summer Olympics for the first time. Sweden, however, lost a game in the Olympics against the Great Britain 1–12, the largest loss in the Sweden national team&#x27;s history.

In 1916, Sweden defeated Denmark for the first time.

Sweden played in the 1912 Olympics (as hosts), the 1920 Olympics, and in the 1924 Olympics, where Sweden took the bronze and their first medal ever.

=== 1938 FIFA World Cup ===
The 1938 World Cup was Sweden&#x27;s second qualification for the World Cup. In the first round, they were scheduled to play against Austria, but after Germany&#x27;s occupation of Austria, the Austrian team could not continue playing in the tournament. Instead, Sweden went straight to the quarter-finals match against Cuba. They beat Cuba 8–0 with both Harry Andersson (on his debut) and Gustav Wetterström scoring hat-tricks. In the semi-final match against Hungary, Sweden lost 1–5. Sweden&#x27;s next match was the third-place match against Brazil. In that game the Swedes lost 2–4, and ended in fourth place for the first and only time in Sweden national team football history.

=== 1948 Summer Olympics ===

In the first round, Sweden played against Austria. The Austrian team had qualified without their professional players, which was a surprise since the Austrian league had many professional players who were allowed to play in the tournament. The match was played at White Hart Lane in London and Sweden won 3–0. In the second game, Sweden played against Korea and won 12–0, one of the two largest margin wins Sweden has ever had. In the semi-final Sweden met their archrivals from Denmark beating them 4–2.

The final was played at legendary Wembley Stadium in London. The attendance was around 40,000 people which was high for a football game in those days. Sweden took on Yugoslavia in the final and won 3–1, with goals by Gunnar Gren (24&#x27;, 67&#x27;), Stjepan Bobek (42&#x27;) and Gunnar Nordahl (48&#x27;). This was Sweden&#x27;s first championship win in any international football tournament.

=== 1950 FIFA World Cup ===

In the 1950 World Cup, the Swedish football association did not allow any professional Swedish football players to take part. Consequently, Sweden only fielded amateur players during the tournament.

Qualifying for the tournament as one of six European national teams, Sweden played in the same group as Italy and Paraguay. (India withdrew from the group.)

In the first match, Sweden beat Italy 3–2 in São Paulo. The second match was a 2–2 draw against Paraguay. With the most points in the group, Sweden advanced to the next round.

Their first game in the second stage – also a group format – was against the hosts Brazil. It was played at the Maracanã Stadium with a total attendance of more than 138,000, to this day the record attendance for the Sweden national team. The game ended 7–1 to Brazil and it is rumored that almost everyone in the Brazilian audience waved the Swedes goodbye with their scarfs.

The next game was against Uruguay, who Sweden played against for the first time in World Cup history. Played in São Paulo, Uruguay won the game 3–2, which meant Sweden were unable to play for the gold.

The final game for Sweden in the tournament was played in São Paulo, against Spain. Sweden won 3–1 with goals by Stig Sundqvist (15&#x27;), Bror Mellberg (34&#x27;) and Karl-Erik Palmér (79&#x27;). Sweden finished 3rd in the group and took their first World Cup medal. As Sweden was the best placed European team, Sweden was, as the time, regarded &quot;unofficial European champions&quot;.

At the Summer Olympics in 1952 in Helsinki, Sweden continued to achieve success and won an Olympic bronze. The following year, the Football Association decided not to allow foreign professionals to play in the national team and the team failed to qualify for the World Championships in Switzerland in 1954 when Sweden only came second in their qualifying group behind Belgium.

=== 1958 FIFA World Cup success ===

In 1956, the Swedish football federation allowed the professional footballers to play for the national team again, giving Swedish football fans hope for the 1958 FIFA World Cup. Sweden, the host nation, were in the same group as Mexico, Hungary and Wales.

The first game, Sweden vs Mexico, was played at Sweden&#x27;s national stadium, Råsunda Stadium, Solna, and was attended by around 32,000 people. Sweden won the game 3–0, taking the lead in Group 3. The next match was against Hungary, who had finished 2nd in the 1954 World Cup in Switzerland and were also the 1952 Olympic Champions. Also played at Råsunda, this game ended 2–1 to Sweden, with both goals scored by Kurt Hamrin. In the next match, against Wales, Sweden drew 0–0.

Making it through to the quarter-finals, playing at Råsunda for the fourth time in this tournament, Sweden were up against the USSR and won 2–0.

The semifinal at Ullevi, Gothenburg, was the only game in the tournament which Sweden did not play at Råsunda. The crowd of around 50,000 people attended one of the best games Sweden played in the tournament. West Germany led by 1–0 when Erich Juskowiak was sent off in the 59th minute. Sweden won 3–1.

The final was played at Råsunda between host nation Sweden and the 1950 FIFA World Cup runners-up, Brazil. The total attendance was approximately 52,000 people. Brazil ended up winning the World Cup for the first time ever after beating Sweden by 5–2. Sweden consequently became runners-up, the best result for Sweden in any World Cup and the only Nordic country to achieve this so far. After the final match the Brazilian players honoured the host nation by sprinting around the pitch holding a Swedish flag.

=== 1960s ===

After the successful 1958 World Cup, Sweden&#x27;s fortunes diminished. In the qualification round of the 1962 World Cup, Sweden won its group in impressive fashion (scoring 10 goals and only having 3 goals scored against it), but it still had to win a play-off game against Switzerland to qualify. The game was played in West Berlin, and the Swiss won, 2–1.

Sweden almost got to the UEFA European Championship 1964. They started their play-off against Norway and won the first game and drew in the last game. In the second round, Sweden beat Yugoslavia, 3–2, but they lost the first game. In the quarter-finals, Sweden played against the defending champions, the Soviet Union. Sweden tied the first game but lost the second.

During the 1966 World Cup qualification, Sweden was in the UEFA Qualification group 2. Sweden started the qualification with a draw against West Germany and then a 3–0 victory over Cyprus. But only the winner of the group advanced and Sweden was eliminated with a loss in its next game against West Germany.

Sweden successfully entered the UEFA European Championship in 1968, but they finished in the Qualification group 2.

===1970s===
Sweden&#x27;s only major success in the &#x27;60s was to qualify for the 1970 World Cup, after winning UEFA Group 5 ahead of Norway and France. Sweden finished third in its group, losing a tie-breaker with eventual #4 Uruguay, and did not advance to the elimination round, however. The winner of Sweden&#x27;s group was eventual world runner-up Italy.

In the qualification of the 1974 FIFA World Cup, Sweden was in the same group as Austria, Hungary and Malta. Sweden clinched a narrow win via a classic play off-match against Austria in a snowy Gelsenkirchen, and advanced to the World Cup finals in Germany. During the World Cup, the team released Vi är svenska fotbollsgrabbar, a fight song written by Georg Ericson.

The group Sweden drew into included Uruguay, Netherlands and Bulgaria. The first game against Bulgaria ended in a draw. In the second game against the Netherlands, Sweden drew another tie. The last game of the round was played against Uruguay. That game was the first victory Sweden had in the tournament, when they beat Uruguay 3–0 with goals by Roland Sandberg (74&#x27;) and Ralf Edström (46&#x27;, 77&#x27;). Sweden finished 2nd in the group and advanced to the second group stage.

In the second group stage, Sweden was defeated in the first game against Poland 0–1. The situation after the defeat against Poland was that if Sweden lost against West Germany with a single goal difference and Yugoslavia defeated Poland, Sweden would be second in the group and play for the bronze medal. But since Poland beat Yugoslavia 2–1, Sweden had to win the game against the host nation, West Germany, in order to finish second in the group.

The game against West Germany was played in Düsseldorf with an attendance of 66,500 people. The Sweden nantional team striker Ralf Edström gave the Scandinavian the lead with 1–0 after 29 minutes. But in the second half West Germany took control of the game, even after Roland Sandberg&#x27;s equaliser after 52 minutes. Germany won 4–2. After the tournament, the German players commented that the game against Sweden was their best game in that tournament. The last game for Sweden was played in Düsseldorf against Yugoslavia. Sweden won that game 2–1. They finished the tournament as the 5th place team. The Sweden national team had profiles that Ronnie Hellström, Bo Larsson and Björn Nordqvist.

Sweden did not qualify for the European Championship quarter-finals game in 1976. On 11 May 1976, Sweden lost for the first time since 1937 at home to Denmark.

1978 took Sweden for the third consecutive World Cup. Sweden made it from the qualifiers in a three team group with Switzerland and Norway as opponents. The qualifying session was played in 1976 and 1977 in the 1978 FIFA World Cup in Argentina, Sweden played the first match with a draw (1–1) against Brazil. Swedish scorer was Thomas Sjöberg. 1–1 was Sweden&#x27;s best result so far in the World Cup against Brazil context (the result was repeated between the two countries at the World Cup finals in 1994). The team then lost against Austria (0–1) and Spain (0–1). The Sweden national team finished last in the group with 1 point and goal difference 1–3. Several of the profiles from 1974, still with (Larsson, Edström, Nordqvist) but also new players such as Anders Linderoth, Hasse Borg and Torbjörn Nilsson.

===1980s===
After the successful 1970s, reaching all three World Cups, Sweden changed their coach from Georg &quot;Åby&quot; Ericson to Lars &quot;Laban&quot; Arnesson. Arnesson had been a successful coach for Östers IF before becoming national team coach. Sweden failed to qualify for the UEFA Euro 1980 after only managing to win against Luxembourg in qualifying in a group that also included Czechoslovakia and France, and the 1982 FIFA World Cup, ending third to Scotland and Northern Ireland. In 1983, Sweden met Brazil in Gothenburg to play a friendly, the match ended 3–3. They failed to qualify for the UEFA Euro 1984, despite defeating the then-reigning world champions Italy 3–0 in Naples, including two goals by Glenn Strömberg, but were unable to prevail against Romania in the battle for the top spot, losing both away and at home against the &quot;Tricolours&quot;. The Sweden setbacks continued. After the failed qualification for the 1986 World Cup, Olle Nordin took over the team. Sweden lost their match against Czechoslovakia with 1–2 in the final qualifying round, while Portugal unexpectedly won 1–0 away against West Germany and took second place in the group. It was West Germany&#x27;s first ever loss in a World Cup qualifier.

Sweden also failed to qualify to the UEFA Euro 1988 in West Germany.

===1990s===
They won their qualification group for the 1990 World Cup ahead of England and went on to their first World Cup in 12 years. However, the World Cup campaign ended quickly after three 1–2 defeats in the group stage matches, against Brazil, Scotland and Costa Rica. As of May 2018, it is the only time that Sweden has failed to score points in a World Cup tournament. After the World Cup, Olle Nordin resigned and Nisse Andersson became an interim coach until Tommy Svensson took over in 1991.

As the host of the UEFA Euro 1992, Sweden played in their first ever European Championship tournament. They were drawn in group A with Denmark, France and England. Sweden managed to advance as group winners ahead of the eventual champions Denmark. In the semi-finals following the group stage, Sweden were eliminated by Germany with 2–3. As of July 2016, the semi-final place remains Sweden&#x27;s best result ever in a European Championship.

Sweden qualified for the 1994 World Cup in the United States at the top of their qualifying group ahead of Bulgaria and France. Sweden was placed in Group B with Brazil, Cameroon and Russia. The first game against Cameroon in Los Angeles looked to be yet another 1–2 loss, (after the 1990 World Cup fiasco with losses of 1–2 in all three games) but in the 75th minute, Martin Dahlin scored the equaliser from a rebound shot off of Henrik Larsson and the match finished 2–2. In the next game against Russia in Detroit, Russia was handed an early penalty and made it 1–0. Sweden managed to come back, with a penalty goal from Tomas Brolin and two goals from Martin Dahlin, with the result being 3–1. In the last group stage match, against Brazil (also in Detroit), they tied 1–1 after goals by Kennet Andersson (&#x27;23) and Romário (&#x27;47).

In the first knockout-stage match, Sweden faced Saudi Arabia in the extreme heat and humidity of Dallas, where the game started at the hottest time of day- 4:30 p.m. where temperatures went past 40C (104F) in an outdoor stadium. Sweden won 3–1 after two goals from Kennet Andersson and one from Martin Dahlin. Sweden&#x27;s quarter-final match in San Francisco against Romania has become a memorable match for Sweden national team football fans. After Sweden had scored late in the second half, Romania managed to equalise in the dying minutes of the match, sending it into extra time. Romania&#x27;s Florin Răducioiu, who scored the first goal for Romania, scored his second of the day to take Romania ahead at the 101st minute. But with five minutes left, Kennet Andersson scored with a header to make it level at 2–2. The penalty shoot-out began with a miss from Håkan Mild of Sweden, but Thomas Ravelli managed to save two penalties from Daniel Prodan and Miodrag Belodedici, giving Sweden the win and making himself a hero. Sweden advanced to the semi-finals, where they were to face Brazil in Los Angeles. They had managed to score in the group stage against Brazil but couldn&#x27;t do it a second time. After Jonas Thern had been sent off with a red card, Romário scored the only goal of the game in the 80th minute.

In the third-place match, Sweden played against a Bulgaria side that had lost to Italy in their semi-final match in New York City. Sweden scored 4 goals in the first half, but the second half went goal-less. Sweden finished 3rd and won the bronze medal, the best placing for the national team in a World Cup since the 1958 silver medal. This led Sweden to a second-place in the FIFA Men&#x27;s World Rankings for one month, in November 1994.

They finished as the top scorers of the tournament, with 15 goals scored in total.

After the World Cup in 1994, Sweden had difficulty reaching up to the same level. The national team was knocked out in qualifying for the 1996 European Championships in England and the World Cup in France in 1998. The qualification for the Euro 96 had started with a win for Sweden 1–0 away against Iceland in September 1994, but then lost against Switzerland away from home. In November 1994, Tomas Brolin broke his foot in a win against Hungary. In the spring of 1995 continued failure in the European Championship qualifiers. Sweden lost the away games against Turkey and played 1–1 draw at home to Iceland. When Sweden drew 0–0 against Switzerland in Gothenburg in September 1995, it was clear that the team would miss the European Championship finals.

The qualifying game for the France 98 was not better. In October 1996, Austria won 1–0 in Stockholm and the month after the Swedes lost against Scotland on away ground. Admittedly, Sweden won against Scotland in the return match in Gothenburg on Walpurgis Night in 1997, but in September 1997 won Austria 1–0 in Vienna. In October 1997, Tommy Svensson quit as head coach and Tommy Söderberg took over.

=== 2000s ===
Sweden qualified impressively for this tournament, winning all games except the away game against England (0–0) and conceding only one goal. The finals however, were a great disappointment. Sweden lost their opening game on 10 June against the host Belgium 1–2. Johan Mjällby scored the goal for Sweden in the 53rd minute after an error by Belgian goalkeeper Filip De Wilde, while Belgium won via goals from Bart Goor in the 43rd minute and Émile Mpenza in the 46th. Then on 15 June Sweden played 0–0 against Turkey. On 19 June, Sweden lost 2–1 to eventual runners-up Italy in the last group stage match. Luigi Di Biagio scored with a header on a corner kick in the first half to give Italy the lead. Late in the second half, Henrik Larsson equalised to 1–1. But after Daniel Andersson lost control of the ball, Alessandro Del Piero shot it into the top corner. Sweden finished the group last behind Belgium with only 1 point. Italy finished first and Turkey second.
Sweden qualified undefeated for the 2002 FIFA World Cup, ahead of eventual third placed Turkey. Sweden was drawn in the &quot;group of death&quot;, Group F, which also featured big favourites Argentina, England and Nigeria. The first match was against England on 2 June. Sol Campbell gave England the lead in the first half by heading in a left-side corner from David Beckham. The equalising goal was scored by midfielder Niclas Alexandersson, a powerful left-foot shot from outside the box past David Seaman. The match ended 1–1. In the next game on 7 June, Sweden played Nigeria. Julius Aghahowa gave Nigeria the lead by heading in a cross from the right. Sweden managed to equalise with a goal by Henrik Larsson. Later in the game, Larsson was fouled in the penalty area and Sweden were awarded with a penalty which Larsson himself put in the goal. Sweden won 2–1.

In the final group match on 12 June, Sweden played Argentina, who needed to win after losing 0–1 to England in the previous game. Sweden midfielder Anders Svensson scored a freekick goal from 30 meters. Andreas Andersson had a shot off the crossbar and out in an attempt to extend the lead. Mattias Jonson committed a foul in the penalty area and Argentina was awarded a penalty. Ariel Ortega shot straight on Magnus Hedman, the Sweden national team keeper, but Hernán Crespo rushed into the box and shot the rebound from Hedman between the keeper&#x27;s legs. The goal was controversial because Crespo began running into the box at the same time as Ortega stepped up to shoot. However, the match ended 1–1 and Sweden won the group, England on second place, Argentina third and Nigeria last.
In the round of 16 on 16 June, Sweden played Senegal. Henrik Larsson gave Sweden an early lead by heading in a corner from Anders Svensson. Senegal equalised through Henri Camara. They also had a goal disallowed for offside. The game came to sudden death golden goal. Rising star Zlatan Ibrahimović came on and nearly won Sweden the game. He made a terrific run on the right wing past several Senegal players, and shot with his weaker left foot from a tight angle straight at Senegal&#x27;s keeper Tony Sylva. Ibrahimović had Larsson and Svensson in excellent positions for a pass, but shot instead. Then Svensson made a great spin past a defender and hit the post with a powerful shot, which Sylva would have had no chance of saving, had it gone inside the posts. Camara then took a weak shot which went past Hedman, off the post and into the goal. Consequently, Sweden were eliminated. Henrik Larsson announced his retirement from the national team after the tournament.

Despite another impressive qualifying campaign and the unexpected return of Henrik Larsson, Sweden came into the tournament in Portugal with low expectations. But after a dazzling 5–0 win against Bulgaria on 14 June, they became one of the favorites. Freddie Ljungberg began the goal-fest after a well done pass by Zlatan Ibrahimović. Henrik Larsson scored 2–0 and 3–0 in the second half. His first goal was a diving header after a perfectly taken crossball from the left by Erik Edman. 4–0 was scored by Zlatan Ibrahimović on a penalty and the substitute Marcus Allbäck scored the last goal of the game. After the 5–0 victory, Sweden became a feared team in the tournament and many were surprised by Sweden&#x27;s offensive play since they were known to mostly play a defensive form of football.

In the next game on 18 June, they were set up against Italy, who would prove themselves as a very hard opponent. After 36 minutes Antonio Cassano scored the first goal of the game for Italy after a cross by Christian Panucci. A great game by Sweden national team goalkeeper Andreas Isaksson made Sweden survive the rest of the game and after 84 minutes, Zlatan Ibrahimović scored a backheel goal to make it 1–1, which became the final score.

Sweden&#x27;s last game of the group was held against Denmark. It was said before the game that if Sweden and Denmark played 2–2, Italy would be eliminated from the tournament. This is exactly what happened. Denmark led the game by 2–1 for a long time. But at the end of the game, Mattias Jonson scored the equaliser after numerous rebounds. Italy was eliminated and both Denmark and Sweden was qualified for the quarter-finals.

In the quarter-finals on 26 June, Sweden played against Holland. The game became goalless after full-time, but not without a lot of chances. The closest Sweden came to scoring was through Freddie Ljungberg but he hit the post with a well taken shot. Henrik Larsson also hit the cross bar from close range. After a goalless extra time, the game went to a penalty shootout. After a long run of penalties were taken, it was Olof Mellberg&#x27;s turn to take a shot. The Dutch goalkeeper Edwin van der Sar saved Mellberg&#x27;s shot and Sweden lost the penalty shoot out after Arjen Robben converted the following penalty.

Sweden qualified for the World Cup as the best runner-up, behind Croatia, who won their qualifying group. At the World Cup draw in December 2005, Sweden were drawn in Group B together with England, Paraguay and Trinidad and Tobago. Their squad for the tournament featured players who played club football in eleven different nations. 
Sweden started the World Cup slowly, recording a goal-less draw on 10 June in Dortmund against unheralded Trinidad and Tobago, despite playing with a one-man advantage for most of the game. The second game, against Paraguay on 15 June in Berlin, looked to be another goal-less draw until Freddie Ljungberg scored with a header in the 89th minute to give Sweden a 1–0 victory. On 20 June, Sweden played their last group stage match against England in Cologne. Joe Cole scored 1–0 for England with a spectacular long range shot in the 34th minute. Marcus Allbäck equalised to 1–1 with a header in the 51st minute. When Steven Gerrard scored with a header in the 85th minute, it looked like England would win the game. However, Henrik Larsson made it 2–2 from close range in the 90th minute. The draw was enough for Sweden to go through to the round of 16. On 24 June, Sweden&#x27;s World Cup run came to an end with a 2–0 defeat to the host nation, Germany in Munich, after two early goals by Lukas Podolski. Defender Teddy Lučić was controversely sent off by referee Carlos Simon, who was captured laughing while holding up a questionable red card. Henrik Larsson missed a penalty kick early in the second half. After the tournament, Mattias Jonson and Teddy Lučić announced they had retired from the national team. On 17 July, Henrik Larsson retired for a second time from the national team.
Sweden finished second in Group F behind Spain, and qualified for the finals as the best runner up. The qualifying campaign included an abandoned match away to Denmark, for which Sweden were awarded a 3–0 win by UEFA.

Prior to the final tournament, Henrik Larsson made another sensational return to the national team, nearly aged 37. Sweden were drawn in Group D together with Spain, Greece and Russia. In their first match in Euro 2008 on 10 June, they beat the reigning European champions, Greece, by a score of 2–0 with goals from Zlatan Ibrahimović and Petter Hansson. Their next game was against Spain on 14 June. The game looked like a draw until a 92nd-minute strike from David Villa, which put the Spaniards ahead. In the final group match on 18 June, the Swedes went on to lose 2–0 to the Russians, eliminating them from the tournament. Freddie Ljungberg, Marcus Allbäck and Niclas Alexandersson all chose to retire from the national team after Sweden was eliminated.

===2010s===
The 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification ended disastrously for Sweden. In the first game in Tirana, they were only able to tie 0–0 with an Albanian side that they were expected to defeat easily. Four days later, Sweden beat Hungary, 2–1, with goals from Kim Källström and Samuel Holmén. They would go on to tie with Portugal twice, both in Stockholm and in Porto. Both games ended 0–0. Sweden would lose to Denmark on home ground with an early strike from Thomas Kahlenberg after a defensive mistake by Mikael Nilsson. Kim Källström had a penalty kick saved early in the first half, which proved to be decisive. Sweden recovered with a 4–0 hammering of Malta. Against Hungary and Malta, both of the winning goals for Sweden were scored late. They would lose to Denmark again at Parken Stadium in Copenhagen after a late goal from Jakob Poulsen. Meanwhile, Portugal defeated Hungary, 3–0, putting the Portuguese team ahead in the standings. Sweden would defeat Albania, 4–1; however, Sweden was eliminated by Portugal&#x27;s 4–0 defeat of Malta. Lars Lagerbäck resigned and Erik Hamrén was appointed the next head coach. Several veteran players chose to retire after Sweden failed to reach the World Cup, including Daniel Andersson, Mikael Nilsson and Henrik Larsson, his third and final retirement. Zlatan Ibrahimović took a break from the national team due to Sweden missing the World Cup. He returned almost a year later, in August 2010, and was named Sweden captain by the new coach Hamrén.
Sweden&#x27;s Euro 2012 campaign with their new coach, Erik Hamrén, started well with two consecutive wins in Group E against Hungary and San Marino. After that Sweden lost to the Netherlands in Amsterdam with 1–4, but then won against Moldova first in Stockholm with 2–1 and later in Chișinău with 4–1. After the battle against Moldova Sweden beat their neighbor Finland with 5–0. The following game was a defeat when Hungary through Rudolf scored 2–1 home at Stadium Puskás Ferenc at the last minute of full-time. After that Sweden defeated San Marino with 5–0 away including two goals from Christian Wilhelmsson, who before the two games against San Marino and Hungary hadn&#x27;t been a regular in the starting eleven during Hamréns tenure as head coach. The Sweden national team then proceeded to beat Finland with 2–1 and in the final game beat the Netherlands with 3–2 to end their streak of 17 consecutive qualification-game wins. On 2 December 2011, Sweden were drawn into Group D alongside England, Ukraine and France in the Euro 2012 competition.

Sweden played their opening match on 11 June against Ukraine. Zlatan Ibrahimović scored from close range after a pass from Kim Källström in the 52nd minute. Andriy Shevchenko equalised by heading in a corner just three minutes later, and in the 62nd minute, he scored another header. Sweden were unable to respond to this and lost the match 1–2.
Sweden played their second group stage match against England on 15 June. Andy Carroll scored 1–0 for England with a powerful header in the 23rd minute. Sweden equalised through an own goal by Glen Johnson and took the lead when Olof Mellberg scored 2–1 in the 59th minute. However, England turned the game around with goals by Theo Walcott and Danny Welbeck. The two losses meant that Sweden were already eliminated from the next stage. In the third group stage game on 19 June, Sweden played against France. Zlatan Ibrahimović scored a spectacular flying volley early in the second half and Sebastian Larsson sealed a meaningless 2–0 win during stoppage time. After Sweden&#x27;s early exit from the tournament, the veteran Olof Mellberg announced his retirement from the national team.

Playing in Group C of the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifiers, Sweden finished second behind Germany, and was one of eight teams to move on to the second round of qualification. A notable result during group play was their match in Germany on 16 October 2012 where they fought back from 4–0 down with 30 minutes remaining to draw the game 4–4 at the Olympiastadion, and was widely regarded as one of the most memorable comebacks in football history.

Sweden&#x27;s new national stadium Friends Arena in Solna was opened on 14 November 2012 with a friendly match against England, which Sweden won 4–2. Zlatan Ibrahimović scored four goals in a world class performance. His fourth goal was an extraordinary overhead bicycle kick from 35 yards, which later won the FIFA Puskás Award for goal of the year.

A key win in their group was the home game against Austria on 11 October 2013, as Martin Olsson and Zlatan Ibrahimović both scored in the second half to secure the win at the Friends Arena.

Using the October 2013 FIFA World Rankings, Sweden was ranked 25th overall and would face one of the four highest ranked teams in the second round of qualification. They were drawn to face Portugal, the team that beat Sweden for a qualification spot in the 2010 World Cup qualifiers. Cristiano Ronaldo scored the only goal in a 1–0 win for Portugal the first match in Lisbon on 15 November. 
The return match was played on 19 November at Friends Arena in Solna. After Ronaldo scored 1–0 for Portugal, Zlatan Ibrahimović scored two quick goals to make it 2–2 on aggregate. Sweden still needed to score a third goal because of Portugal&#x27;s away goal. However, Ronaldo scored two more counter-attack goals and Portugal won the game 3–2 and 4–2 on aggregate. This meant that Sweden once again failed to qualify for the World Cup. Due to this, Sweden&#x27;s most capped player of all time Anders Svensson decided to end his international career.

Competing in Group G of the UEFA Euro 2016 qualifiers, Sweden picked up their first point on the road in Austria with a 1–1 draw on 8 September 2014. After a 1–1 draw against Russia at the Friends Arena, Sweden then picked up their first win in their next match with a 2–0 result against Liechtenstein. Sweden then went unbeaten for another three matches before suffering two consecutive defeats, a 1–0 loss to Russia in Moscow and a crushing 4–1 home defeat to group leaders Austria. This caused Sweden to move down to third place in their group, just one point above fourth-placed Montenegro. Sweden then bounced back to win their final two group games against Liechtenstein and Moldova with the scoreline being 2–0 on both occasions. They finished their group in third position behind Austria and Russia and qualified for the playoffs. Sweden were drawn against big rivals Denmark and won 4–3 on aggregate, qualifying for the UEFA Euro 2016. They were, however, eliminated from the group stage, losing to Italy and Belgium, drawing with the Republic of Ireland and scoring no goals of their own (their only goal was an own goal by Ciaran Clark).
On 25 July 2015, Sweden were drawn in Group A of 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification. The team scored six wins, a draw and three losses. As a result, they tied with the Netherlands in points, and claimed second place behind eventual world champions France on goal difference.

On 13 November 2017, Sweden qualified for the 2018 World Cup after a 0–0 draw away to Italy at the San Siro during the second leg of their qualification play-off match. As Sweden had won the first match 1–0, this resulted in a Sweden national team win on aggregate, making their return to the World Cup for the first time in 12 years.

At the 2018 World Cup, Sweden started its campaign by a 1–0 win over South Korea in the first match on 18 June, through a penalty goal by Andreas Granqvist, decided by the new VAR technology. Their second match on 23 June was against Germany. Ola Toivonen scored 1–0 for Sweden by lobbing the ball over the German goalkeeper Manuel Neuer in the first half. However, Marco Reus equalised to 1–1 early on in the second half. With 15 seconds remaining on the five stoppage time minutes, Toni Kroos won the game for Germany by scoring a free kick from just outside the penalty area, after a foul by Jimmy Durmaz. Despite this loss, Sweden advanced to the knockout stage top of the group with a 3–0 win over Mexico, while Germany were knocked out bottom of the group with a 2–0 loss to South Korea.

On 3 July 2018, Sweden played Switzerland in the round of 16, beating them 1–0 with a goal by Emil Forsberg, and advancing to the quarter finals for the first time since 1994. In the quarter-finals, Sweden suffered a 2–0 defeat to England and was thus knocked out.

Sweden were drawn with Turkey and Russia in the League B. Sweden started their campaign on 10 September with a 2–3 defeat against Turkey in Solna, after leading 2–1 with only a few minutes remaining. A month later, Sweden earned a point in a 0–0 draw against Russia in Kaliningrad. With two matches remaining, Sweden had to win both to top the group and to be promoted to the 2020–21 UEFA Nations League A. On 17 November, Sweden beat Turkey with 1–0 in Konya after a penalty goal from captain Andreas Granqvist. Three days later, they achieved a 2–0 victory over Russia in Solna. The two wins meant promotion for Sweden to League A and a guaranteed play-off spot for the UEFA Euro 2020, should they not qualify directly via the regular qualification process.

===2020s===

The draw for the UEFA Euro 2020 qualifying saw Sweden placed in Group F with Spain, Norway, Romania, Faroe Islands and Malta. On 15 November, Sweden defeated Romania 2–0 in Bucharest. The win meant that Sweden had secured second place in the group and a spot at UEFA Euro 2020, their sixth consecutive European championship.

For UEFA Euro 2020, Sweden were drawn in Group E together with Spain, Poland, and Slovakia. At the delayed final tournament, held in 2021, Sweden opened their campaign with an impressive 0–0 draw with Spain in Seville. Four days later, Sweden would face off against Slovakia in Saint Petersburg. The match provided no goals until the 77th minute where Emil Forsberg slotted home the winning penalty after Slovakian goalkeeper, Martin Dúbravka, took out Robin Quaison in the box, this win confirmed Sweden&#x27;s path to the knockout stages. On 23 June, Sweden finished their group campaign with a 3–2 win against Poland. Sweden would face off against Ukraine in the round of 16 on 29 June in Glasgow. The match finished 1–1 in normal time. Late in extra time, a header from Artem Dovbyk in the 120th-minute would eliminate the Swedes.

Promoted to League A, Sweden were drawn in Group A3 with Portugal, France and Croatia. Despite a 2–1 home win against Croatia, Sweden would be relegated to League B due to an inferior goal difference.

For the 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification, Sweden were drawn in Group B along with Spain, Greece, Georgia and Kosovo. On 16 March 2021, Zlatan Ibrahimović was included in the squad for the first time in almost five years, following his retirement from the national team after Euro 2016. On 25 March 2021, Sweden beat Georgia 1–0 at Friends Arena after a goal by Viktor Claesson, with Ibrahimović providing the assist. With his 117th appearance, Ibrahimović officially became Sweden&#x27;s oldest player of all time at the age of 39 years, five months and 22 days, taking over Thomas Ravelli&#x27;s record from 11 October 1997. On 2 September, Sweden beat Spain 2–1 in Solna. This was the first time Spain had been beaten in a World Cup qualifier since 1993.

On 11 November, Sweden suffered a shock 2–0 loss against Georgia, the lowest ranked team to have ever defeated Sweden. On 14 November, Sweden played the return fixture against Spain in Seville where they have to win. Despite creating the best chances to score, Sweden lost the match 1–0 after Álvaro Morata scored on a rebound in the 86th minute. This meant that Sweden finished second place in the group, and entered the play-off round as one of six seeded teams in late March 2022. On 24 March, Sweden played against Czech Republic in the play-off semi-final in Solna. The game was scoreless after 90 minutes and went into extra time, where Robin Quaison scored the winning goal. On 29 March, Sweden lost 2–0 to Poland at the Stadion Śląski due to goals from Robert Lewandowski and Piotr Zieliński and thus failed to qualify for the World Cup.

Sweden competed in League B of the Nations League against Norway, Serbia, and Slovenia. Their campaign started in a promising way with a 2–0 away win against Slovenia. However, they subsequently suffered four straight losses before only managing a draw at home to Slovenia. This meant that Sweden suffered back-to-back relegations as finished last in their group and were relegated to League C for the 2024–25 UEFA Nations League.

Their terrible Nations League form meant that Sweden realistically must qualify directly for UEFA Euro 2024 by finishing in the top two. They were drawn in Group F with Belgium, Austria, Azerbaijan, and Estonia for UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying. However, Sweden performed poorly throughout their qualifying campaign – notably suffering a shocking 3–0 loss to Azerbaijan. Furthermore, one draw and a loss against Belgium and two losses to Austria severely damaged their chances of qualification, leading to Sweden failing to qualify for Euro 2024 after Austria beat Azerbaijan 1–0 in Baku, marking their first failure to qualify for the European Championship since 1996. As a result, Janne Andersson announced he would resign as Sweden&#x27;s head coach, doing so after the final match against Estonia.

On 26 February 2024, the Swedish FA announced that former Danish player Jon Dahl Tomasson has been appointed as manager of the Sweden national team, effective from 1 March 2024. Tomasson&#x27;s contract includes the 2026 FIFA World Cup qualification and will be extended if Sweden qualifies for the World Cup. Tomasson is Sweden&#x27;s first foreign manager since George Raynor who led Sweden in the 1950 and 1958 World Cups.

== Team image ==
=== Supporters ===

Sweden national team supporters showed up first during the 1912 Summer Olympics, where they chanted &quot;Heja Sverige / friskt humör / det är det som susen gör&quot; (roughly meaning &quot;Come on, Sweden / being in good spirits is what does the trick&quot;) during the football games.

The traveling supporters for Sweden&#x27;s away games showed up for the first time in the 1974 FIFA World Cup in West Germany, and since then Sweden has always had supporters in large tournaments. In the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany, Sweden had one of the largest group of supporters during a tournament, especially during the group stage match against Paraguay with around 50,000 Sweden national team supporters in attendance, plus an additional 50,000 fans watching the game outside the stadium. The Sweden national team fans were also voted the best fans during the 2006 World Cup, due to their massive numbers, friendly attitude and love for the game.

Since 2004, &quot;Camp Sweden&quot; has organised gatherings around matches. In 2017, &quot;Gula väggen&quot; ( also started organising gatherings. Gula väggen, a limited company, had Andreas Richt – who was the son of the then head of football of the team, Lars Richt – as one of its owners. Gula väggen, which had been a common term used by different supporter groups for the Swedish fans, registered their name as a trademark. It was found Gula väggen profiles such as &quot;Kannan&quot;, &quot;GV-Sara&quot;, &quot;Hasse Kongo&quot;, and &quot;Jan-Tommy&quot; were paid to support Sweden. Camp Sweden stopped using the term Gula väggen to refer to their activities.

=== Rivalry ===

Sweden&#x27;s main rival is Denmark. The countries have played against each other 107 times, of which Sweden have won 47, drawn 20 and lost 40. The first match between the teams was an 8–0 Denmark win in May 1913. Sweden lost their first five matches against Denmark before their first win in October 1916 by the score 4–0. The first competitive match between the countries was as 1–0 win for Sweden in the group stage of UEFA Euro 1992. Both teams advanced from the group stage and Denmark went on to win the tournament. In UEFA Euro 2004 the teams drew 2–2 in the last group stage match, ensuring that both teams advanced at the expense of Italy. In the qualification for UEFA Euro 2008, Sweden were awarded a 3–0 win away against Denmark after a Danish fan invaded the pitch and attacked the referee. The reverse fixture ended in a goalless draw and Sweden qualified for the final tournament. In the qualification for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, Sweden lost both matches against Denmark by 1–0 and failed to qualify for the World Cup. In the play-offs round of the qualification for UEFA Euro 2016, Sweden defeated Denmark by 4–3 on aggregate to qualify for the final tournament. The most recent match between the countries was won by Denmark by 2–0.

=== Kit sponsorship ===
Sweden traditionally wears yellow shirts, blue shorts, and yellow socks as their home kit, and their away kit is in reverse order: blue shirts, yellow shorts, and blue socks, though the color of the shorts are interchangeable if there is any minor clash. Since 2013, their kit manufacturer is Adidas, who were also the manufacturer between 1973 and 2003. They were manufactured by Umbro in 1970 as well as between 2003 and 2013.

=== Home stadium ===
Since 2012, the Swedish national stadium is Strawberry Arena, replacing Råsunda Fotbollsstadion which was demolished. According to FIFA, Råsunda Stadion was a classic stadium, one of only two stadiums in the world, the other one being the Rose Bowl Stadium in Pasadena, California, which hosted both the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s World Cup final (1958 FIFA World Cup final and the 1995 FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup). Råsunda stadium was opened 18 September 1910, and had a capacity of only 2,000, mostly standing. It was Råsunda stadium and Valhalla stadium in Gothenburg that were the first football fields with grass used for Sweden national team football. The stadium was expanded during 1937, to a capacity of 40,000 people. It was used for the football tournament in the 1912 Summer Olympics held in Stockholm, and hosted eight games during the 1958 FIFA World Cup. At the 1992 UEFA European Championship, the stadium hosted four games and in the 1995 FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup it hosted only the final game. Ullevi in Gothenburg is used for some home games, such as the centennial game of the Swedish Football Association against England in 2004. Even other stadiums, such as Stadion in Malmö, are used for the national team.

== Results and fixtures ==

The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.


=== 2024 ===



===2025===




== Management ==

===Organisation===

===Coaching staff===

=== Manager history ===

; Chairmen of the Selection Committee

* 1908 Ludvig Kornerup
* 1909–1911 Wilhelm Friberg
* 1912 John Ohlson
* 1912–1913 Ruben Gelbord
* 1914–1915 Hugo Levin
* 1916 Frey Svenson
* 1917–1920 Anton Johanson
* 1921–1936 John Pettersson
* 1937 Carl Linde
* 1938–1942 Gustaf Carlson
* 1942 Selection Committee (caretaker)
* 1943–1956 Rudolf Kock
* 1957–1961 Eric Persson
; Head coaches

* 1962–1965 Lennart Nyman
* 1966–1970 Orvar Bergmark
* 1971–1979 Georg Ericson
* 1980–1985 Lars Arnesson
* 1986–1990 Olle Nordin
* 1990 Nisse Andersson (caretaker)
* 1991–1997 Tommy Svensson
* 1998–1999 Tommy Söderberg
* 2000–2004 Lars Lagerbäck &amp; Tommy Söderberg
* 2004–2009 Lars Lagerbäck
* 2009–2016 Erik Hamrén
* 2016–2023 Janne Andersson
* 2024 Daniel Bäckström (caretaker)
* 2024– Jon Dahl Tomasson
== Players ==

=== Current squad ===
The following 23 players were called up for 2024–25 UEFA Nations League matches against Slovakia and Azerbaijan on 16 and 19 November 2024, respectively.

&quot;Caps and goals are correct as of 19 November 2024, after the match against Azerbaijan.&quot;










=== Recent call-ups ===
The following 21 players have also been called up to the Sweden squad within the last twelve months.









;Notes
*WD = Player withdrew from the squad
=== Previous squads ===

;FIFA World Cup:
* 1934 World Cup squad
* 1938 World Cup squad
* 1950 World Cup squad
* 1958 World Cup squad
* 1970 World Cup squad
* 1974 World Cup squad
* 1978 World Cup squad
* 1990 World Cup squad
* 1994 World Cup squad
* 2002 World Cup squad
* 2006 World Cup squad
* 2018 World Cup squad

;UEFA European Championship:
* Euro 1992 squad
* Euro 2000 squad
* Euro 2004 squad
* Euro 2008 squad
* Euro 2012 squad
* Euro 2016 squad
* Euro 2020 squad

;Olympic Games:
* 1908 Olympics squad
* 1912 Olympics squad
* 1920 Olympics squad
* 1924 Olympics squad
* 1936 Olympics squad
* 1948 Olympics squad
* 1952 Olympics squad
== Player records ==

:&quot;Players in bold are still active with Sweden.&quot;

=== Most capped players ===


=== Top goalscorers ===


=== Age-related records ===
Age-related records of the Swedish national football team.

; Oldest player: 41 years, 5 months and 21 days – Zlatan Ibrahimović (0–3 against Belgium on 24 March 2023)
; Youngest debutante: 17 years, 2 months and 11 days  – Gunnar Pleijel (5–2 against Finland on 22 October 1911)
; Oldest debutante: 34 years, 9 months and 1 day – Stendy Appeltoft (3–0 against Finland on 28 August 1955)
; Longest national career: 22 years, 1 month and 24 days – Zlatan Ibrahimović (from 31 January 2001 until 24 March 2023)
; Oldest goalscorer: 37 years, 11 months and 26 days – Gunnar Gren (two goals in a 4–4 draw against Denmark on 26 October 1958)
; Youngest goalscorer: 17 years, 3 months and 22 days – Alexander Isak (one goal in a 6–0 win against Slovakia on 12 January 2017)

=== Notable captains ===

This is a list of captains who either have played 30 or more matches as team captain or have played a match as team captain in a major tournament (FIFA World Cup, UEFA Euro and Olympic Games). Note that only players who started the match as captain are included in the list.

The order for this list is by most appearances as captain, then chronological order of first captaincy.

== Competitive record ==
 Champions   Runners-up   Third place   Fourth place   Tournament held on home soil  

=== FIFA World Cup ===

=== UEFA European Championship ===

=== UEFA Nations League ===
=== Olympic Games ===

Football at the Summer Olympics was first played officially in 1908. The Olympiads between 1896 and 1980 were only open for amateur players. The 1984 and 1988 tournaments were open to players with no appearances in the FIFA World Cup. Since 1992 Olympics, the football event was changed into a tournament for under-23 teams with a maximum of three overage players. See Sweden Olympic football team for competition record from 1984 until present day.
=== Nordic Football Championship ===
=== Minor tournaments ===
== Head-to-head record ==
The following table shows Sweden&#x27;s all-time international record. The abandoned match against Denmark on 2 June 2007 here counts as a draw. Former national teams are included in their respective successor team. However, note that matches against Czechoslovakia are included in the statistics for Czech Republic, not Slovakia.
&quot;Statistics updated as of 19 November 2024.&quot;

== Honours ==
=== Major competitions ===
* FIFA World Cup
** Runners-up (1): 1958
** Third place (2): 1950, 1994
* Olympic Games
** Gold Medal (1): 1948
** Bronze Medal (2): 1924, 1952

=== Regional ===
* Nordic Football Championship
** Champions (9): 1933–36, 1937–47, 1948–51, 1952–55, 1956–59, 1960–63, 1964–67, 1968–71, 1972–77

===Summary===
== See also ==

* Denmark–Sweden football rivalry
* Football in Sweden
* Gotland official football team
* Sápmi football team
* Sweden national football B team (defunct)
* Sweden men&#x27;s national under-17 football team
* Sweden men&#x27;s national under-19 football team
* Sweden national under-21 football team
* Sweden Olympic football team
* Sweden women&#x27;s national football team

==Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==

* of the SvFF
* Sweden at FIFA
* Sweden at UEFA
* National team statistics by SvFF
* National team statistics by SFS-Bolletinen
* International results by RSSSF
* Most capped players and top goalscorers by RSSSF</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="4" end="44" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="59" end="65" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="94" end="102" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q455428" start="131" end="159" title="Swedish Football Association" label="Swedish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318821" start="183" end="201" title="football in Sweden" label="football in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138684" start="232" end="248" title="Strawberry Arena" label="Strawberry Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="252" end="257" title="Solna Municipality" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q203657" start="285" end="302" title="Jon Dahl Tomasson" label="Jon Dahl Tomasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="434" end="443" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="471" end="475" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="520" end="541" title="UEFA European Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="573" end="592" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="631" end="635" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="640" end="644" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q667937" start="715" end="735" title="Football at the 1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q748692" start="758" end="762" title="Football at the 1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q581978" start="767" end="771" title="Football at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="810" end="824" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="UEFA Euro 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="941" end="950" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q188317" start="983" end="991" title="Football at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="1037" end="1051" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="1096" end="1102" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078991" start="1114" end="1119" title="1958 FIFA World Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="1162" end="1166" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="1171" end="1175" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q131591" start="1180" end="1184" title="1938 FIFA World Cup" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="1283" end="1289" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q48780834" start="1326" end="1340" title="Idrottsplatsen" label="Idrottsplatsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="1344" end="1352" title="Göteborg" label="Göteborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="1396" end="1403" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="1424" end="1435" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="1448" end="1455" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q877411" start="1626" end="1639" title="Great Britain men&amp;#x27;s Olympic football team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="1733" end="1740" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q131591" start="1944" end="1958" title="1938 FIFA World Cup" label="1938 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="2073" end="2080" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="2092" end="2128" title="Anschluss" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s occupation of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q236014" start="2260" end="2264" title="Cuba national football team" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q677755" start="2295" end="2310" title="Harry Andersson" label="Harry Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q721072" start="2330" end="2348" title="Gustav Wetterström" label="Gustav Wetterström"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="2357" end="2366" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="2401" end="2408" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="2486" end="2492" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q186425" start="2919" end="2934" title="White Hart Lane" label="White Hart Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2938" end="2944" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258063" start="3118" end="3141" title="Denmark–Sweden football rivalry" label="archrivals from Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="3195" end="3210" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q314511" start="3378" end="3389" title="Gunnar Gren" label="Gunnar Gren"/>
<link wikidata="Q374555" start="3412" end="3425" title="Stjepan Bobek" label="Stjepan Bobek"/>
<link wikidata="Q110111" start="3441" end="3455" title="Gunnar Nordahl" label="Gunnar Nordahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="3593" end="3607" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="3976" end="3981" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="3989" end="3998" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155174" start="4233" end="4249" title="Maracanã Stadium" label="Maracanã Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377172" start="4815" end="4829" title="Stig Sundqvist" label="Stig Sundqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q749055" start="4842" end="4855" title="Bror Mellberg" label="Bror Mellberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376944" start="4871" end="4887" title="Karl-Erik Palmér" label="Karl-Erik Palmér"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="5128" end="5136" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="5666" end="5685" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q725623" start="5846" end="5861" title="Råsunda Stadium" label="Råsunda Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="5863" end="5868" title="Solna Municipality" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q363766" start="6182" end="6193" title="Kurt Hamrin" label="Kurt Hamrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189275" start="6374" end="6378" title="Soviet Union national football team" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q824352" start="6410" end="6416" title="Ullevi" label="Ullevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="6418" end="6428" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q694909" start="6631" end="6646" title="Erich Juskowiak" label="Erich Juskowiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="6764" end="6783" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="7498" end="7509" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="8770" end="8789" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765" start="8936" end="8949" title="Gelsenkirchen" label="Gelsenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10714862" start="9040" end="9069" title="Vi är svenska fotbollsgrabbar" label="Vi är svenska fotbollsgrabbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q720741" start="9095" end="9108" title="Georg Ericson" label="Georg Ericson"/>
<link wikidata="Q963850" start="9458" end="9473" title="Roland Sandberg" label="Roland Sandberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q161918" start="9489" end="9501" title="Ralf Edström" label="Ralf Edström"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="9993" end="10005" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="10092" end="10102" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q46943" start="11120" end="11139" title="1978 FIFA World Cup" label="1978 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q720741" start="11827" end="11856" title="Georg Ericson" label="Georg &amp;quot;Åby&amp;quot; Ericson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806171" start="11860" end="11891" title="Lars Arnesson" label="Lars &amp;quot;Laban&amp;quot; Arnesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q306787" start="11934" end="11943" title="Östers IF" label="Östers IF"/>
<link wikidata="Q182196" start="12014" end="12028" title="UEFA Euro 1980" label="UEFA Euro 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q184266" start="12064" end="12074" title="Luxembourg national football team" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="12119" end="12133" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="12138" end="12144" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q46934" start="12154" end="12173" title="1982 FIFA World Cup" label="1982 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182770" start="12335" end="12349" title="UEFA Euro 1984" label="UEFA Euro 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q602845" start="12447" end="12462" title="Glenn Strömberg" label="Glenn Strömberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="12674" end="12688" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375573" start="12690" end="12701" title="Olle Nordin" label="Olle Nordin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="13014" end="13028" title="UEFA Euro 1988" label="UEFA Euro 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q705590" start="13517" end="13531" title="Tommy Svensson" label="Tommy Svensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="13571" end="13585" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="UEFA Euro 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="14021" end="14035" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="14280" end="14294" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q318747" start="14365" end="14378" title="Martin Dahlin" label="Martin Dahlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179334" start="14427" end="14441" title="Henrik Larsson" label="Henrik Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q361435" start="14620" end="14632" title="Tomas Brolin" label="Tomas Brolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q352241" start="14788" end="14804" title="Kennet Andersson" label="Kennet Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="14820" end="14827" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="Q189723" start="14889" end="14901" title="Saudi Arabia national football team" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="14938" end="14944" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="15210" end="15217" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q358783" start="15442" end="15458" title="Florin Răducioiu" label="Florin Răducioiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q521803" start="15707" end="15717" title="Håkan Mild" label="Håkan Mild"/>
<link wikidata="Q313710" start="15733" end="15747" title="Thomas Ravelli" label="Thomas Ravelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q265055" start="15783" end="15796" title="Daniel Prodan" label="Daniel Prodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q443750" start="15801" end="15819" title="Miodrag Belodedici" label="Miodrag Belodedici"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="16545" end="16575" title="FIFA Men&amp;#x27;s World Rankings" label="FIFA Men&amp;#x27;s World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="16934" end="16941" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="17480" end="17489" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="France 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q724528" start="17827" end="17842" title="Tommy Söderberg" label="Tommy Söderberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="18118" end="18125" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q349848" start="18131" end="18144" title="Johan Mjällby" label="Johan Mjällby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337051" start="18228" end="18242" title="Filip De Wilde" label="Filip De Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q446846" start="18277" end="18286" title="Bart Goor" label="Bart Goor"/>
<link wikidata="Q346735" start="18310" end="18322" title="Émile Mpenza" label="Émile Mpenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="18378" end="18384" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="18437" end="18442" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q314053" start="18474" end="18489" title="Luigi Di Biagio" label="Luigi Di Biagio"/>
<link wikidata="Q179334" start="18595" end="18609" title="Henrik Larsson" label="Henrik Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q351934" start="18638" end="18654" title="Daniel Andersson (footballer, born 1977)" label="Daniel Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q624" start="18681" end="18701" title="Alessandro Del Piero" label="Alessandro Del Piero"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="18872" end="18891" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061939" start="18962" end="18976" title="group of death" label="group of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477771" start="18984" end="18991" title="2002 FIFA World Cup Group F" label="Group F"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="19028" end="19037" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="19039" end="19046" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q181930" start="19051" end="19058" title="Nigeria national football team" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q214734" start="19107" end="19119" title="Sol Campbell" label="Sol Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="19198" end="19211" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q258214" start="19258" end="19278" title="Niclas Alexandersson" label="Niclas Alexandersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214498" start="19332" end="19344" title="David Seaman" label="David Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q144161" start="19418" end="19433" title="Julius Aghahowa" label="Julius Aghahowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179334" start="19536" end="19550" title="Henrik Larsson" label="Henrik Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q296219" start="19853" end="19868" title="Anders Svensson" label="Anders Svensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q495810" start="19908" end="19925" title="Andreas Andersson (footballer, born 1974)" label="Andreas Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q352183" start="19996" end="20010" title="Mattias Jonson" label="Mattias Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q296965" start="20085" end="20097" title="Ariel Ortega" label="Ariel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q342214" start="20115" end="20128" title="Magnus Hedman" label="Magnus Hedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q160206" start="20167" end="20180" title="Hernán Crespo" label="Hernán Crespo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207441" start="20542" end="20549" title="Senegal national football team" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316799" start="20663" end="20675" title="Henri Camara" label="Henri Camara"/>
<link wikidata="Q46896" start="20777" end="20795" title="Zlatan Ibrahimović" label="Zlatan Ibrahimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q504393" start="20995" end="21005" title="Tony Sylva" label="Tony Sylva"/>
<link wikidata="Q180845" start="21667" end="21675" title="Bulgaria national football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10560" start="21722" end="21739" title="Freddie Ljungberg" label="Freddie Ljungberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q315459" start="21946" end="21956" title="Erik Edman" label="Erik Edman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313610" start="22027" end="22041" title="Marcus Allbäck" label="Marcus Allbäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="22323" end="22328" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180993" start="22399" end="22414" title="Antonio Cassano" label="Antonio Cassano"/>
<link wikidata="Q168287" start="22476" end="22493" title="Christian Panucci" label="Christian Panucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q205773" start="22543" end="22559" title="Andreas Isaksson" label="Andreas Isaksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="22766" end="22773" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q352183" start="22993" end="23007" title="Mattias Jonson" label="Mattias Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192491" start="23563" end="23576" title="Olof Mellberg" label="Olof Mellberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="23626" end="23643" title="Edwin van der Sar" label="Edwin van der Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43913" start="23715" end="23727" title="Arjen Robben" label="Arjen Robben"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="23827" end="23834" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837240" start="23929" end="23936" title="2006 FIFA World Cup Group B" label="Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="23951" end="23958" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q172020" start="23960" end="23968" title="Paraguay national football team" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q192149" start="23973" end="23992" title="Trinidad and Tobago national football team" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q192149" start="24203" end="24222" title="Trinidad and Tobago national football team" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q172020" start="24312" end="24320" title="Paraguay national football team" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="24536" end="24543" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q184946" start="24556" end="24564" title="Joe Cole" label="Joe Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q313610" start="24643" end="24657" title="Marcus Allbäck" label="Marcus Allbäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q459830" start="24714" end="24728" title="Steven Gerrard" label="Steven Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="25044" end="25051" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q134976" start="25088" end="25102" title="Lukas Podolski" label="Lukas Podolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q314756" start="25113" end="25124" title="Teddy Lučić" label="Teddy Lučić"/>
<link wikidata="Q315317" start="25163" end="25175" title="Carlos Eugênio Simon" label="Carlos Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q352183" start="25330" end="25344" title="Mattias Jonson" label="Mattias Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25515" end="25522" title="UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying#Group F" label="Group F"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="25530" end="25535" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q241864" start="25559" end="25565" title="UEFA Euro 2008" label="finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478350" start="25625" end="25640" title="Denmark v Sweden (UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying)" label="abandoned match"/>
<link wikidata="Q241864" start="25917" end="25926" title="UEFA Euro 2008" label="Euro 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="25982" end="25988" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q299435" start="26047" end="26061" title="Petter Hansson" label="Petter Hansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83006" start="26169" end="26180" title="David Villa" label="David Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q313610" start="26355" end="26369" title="Marcus Allbäck" label="Marcus Allbäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q258214" start="26374" end="26394" title="Niclas Alexandersson" label="Niclas Alexandersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193596" start="26484" end="26517" title="2010 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="2010 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="26570" end="26576" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q214124" start="26732" end="26745" title="Kim Källström" label="Kim Källström"/>
<link wikidata="Q318533" start="26750" end="26763" title="Samuel Holmén" label="Samuel Holmén"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="26818" end="26827" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="26835" end="26840" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q213616" start="26934" end="26951" title="Thomas Kahlenberg" label="Thomas Kahlenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q317293" start="26981" end="26995" title="Mikael Nilsson (footballer, born 1978)" label="Mikael Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214124" start="26997" end="27010" title="Kim Källström" label="Kim Källström"/>
<link wikidata="Q33003" start="27256" end="27270" title="Parken Stadium" label="Parken Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q310703" start="27308" end="27321" title="Jakob Poulsen" label="Jakob Poulsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q316026" start="27523" end="27537" title="Lars Lagerbäck" label="Lars Lagerbäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q357870" start="27551" end="27562" title="Erik Hamrén" label="Erik Hamrén"/>
<link wikidata="Q351934" start="27692" end="27708" title="Daniel Andersson (footballer, born 1977)" label="Daniel Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q317293" start="27710" end="27724" title="Mikael Nilsson (footballer, born 1978)" label="Mikael Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179334" start="27729" end="27743" title="Henrik Larsson" label="Henrik Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="27986" end="27995" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="Euro 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q357870" start="28027" end="28038" title="Erik Hamrén" label="Erik Hamrén"/>
<link wikidata="Q752354" start="28082" end="28089" title="UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying Group E" label="Group E"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="28098" end="28105" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q185350" start="28110" end="28120" title="San Marino national football team" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="28257" end="28265" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q276284" start="28565" end="28586" title="Christian Wilhelmsson" label="Christian Wilhelmsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="28972" end="28979" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170403" start="28981" end="28988" title="Ukraine national football team" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="28993" end="28999" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q41244" start="29188" end="29205" title="Andriy Shevchenko" label="Andriy Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q159159" start="29450" end="29462" title="Andy Carroll" label="Andy Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q185208" start="29569" end="29581" title="Glen Johnson" label="Glen Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29516" start="29704" end="29716" title="Theo Walcott" label="Theo Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q188457" start="29721" end="29734" title="Danny Welbeck" label="Danny Welbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q83638" start="29969" end="29986" title="Sebastian Larsson" label="Sebastian Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30177" end="30184" title="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group C" label="Group C"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="30192" end="30211" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q317077" start="30212" end="30222" title="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="30254" end="30261" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30308" end="30320" title="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA second round" label="second round"/>
<link wikidata="Q151374" start="30511" end="30525" title="Olympiastadion (Berlin)" label="Olympiastadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138684" start="30647" end="30660" title="Friends Arena" label="Friends Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q616031" start="30923" end="30940" title="FIFA Puskás Award" label="FIFA Puskás Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="31015" end="31022" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q312935" start="31046" end="31059" title="Martin Olsson" label="Martin Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138684" start="31139" end="31152" title="Friends Arena" label="Friends Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="31178" end="31197" title="FIFA World Rankings" label="FIFA World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="31344" end="31352" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11571" start="31439" end="31456" title="Cristiano Ronaldo" label="Cristiano Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="31523" end="31529" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="31610" end="31615" title="Solna Municipality" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="31973" end="31982" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q296219" start="32042" end="32057" title="Anders Svensson" label="Anders Svensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15808405" start="32113" end="32120" title="UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying Group G" label="Group G"/>
<link wikidata="Q189571" start="32128" end="32142" title="UEFA Euro 2016" label="UEFA Euro 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q12342217" start="32143" end="32153" title="UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying" label="qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="32205" end="32212" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q726080" start="32275" end="32281" title="Russia national football team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186690" start="32388" end="32401" title="Liechtenstein national football team" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="32521" end="32527" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q189018" start="32683" end="32693" title="Montenegro national football team" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="32976" end="32983" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q189571" start="33029" end="33043" title="UEFA Euro 2016" label="UEFA Euro 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q18533" start="33222" end="33230" title="own goal" label="own goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q350976" start="33234" end="33246" title="Ciaran Clark" label="Ciaran Clark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33287" end="33294" title="2018 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group A" label="Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q8346779" start="33298" end="33331" title="2018 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="2018 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="33610" end="33615" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133566" start="33623" end="33631" title="San Siro" label="San Siro"/>
<link wikidata="Q543842" start="33929" end="33940" title="South Korea national football team" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178270" start="33998" end="34015" title="Andreas Granqvist" label="Andreas Granqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406836" start="34036" end="34039" title="Video assistant referee" label="VAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q11956" start="34103" end="34115" title="Ola Toivonen" label="Ola Toivonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q107365" start="34185" end="34197" title="Manuel Neuer" label="Manuel Neuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152377" start="34226" end="34236" title="Marco Reus" label="Marco Reus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131234" start="34344" end="34354" title="Toni Kroos" label="Toni Kroos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365667" start="34455" end="34467" title="Jimmy Durmaz" label="Jimmy Durmaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="34563" end="34569" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="34685" end="34696" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34730" end="34733" title="2018 FIFA World Cup knockout stage#Sweden vs Switzerland" label="1–0"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371234" start="34749" end="34762" title="Emil Forsberg" label="Emil Forsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="34886" end="34893" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="34944" end="34950" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q726080" start="34955" end="34961" title="Russia national football team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40501109" start="34969" end="34977" title="2018–19 UEFA Nations League B" label="League B"/>
<link wikidata="Q72676384" start="35297" end="35326" title="2020–21 UEFA Nations League A" label="2020–21 UEFA Nations League A"/>
<link wikidata="Q178270" start="35415" end="35432" title="Andreas Granqvist" label="Andreas Granqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="35593" end="35607" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="UEFA Euro 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q23688132" start="35712" end="35737" title="UEFA Euro 2020 qualifying" label="UEFA Euro 2020 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="35772" end="35777" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="35779" end="35785" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="35787" end="35794" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q200688" start="35796" end="35809" title="Faroe Islands national football team" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q188782" start="35814" end="35819" title="Malta national football team" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="35868" end="35877" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="36025" end="36039" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="UEFA Euro 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="36091" end="36097" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174512" start="36103" end="36111" title="Slovakia national football team" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="36231" end="36238" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="36299" end="36315" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q510401" start="36448" end="36463" title="Martin Dúbravka" label="Martin Dúbravka"/>
<link wikidata="Q170403" start="36672" end="36679" title="Ukraine national football team" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="36713" end="36720" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q20066885" start="36795" end="36807" title="Artem Dovbyk" label="Artem Dovbyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771590" start="37067" end="37100" title="2022 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="2022 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770" start="38111" end="38124" title="Álvaro Morata" label="Álvaro Morata"/>
<link wikidata="Q483868" start="38337" end="38351" title="Czech Republic national football team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q599592" start="38546" end="38560" title="Stadion Śląski" label="Stadion Śląski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197034" start="38602" end="38617" title="Piotr Zieliński" label="Piotr Zieliński"/>
<link wikidata="Q111889154" start="39067" end="39094" title="2024–25 UEFA Nations League" label="2024–25 UEFA Nations League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098367" start="39190" end="39204" title="UEFA Euro 2024" label="UEFA Euro 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q180800" start="39284" end="39294" title="Azerbaijan national football team" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186914" start="39300" end="39307" title="Estonia national football team" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672702" start="39312" end="39337" title="UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying" label="UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="39757" end="39761" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q203657" start="39968" end="39985" title="Jon Dahl Tomasson" label="Jon Dahl Tomasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56377818" start="40112" end="40145" title="2026 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="2026 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508164" start="40260" end="40273" title="George Raynor" label="George Raynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="42023" end="42030" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="42417" end="42431" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="UEFA Euro 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="42520" end="42534" title="UEFA Euro 2004" label="UEFA Euro 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="42637" end="42642" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29185" start="42651" end="42664" title="UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q241864" start="42669" end="42683" title="UEFA Euro 2008" label="UEFA Euro 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478350" start="42692" end="42735" title="Denmark v Sweden (UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying)" label="were awarded a 3–0 win away against Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q211814" start="42898" end="42911" title="2010 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="42920" end="42939" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q12342217" start="43060" end="43073" title="UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q189571" start="43078" end="43092" title="UEFA Euro 2016" label="UEFA Euro 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="43564" end="43570" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q652047" start="43652" end="43657" title="Umbro" label="Umbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138684" start="43766" end="43782" title="Strawberry Arena" label="Strawberry Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q725623" start="43794" end="43817" title="Råsunda Stadium" label="Råsunda Fotbollsstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q582280" start="43961" end="43978" title="Rose Bowl (stadium)" label="Rose Bowl Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="43982" end="44002" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="44071" end="44096" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958 FIFA World Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q642445" start="44105" end="44137" title="1995 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="1995 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="44499" end="44519" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="44601" end="44632" title="1992 UEFA European Championship" label="1992 UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q824352" start="44739" end="44745" title="Ullevi" label="Ullevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="44749" end="44759" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="44861" end="44868" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q867234" start="44907" end="44914" title="Stadion, Malmö" label="Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211" start="44918" end="44923" title="Malmö" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919678" start="45270" end="45285" title="Ludvig Kornerup" label="Ludvig Kornerup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739326" start="45298" end="45313" title="Wilhelm Friberg" label="Wilhelm Friberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45321" end="45332" title="John Ohlson" label="John Ohlson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45345" end="45358" title="Ruben Gelbord" label="Ruben Gelbord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948554" start="45371" end="45381" title="Hugo Levin" label="Hugo Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503288" start="45389" end="45401" title="Frey Svenson" label="Frey Svenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q590732" start="45414" end="45428" title="Anton Johanson" label="Anton Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563494" start="45441" end="45456" title="John Pettersson (football manager)" label="John Pettersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q97610101" start="45464" end="45474" title="Carl Linde (football manager)" label="Carl Linde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555412" start="45487" end="45501" title="Gustaf Carlson (footballer)" label="Gustaf Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q197772" start="45553" end="45564" title="Putte Kock" label="Rudolf Kock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351553" start="45577" end="45589" title="Eric Persson" label="Eric Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817981" start="45618" end="45631" title="Lennart Nyman" label="Lennart Nyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q721360" start="45644" end="45658" title="Orvar Bergmark" label="Orvar Bergmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q720741" start="45671" end="45684" title="Georg Ericson" label="Georg Ericson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806171" start="45697" end="45710" title="Lars Arnesson" label="Lars Arnesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375573" start="45723" end="45734" title="Olle Nordin" label="Olle Nordin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992250" start="45742" end="45757" title="Nisse Andersson" label="Nisse Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q705590" start="45782" end="45796" title="Tommy Svensson" label="Tommy Svensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q724528" start="45809" end="45824" title="Tommy Söderberg" label="Tommy Söderberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q316026" start="45837" end="45851" title="Lars Lagerbäck" label="Lars Lagerbäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q724528" start="45858" end="45873" title="Tommy Söderberg" label="Tommy Söderberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q316026" start="45886" end="45900" title="Lars Lagerbäck" label="Lars Lagerbäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q357870" start="45913" end="45924" title="Erik Hamrén" label="Erik Hamrén"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130555" start="45937" end="45952" title="Janne Andersson" label="Janne Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q84315252" start="45960" end="45976" title="Daniel Bäckström (footballer)" label="Daniel Bäckström"/>
<link wikidata="Q203657" start="45997" end="46014" title="Jon Dahl Tomasson" label="Jon Dahl Tomasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q118930003" start="46096" end="46123" title="2024–25 UEFA Nations League C" label="2024–25 UEFA Nations League"/>
<link wikidata="Q174512" start="46140" end="46148" title="Slovakia national football team" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180800" start="46153" end="46163" title="Azerbaijan national football team" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180800" start="46288" end="46298" title="Azerbaijan national football team" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46538" end="46558" title="1934 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1934 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46561" end="46581" title="1938 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1938 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46584" end="46604" title="1950 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1950 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46607" end="46627" title="1958 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1958 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46630" end="46650" title="1970 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1970 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46653" end="46673" title="1974 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1974 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46676" end="46696" title="1978 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1978 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46699" end="46719" title="1990 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1990 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46722" end="46742" title="1994 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="1994 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46745" end="46765" title="2002 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="2002 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46768" end="46788" title="2006 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="2006 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46791" end="46811" title="2018 FIFA World Cup squads#Sweden" label="2018 World Cup squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46844" end="46859" title="UEFA Euro 1992 squads#Sweden" label="Euro 1992 squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46862" end="46877" title="UEFA Euro 2000 squads#Sweden" label="Euro 2000 squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46880" end="46895" title="UEFA Euro 2004 squads#Sweden" label="Euro 2004 squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46898" end="46913" title="UEFA Euro 2008 squads#Sweden" label="Euro 2008 squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46916" end="46931" title="UEFA Euro 2012 squads#Sweden" label="Euro 2012 squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46934" end="46949" title="UEFA Euro 2016 squads#Sweden" label="Euro 2016 squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46952" end="46967" title="UEFA Euro 2020 squads#Sweden" label="Euro 2020 squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46987" end="47006" title="Football at the 1908 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s team squads#Sweden" label="1908 Olympics squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47009" end="47028" title="Football at the 1912 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s team squads#Sweden" label="1912 Olympics squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47031" end="47050" title="Football at the 1920 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s team squads#Sweden" label="1920 Olympics squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47053" end="47072" title="Football at the 1924 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s team squads#Sweden" label="1924 Olympics squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47075" end="47094" title="Football at the 1936 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s team squads#Sweden" label="1936 Olympics squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47097" end="47116" title="Football at the 1948 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s team squads#Sweden" label="1948 Olympics squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47119" end="47138" title="Football at the 1952 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s team squads#Sweden" label="1952 Olympics squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q46896" start="47415" end="47433" title="Zlatan Ibrahimović" label="Zlatan Ibrahimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="47447" end="47454" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47529" end="47543" title="Gunnar Pleijel" label="Gunnar Pleijel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186532" start="47557" end="47564" title="Finland national football team" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q104186504" start="47636" end="47652" title="Stendy Appeltoft" label="Stendy Appeltoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q186532" start="47666" end="47673" title="Finland national football team" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46896" start="47752" end="47770" title="Zlatan Ibrahimović" label="Zlatan Ibrahimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q314511" start="47869" end="47880" title="Gunnar Gren" label="Gunnar Gren"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="47914" end="47921" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q23759917" start="47998" end="48012" title="Alexander Isak" label="Alexander Isak"/>
<link wikidata="Q174512" start="48044" end="48052" title="Slovakia national football team" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188317" start="48704" end="48735" title="Football at the Summer Olympics" label="Football at the Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q798442" start="48767" end="48771" title="Football at the 1908 Summer Olympics" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991269" start="48828" end="48835" title="Amateur sports" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="48923" end="48937" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q748635" start="48945" end="48958" title="Football at the 1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q113988006" start="49052" end="49067" title="List of overage players in Olympic football" label="overage players"/>
<link wikidata="Q16581726" start="49073" end="49101" title="Sweden Olympic football team" label="Sweden Olympic football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478350" start="49318" end="49333" title="Denmark v Sweden (UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying)" label="abandoned match"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49388" end="49409" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s national association football teams#National football teams representing former nations" label="Former national teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="49494" end="49508" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483868" start="49544" end="49558" title="Czech Republic national football team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174512" start="49564" end="49572" title="Slovakia national football team" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="49673" end="49687" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="49707" end="49711" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="49732" end="49736" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="49738" end="49742" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q188317" start="49745" end="49758" title="Football at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q667937" start="49778" end="49782" title="Football at the 1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q748692" start="49804" end="49808" title="Football at the 1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q581978" start="49810" end="49814" title="Football at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282377" start="49835" end="49863" title="Nordic Football Championship" label="Nordic Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345125" start="49882" end="49889" title="1933–36 Nordic Football Championship" label="1933–36"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345081" start="49891" end="49898" title="1937–47 Nordic Football Championship" label="1937–47"/>
<link wikidata="Q572756" start="49900" end="49907" title="1948–51 Nordic Football Championship" label="1948–51"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998232" start="49909" end="49916" title="1952–55 Nordic Football Championship" label="1952–55"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998238" start="49918" end="49925" title="1956–59 Nordic Football Championship" label="1956–59"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998234" start="49927" end="49934" title="1960–63 Nordic Football Championship" label="1960–63"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507384" start="49936" end="49943" title="1964–67 Nordic Football Championship" label="1964–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998248" start="49945" end="49952" title="1968–71 Nordic Football Championship" label="1968–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998255" start="49954" end="49961" title="1972–77 Nordic Football Championship" label="1972–77"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258063" start="49995" end="50026" title="Denmark–Sweden football rivalry" label="Denmark–Sweden football rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318821" start="50029" end="50047" title="Football in Sweden" label="Football in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428277" start="50050" end="50080" title="Gotland official football team" label="Gotland official football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047912" start="50083" end="50102" title="Sápmi football team" label="Sápmi football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q10685864" start="50105" end="50136" title="Sweden national football B team" label="Sweden national football B team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590410" start="50149" end="50198" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national under-17 football team" label="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national under-17 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255212" start="50201" end="50250" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national under-19 football team" label="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national under-19 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255267" start="50253" end="50291" title="Sweden national under-21 football team" label="Sweden national under-21 football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16581726" start="50294" end="50322" title="Sweden Olympic football team" label="Sweden Olympic football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q726066" start="50325" end="50367" title="Sweden women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden women&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q455428" start="50427" end="50431" title="Swedish Football Association" label="SvFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="50444" end="50448" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="50461" end="50465" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q455428" start="50496" end="50500" title="Swedish Football Association" label="SvFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q770608" start="50573" end="50578" title="Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation" label="RSSSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q770608" start="50624" end="50629" title="Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation" label="RSSSF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="578469" wikidata="Q5226156" url="?curid=578469" title="Theory of Games and Economic Behavior">
<text>Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, published in 1944 by Princeton University Press, is a book by mathematician John von Neumann and economist Oskar Morgenstern which is considered the groundbreaking text that created the interdisciplinary research field of game theory. In the introduction of its 60th anniversary commemorative edition from the Princeton University Press, the book is described as &quot;the classic work upon which modern-day game theory is based.&quot;

==Overview==
The book is based partly on earlier research by von Neumann, published in 1928 under the German title &quot;Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele&quot; (&quot;On the Theory of Board Games&quot;).

The derivation of expected utility from its axioms appeared in an appendix to the Second Edition (1947). Von Neumann and Morgenstern used objective probabilities, supposing that all the agents had the same probability distribution, as a convenience. However, Neumann and Morgenstern mentioned that a theory of subjective probability could be provided, and this task was completed by Jimmie Savage in 1954 and Johann Pfanzagl in 1967. Savage extended von Neumann and Morgenstern&#x27;s axioms of rational preferences to endogenize probability and make it subjective. He then used Bayes&#x27; theorem to update these subject probabilities in light of new information, thus linking rational choice and inference.

==See also==
*
* 
* Commemorative edition of the book &quot;Theory of Games and Economic Behavior&quot;
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, full text at archive.org (public domain)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="60" end="86" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="101" end="114" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="115" end="131" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="136" end="145" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q94028" start="146" end="163" title="Oskar Morgenstern" label="Oskar Morgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="261" end="272" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319304" start="702" end="718" title="expected utility" label="expected utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="789" end="800" title="John von Neumann" label="Von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q94028" start="805" end="816" title="Oskar Morgenstern" label="Morgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q812534" start="994" end="1016" title="subjective probability" label="subjective probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q374341" start="1067" end="1080" title="Leonard Jimmie Savage" label="Jimmie Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q102079805" start="1093" end="1108" title="Johann Pfanzagl" label="Johann Pfanzagl"/>
<link wikidata="Q182505" start="1263" end="1282" title="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
</links>
</doc>
