<doc id="584911" wikidata="Q789762" url="?curid=584911" title="External ballistics">
<text>External ballistics or exterior ballistics is the part of ballistics that deals with the behavior of a projectile in flight. The projectile may be powered or un-powered, guided or unguided, spin or fin stabilized, flying through an atmosphere or in the vacuum of space, but most certainly flying under the influence of a gravitational field.

Gun-launched projectiles may be unpowered, deriving all their velocity from the propellant&#x27;s ignition until the projectile exits the gun barrel. However, exterior ballistics analysis also deals with the trajectories of rocket-assisted gun-launched projectiles and gun-launched rockets; and rockets that acquire all their trajectory velocity from the interior ballistics of their on-board propulsion system, either a rocket motor or air-breathing engine, both during their boost phase and after motor burnout. External ballistics is also concerned with the free-flight of other projectiles, such as balls, arrows etc.

==Forces acting on the projectile==
When in flight, the main or major forces acting on the projectile are gravity, drag, and if present, wind; if in powered flight, thrust; and if guided, the forces imparted by the control surfaces.

In small arms external ballistics applications, gravity imparts a downward acceleration on the projectile, causing it to drop from the line-of-sight. Drag, or the air resistance, decelerates the projectile with a force proportional to the square of the velocity. Wind makes the projectile deviate from its trajectory. During flight, gravity, drag, and wind have a major impact on the path of the projectile, and must be accounted for when predicting how the projectile will travel.

For medium to longer ranges and flight times, besides gravity, air resistance and wind, several intermediate or meso variables described in the external factors paragraph have to be taken into account for small arms. Meso variables can become significant for firearms users that have to deal with angled shot scenarios or extended ranges, but are seldom relevant at common hunting and target shooting distances.

For long to very long small arms target ranges and flight times, minor effects and forces such as the ones described in the long range factors paragraph become important and have to be taken into account. The practical effects of these minor variables are generally irrelevant for most firearms users, since normal group scatter at short and medium ranges prevails over the influence these effects exert on projectile trajectories.

At extremely long ranges, artillery must fire projectiles along trajectories that are not even approximately straight; they are closer to parabolic, although air resistance affects this. Extreme long range projectiles are subject to significant deflections, depending on circumstances, from the line toward the target; and all external factors and long range factors must be taken into account when aiming. In very large-calibre artillery cases, like the Paris Gun, very subtle effects that are not covered in this article can further refine aiming solutions.

In the case of ballistic missiles, the altitudes involved have a significant effect as well, with part of the flight taking place in a near-vacuum well above a rotating Earth, steadily moving the target from where it was at launch time.

===Stabilizing non-spherical projectiles during flight===
Two methods can be employed to stabilize non-spherical projectiles during flight:
* Projectiles like arrows or arrow like sabots such as the M829 Armor-Piercing, Fin-Stabilized, Discarding Sabot (APFSDS) achieve stability by forcing their center of pressure (CP) behind their center of mass (CM) with tail surfaces. The CP behind the CM condition yields stable projectile flight, meaning the projectile will not overturn during flight through the atmosphere due to aerodynamic forces.
* Projectiles like small arms bullets and artillery shells must deal with their CP being in front of their CM, which destabilizes these projectiles during flight. To stabilize such projectiles the projectile is spun around its longitudinal (leading to trailing) axis. The spinning mass creates gyroscopic forces that keep the bullet&#x27;s length axis resistant to the destabilizing overturning torque of the CP being in front of the CM.

==Main effects in external ballistics==

===Projectile/bullet drop and projectile path===
The effect of gravity on a projectile in flight is often referred to as projectile drop or bullet drop. It is important to understand the effect of gravity when zeroing the sighting components of a gun. To plan for projectile drop and compensate properly, one must understand parabolic shaped trajectories.

====Projectile/bullet drop====
In order for a projectile to impact any distant target, the barrel must be inclined to a positive elevation angle relative to the target. This is due to the fact that the projectile will begin to respond to the effects of gravity the instant it is free from the mechanical constraints of the bore. The imaginary line down the center axis of the bore and out to infinity is called the line of departure and is the line on which the projectile leaves the barrel. Due to the effects of gravity a projectile can never impact a target higher than the line of departure. When a positively inclined projectile travels downrange, it arcs below the line of departure as it is being deflected off its initial path by gravity. Projectile/Bullet drop is defined as the vertical distance of the projectile below the line of departure from the bore. Even when the line of departure is tilted upward or downward, projectile drop is still defined as the distance between the bullet and the line of departure at any point along the trajectory. Projectile drop does not describe the actual trajectory of the projectile. Knowledge of projectile drop however is useful when conducting a direct comparison of two different projectiles regarding the shape of their trajectories, comparing the effects of variables such as velocity and drag behavior.

====Projectile/bullet path====
For hitting a distant target an appropriate positive elevation angle is required that is achieved by angling the line of sight from the shooter&#x27;s eye through the centerline of the sighting system downward toward the line of departure. This can be accomplished by simply adjusting the sights down mechanically, or by securing the entire sighting system to a sloped mounting having a known downward slope, or by a combination of both. This procedure has the effect of elevating the muzzle when the barrel must be subsequently raised to align the sights with the target. A projectile leaving a muzzle at a given elevation angle follows a ballistic trajectory whose characteristics are dependent upon various factors such as muzzle velocity, gravity, and aerodynamic drag. This ballistic trajectory is referred to as the bullet path. If the projectile is spin stabilized, aerodynamic forces will also predictably arc the trajectory slightly to the right, if the rifling employs &quot;right-hand twist.&quot; Some barrels are cut with left-hand twist, and the bullet will arc to the left, as a result. Therefore, to compensate for this path deviation, the sights also have to be adjusted left or right, respectively. A constant wind also predictably affects the bullet path, pushing it slightly left or right, and a little bit more up and down, depending on the wind direction. The magnitude of these deviations are also affected by whether the bullet is on the upward or downward slope of the trajectory, due to a phenomenon called &quot;yaw of repose,&quot; where a spinning bullet tends to steadily and predictably align slightly off center from its point mass trajectory. Nevertheless, each of these trajectory perturbations are predictable once the projectile aerodynamic coefficients are established, through a combination of detailed analytical modeling and test range measurements.

Projectile/bullet path analysis is of great use to shooters because it allows them to establish ballistic tables that will predict how much vertical elevation and horizontal deflection corrections must be applied to the sight line for shots at various known distances. The most detailed ballistic tables are developed for long range artillery and are based on six-degree-of-freedom trajectory analysis, which accounts for aerodynamic behavior along the three axial directions—elevation, range, and deflection—and the three rotational directions—pitch, yaw, and spin. For small arms applications, trajectory modeling can often be simplified to calculations involving only four of these degrees-of-freedom, lumping the effects of pitch, yaw and spin into the effect of a yaw-of-repose to account for trajectory deflection. Once detailed range tables are established, shooters can relatively quickly adjust sights based on the range to target, wind, air temperature and humidity, and other geometric considerations, such as terrain elevation differences.

Projectile path values are determined by both the sight height, or the distance of the line of sight above the bore centerline, and the range at which the sights are zeroed, which in turn determines the elevation angle. A projectile following a ballistic trajectory has both forward and vertical motion. Forward motion is slowed due to air resistance, and in point mass modeling the vertical motion is dependent on a combination of the elevation angle and gravity. Initially, the projectile is rising with respect to the line of sight or the horizontal sighting plane. The projectile eventually reaches its apex (highest point in the trajectory parabola) where the vertical speed component decays to zero under the effect of gravity, and then begins to descend, eventually impacting the earth. The farther the distance to the intended target, the greater the elevation angle and the higher the apex.

The projectile path crosses the horizontal sighting plane two times. The point closest to the gun occurs while the bullet is climbing through the line of sight and is called the near zero. The second point occurs as the projectile is descending through the line of sight. It is called the far zero and defines the current sight in distance for the gun. Projectile path is described numerically as distances above or below the horizontal sighting plane at various points along the trajectory. This is in contrast to projectile drop which is referenced to the plane containing the line of departure regardless of the elevation angle. Since each of these two parameters uses a different reference datum, significant confusion can result because even though a projectile is tracking well below the line of departure it can still be gaining actual and significant height with respect to the line of sight as well as the surface of the Earth in the case of a horizontal or near horizontal shot taken over flat terrain.

====Maximum point-blank range and battle zero====
Knowledge of the projectile drop and path has some practical uses to shooters even if it does not describe the actual trajectory of the projectile. For example, if the vertical projectile position over a certain range reach is within the vertical height of the target area the shooter wants to hit, the point of aim does not necessarily need to be adjusted over that range; the projectile is considered to have a sufficiently flat point-blank range trajectory for that particular target. Also known as &quot;battle zero&quot;, maximum point-blank range is also of importance to the military. Soldiers are instructed to fire at any target within this range by simply placing their weapon&#x27;s sights on the center of mass of the enemy target. Any errors in range estimation are tactically irrelevant, as a well-aimed shot will hit the torso of the enemy soldier. The current trend for elevated sights and higher-velocity cartridges in assault rifles is in part due to a desire to extend the maximum point-blank range, which makes the rifle easier to use.

===Drag resistance===
Mathematical models, such as computational fluid dynamics, are used for calculating the effects of drag or air resistance; they are quite complex and not yet completely reliable, but research is ongoing. The most reliable method, therefore, of establishing the necessary projectile aerodynamic properties to properly describe flight trajectories is by empirical measurement.

===Fixed drag curve models generated for standard-shaped projectiles===
Use of ballistics tables or ballistics software based on the Mayevski/Siacci method and G1 drag model, introduced in 1881, are the most common method used to work with external ballistics. Projectiles are described by a ballistic coefficient, or BC, which combines the air resistance of the bullet shape (the drag coefficient) and its sectional density (a function of mass and bullet diameter).

The deceleration due to drag that a projectile with mass &quot;m&quot;, velocity &quot;v&quot;, and diameter &quot;d&quot; will experience is proportional to 1/BC, 1/&quot;m&quot;, &quot;v²&quot; and &quot;d²&quot;. The BC gives the ratio of ballistic efficiency compared to the standard G1 projectile, which is a fictitious projectile with a flat base, a length of 3.28 calibers/diameters, and a 2 calibers/diameters radius tangential curve for the point.
The G1 standard projectile originates from the &quot;C&quot; standard reference projectile defined by the German steel, ammunition and armaments manufacturer Krupp in 1881. The G1 model standard projectile has a BC of 1. The French Gâvre Commission decided to use this projectile as their first reference projectile, giving the G1 name.

Sporting bullets, with a calibre &quot;d&quot; ranging from 0.177 to 0.50 inches (4.50 to 12.7 mm), have G1 BC&#x27;s in the range 0.12 to slightly over 1.00, with 1.00 being the most aerodynamic, and 0.12 being the least. Very-low-drag bullets with BC&#x27;s ≥ 1.10 can be designed and produced on CNC precision lathes out of mono-metal rods, but they often have to be fired from custom made full bore rifles with special barrels.

Sectional density is a very important aspect of a projectile or bullet, and is for a round projectile like a bullet the ratio of frontal surface area (half the bullet diameter squared, times pi) to bullet mass. Since, for a given bullet shape, frontal surface increases as the square of the calibre, and mass increases as the cube of the diameter, then sectional density grows linearly with bore diameter. Since BC combines shape and sectional density, a half scale model of the G1 projectile will have a BC of 0.5, and a quarter scale model will have a BC of 0.25.

Since different projectile shapes will respond differently to changes in velocity (particularly between supersonic and subsonic velocities), a BC provided by a bullet manufacturer will be an average BC that represents the common range of velocities for that bullet. For rifle bullets, this will probably be a supersonic velocity, for pistol bullets it will probably be subsonic. For projectiles that travel through the supersonic, transonic and subsonic flight regimes BC is not well approximated by a single constant, but is considered to be a function &quot;BC(M)&quot; of the Mach number M; here M equals the projectile velocity divided by the speed of sound. During the flight of the projectile the M will decrease, and therefore (in most cases) the BC will also decrease.

Most ballistic tables or software takes for granted that one specific drag function correctly describes the drag and hence the flight characteristics of a bullet related to its ballistics coefficient. Those models do not differentiate between wadcutter, flat-based, spitzer, boat-tail, very-low-drag, etc. bullet types or shapes. They assume one invariable drag function as indicated by the published BC.

Several drag curve models optimized for several standard projectile shapes are however available. The resulting fixed drag curve models for several standard projectile shapes or types are referred to as the:

* G1 or Ingalls (flatbase with 2 caliber (blunt) nose ogive - by far the most popular)
* G2 (Aberdeen J projectile)
* G5 (short 7.5° boat-tail, 6.19 calibers long tangent ogive)
* G6 (flatbase, 6 calibers long secant ogive)
* G7 (long 7.5° boat-tail, 10 calibers tangent ogive, preferred by some manufacturers for very-low-drag bullets)
* G8 (flatbase, 10 calibers long secant ogive)
* GL (blunt lead nose)

How different speed regimes affect .338 calibre rifle bullets can be seen in the .338 Lapua Magnum product brochure which states Doppler radar established G1 BC data. The reason for publishing data like in this brochure is that the Siacci/Mayevski G1 model can not be tuned for the drag behavior of a specific projectile whose shape significantly deviates from the used reference projectile shape. Some ballistic software designers, who based their programs on the Siacci/Mayevski G1 model, give the user the possibility to enter several different G1 BC constants for different speed regimes to calculate ballistic predictions that closer match a bullets flight behavior at longer ranges compared to calculations that use only one BC constant.

The above example illustrates the central problem fixed drag curve models have. These models will only yield satisfactory accurate predictions as long as the projectile of interest has the same shape as the reference projectile or a shape that closely resembles the reference projectile. Any deviation from the reference projectile shape will result in less accurate predictions. How much a projectile deviates from the applied reference projectile is mathematically expressed by the form factor (&quot;i&quot;). The form factor can be used to compare the drag experienced by a projectile of interest to the drag experienced by the employed reference projectile at a given velocity (range). The problem that the actual drag curve of a projectile can significantly deviate from the fixed drag curve of any employed reference projectile systematically limits the traditional drag resistance modeling approach. The relative simplicity however makes that it can be explained to and understood by the general shooting public and hence is also popular amongst ballistic software prediction developers and bullet manufacturers that want to market their products.

===More advanced drag models===
====Pejsa model====
Another attempt at building a ballistic calculator is the model presented in 1980 by Dr. Arthur J. Pejsa. Dr. Pejsa claims on his website that his method was consistently capable of predicting (supersonic) rifle bullet trajectories within 2.5 mm (0.1 in) and bullet velocities within 0.3 m/s (1 ft/s) out to 914 m (1,000 yd) in theory. The Pejsa model is a closed-form solution.

The Pejsa model can predict a projectile within a given flight regime (for example the supersonic flight regime) with only two velocity measurements, a distance between said velocity measurements, and a slope or deceleration constant factor. The model allows the drag curve to change slopes (true/calibrate) or curvature at three different points. Down range velocity measurement data can be provided around key inflection points allowing for more accurate calculations of the projectile retardation rate, very similar to a Mach vs CD table. The Pejsa model allows the slope factor to be tuned to account for subtle differences in the retardation rate of different bullet shapes and sizes. It ranges from 0.1 (flat-nose bullets) to 0.9 (very-low-drag bullets). If this slope or deceleration constant factor is unknown a default value of 0.5 is used. With the help of test firing measurements the slope constant for a particular bullet/rifle system/shooter combination can be determined. These test firings should preferably be executed at 60% and for extreme long range ballistic predictions also at 80% to 90% of the supersonic range of the projectiles of interest, staying away from erratic transonic effects. With this the Pejsa model can easily be tuned. A practical downside of the Pejsa model is that accurate projectile specific down range velocity measurements to provide these better predictions can not be easily performed by the vast majority of shooting enthusiasts.

An average retardation coefficient can be calculated for any given slope constant factor if velocity data points are known and distance between said velocity measurements is known. Obviously this is true only within the same flight regime. With velocity actual speed is meant, as velocity is a vector quantity and speed is the magnitude of the velocity vector. Because the power function does not have constant curvature a simple chord average cannot be used. The Pejsa model uses a weighted average retardation coefficient weighted at 0.25 range. The closer velocity is more heavily weighted. The retardation coefficient is measured in feet whereas range is measured in yards hence 0.25 × 3.0 = 0.75, in some places 0.8 rather than 0.75 is used. The 0.8 comes from rounding in order to allow easy entry on hand calculators. Since the Pejsa model does not use a simple chord weighted average, two velocity measurements are used to find the chord average retardation coefficient at midrange between the two velocity measurements points, limiting it to short range accuracy. In order to find the starting retardation coefficient Dr. Pejsa provides two separate equations in his two books. The first involves the power function. The second equation is identical to the one used to find the weighted average at R / 4; add N × (R/2) where R is the range in feet to the chord average retardation coefficient at midrange and where N is the slope constant factor. After the starting retardation coefficient is found the opposite procedure is used in order find the weighted average at R / 4; the starting retardation coefficient minus N × (R/4). In other words, N is used as the slope of the chord line. Dr. Pejsa states that he expanded his drop formula in a power series in order to prove that the weighted average retardation coefficient at R / 4 was a good approximation. For this Dr. Pejsa compared the power series expansion of his drop formula to some other unnamed drop formula&#x27;s power expansion to reach his conclusions. The fourth term in both power series matched when the retardation coefficient at 0.25 range was used in Pejsa&#x27;s drop formula. The fourth term was also the first term to use N. The higher terms involving N where insignificant and disappeared at N = 0.36, which according to Dr. Pejsa was a lucky coincidence making for an exceedingly accurate linear approximation, especially for N&#x27;s around 0.36. If a retardation coefficient function is used exact average values for any N can be obtained because from calculus it is trivial to find the average of any integrable function. Dr. Pejsa states that the retardation coefficient can be modeled by C × VN where C is a fitting coefficient which disappears during the derivation of the drop formula and N the slope constant factor.

The retardation coefficient equals the velocity squared divided by the retardation rate A. Using an average retardation coefficient allows the Pejsa model to be a closed-form expression within a given flight regime.

In order to allow the use of a G1 ballistic coefficient rather than velocity data Dr. Pejsa provided two reference drag curves. The first reference drag curve is based purely on the Siacci/Mayevski retardation rate function. The second reference drag curve is adjusted to equal the Siacci/Mayevski retardation rate function at a projectile velocity of 2600 fps (792.5 m/s) using a .30-06 Springfield Cartridge, Ball, Caliber .30 M2 rifle spitzer bullet with a slope or deceleration constant factor of 0.5 in the supersonic flight regime. In other flight regimes the second Pejsa reference drag curve model uses slope constant factors of 0.0 or -4.0. These deceleration constant factors can be verified by backing out Pejsa&#x27;s formulas (the drag curve segments fits the form V(2 - N) / C and the retardation coefficient curve segments fits the form V2 / (V(2 - N) / C) = C × VN where C is a fitting coefficient). The empirical test data Pejsa used to determine the exact shape of his chosen reference drag curve and pre-defined mathematical function that returns the retardation coefficient at a given Mach number was provided by the US military for the Cartridge, Ball, Caliber .30 M2 bullet. The calculation of the retardation coefficient function also involves air density, which Pejsa did not mention explicitly. The Siacci/Mayevski G1 model uses the following deceleration parametrization (60 °F, 30 inHg and 67% humidity, air density ρ = 1.2209 kg/m3). Dr. Pejsa suggests using the second drag curve because the Siacci/Mayevski G1 drag curve does not provide a good fit for modern spitzer bullets. To obtain relevant retardation coefficients for optimal long range modeling Dr. Pejsa suggested using accurate projectile specific down range velocity measurement data for a particular projectile to empirically derive the average retardation coefficient rather than using a reference drag curve derived average retardation coefficient. Further he suggested using ammunition with reduced propellant loads to empirically test actual projectile flight behavior at lower velocities. When working with reduced propellant loads utmost care must be taken to avoid dangerous or catastrophic conditions (detonations) with can occur when firing experimental loads in firearms.

====Manges model====
Although not as well known as the Pejsa model, an additional alternative ballistic model was presented in 1989 by Colonel Duff Manges (U S Army Retired) at the American Defense Preparedness (ADPA) 11th International Ballistic Symposium held at the Brussels Congress Center, Brussels, Belgium, May 9–11, 1989. A paper titled &quot;Closed Form Trajectory Solutions for Direct Fire Weapons Systems&quot; appears in the proceedings, Volume 1, Propulsion Dynamics, Launch Dynamics, Flight Dynamics, pages 665–674. Originally conceived to model projectile drag for 120 mm tank gun ammunition, the novel drag coefficient formula has been applied subsequently to ballistic trajectories of center-fired rifle ammunition with results comparable to those claimed for the Pejsa model.

The Manges model uses a first principles theoretical approach that eschews &quot;G&quot; curves and &quot;ballistic coefficients&quot; based on the standard G1 and other similarity curves. The theoretical description has three main parts. The first is to develop and solve a formulation of the two dimensional differential equations of motion governing flat trajectories of point mass projectiles by defining mathematically a set of quadratures that permit closed form solutions for the trajectory differential equations of motion. A sequence of successive approximation drag coefficient functions is generated that converge rapidly to actual observed drag data. The vacuum trajectory, simplified aerodynamic, d&#x27;Antonio, and Euler drag law models are special cases. The Manges drag law thereby provides a unifying influence with respect to earlier models used to obtain two dimensional closed form solutions to the point-mass equations of motion. The third purpose of this paper is to describe a least squares fitting procedure for obtaining the new drag functions from observed experimental data. The author claims that results show excellent agreement with six degree of freedom numerical calculations for modern tank ammunition and available published firing tables for center-fired rifle ammunition having a wide variety of shapes and sizes.

A Microsoft Excel application has been authored that uses least squares fits of wind tunnel acquired tabular drag coefficients. Alternatively, manufacturer supplied ballistic trajectory data, or Doppler acquired velocity data can be fitted as well to calibrate the model. The Excel application then employs custom macroinstructions to calculate the trajectory variables of interest. A modified 4th order Runge–Kutta integration algorithm is used. Like Pejsa, Colonel Manges claims center-fired rifle accuracies to the nearest one tenth of an inch for bullet position, and nearest foot per second for the projectile velocity.

The Proceedings of the 11th International Ballistic Symposium are available through the National Defense Industrial Association (NDIA) at the website http://www.ndia.org/Resources/Pages/Publication_Catalog.aspx .

====Six degrees of freedom model====
There are also advanced professional ballistic models like PRODAS available. These are based on six degrees of freedom (6 DoF) calculations. 6 DoF modeling accounts for x, y, and z position in space along with the projectiles pitch, yaw, and roll rates. 6 DoF modeling needs such elaborate data input, knowledge of the employed projectiles and expensive data collection and verification methods that it is impractical for non-professional ballisticians, but not impossible for the curious, computer literate, and mathematically inclined. Semi-empirical aeroprediction models have been developed that reduced extensive test range data on a wide variety of projectile shapes, normalizing dimensional input geometries to calibers; accounting for nose length and radius, body length, and boattail size, and allowing the full set of 6-dof aerodynamic coefficients to be estimated. Early research on spin-stabilized aeroprediction software resulted in the SPINNER computer program. The FINNER aeroprediction code calculates 6-dof inputs for fin stabilized projectiles. Solids modeling software that determines the projectile parameters of mass, center of gravity, axial and transverse moments of inertia necessary for stability analysis are also readily available, and simple to computer program. Finally, algorithms for 6-dof numerical integration suitable to a 4th order Runge-Kutta are readily available. All that is required for the amateur ballistician to investigate the finer analytical details of projectile trajectories, along with bullet nutation and precession behavior, is computer programming determination. Nevertheless, for the small arms enthusiast, aside from academic curiosity, one will discover that being able to predict trajectories to 6-dof accuracy is probably not of practical significance compared to more simplified point mass trajectories based on published bullet ballistic coefficients. 6 DoF is generally used by the aerospace and defense industry and military organizations that study the ballistic behavior of a limited number of (intended) military issue projectiles. Calculated 6 DoF trends can be incorporated as correction tables in more conventional ballistic software applications.

Though 6 DoF modeling and software applications are used by professional well equipped organizations for decades, the computing power restrictions of mobile computing devices like (ruggedized) personal digital assistants, tablet computers or smartphones impaired field use as calculations generally have to be done on the fly. In 2016 the Scandinavian ammunition manufacturer Nammo Lapua Oy released a 6 DoF calculation model based ballistic free software named Lapua Ballistics. The software is distributed as a mobile app only and available for Android and iOS devices. The employed 6 DoF model is however limited to Lapua bullets as a 6 DoF solver needs bullet specific drag coefficient (Cd)/Doppler radar data and geometric dimensions of the projectile(s) of interest. For other bullets the Lapua Ballistics solver is limited to and based on G1 or G7 ballistic coefficients and the Mayevski/Siacci method.

====Artillery software suites====
Military organizations have developed ballistic models like the NATO Armament Ballistic Kernel (NABK) for fire-control systems for artillery like the SG2 Shareable (Fire Control) Software Suite (S4) from the NATO Army Armaments Group (NAAG). The NATO Armament Ballistic Kernel is a 4-DoF modified point mass model. This is a compromise between a simple point mass model and a computationally intensive 6-DoF model.
A six- and seven-degree-of-freedom standard called BALCO has also been developed within NATO working groups. BALCO is a trajectory simulation program based on the mathematical model defined by the NATO Standardization Recommendation 4618. The primary goal of BALCO is to compute high-fidelity trajectories for both conventional axisymmetric and precision-guided projectiles featuring control surfaces. The BALCO trajectory model is a FORTRAN 2003 program that implements the following features:
* 6/7‐DoF equations of motion
* 7th‐order Runge‐Kutta‐Fehlberg integration
* Earth models
* Atmosphere models
* Aerodynamic models
* Thrust and Base Burn models
* Actuator models
The predictions these models yield are subject to comparison study.

===Doppler radar measurements===
For the precise establishment of drag or air resistance effects on projectiles, Doppler radar measurements are required. Weibel 1000e or Infinition BR-1001 Doppler radars are used by governments, professional ballisticians, defence forces and a few ammunition manufacturers to obtain real-world data of the flight behavior of projectiles of their interest. Correctly established state of the art Doppler radar measurements can determine the flight behavior of projectiles as small as airgun pellets in three-dimensional space to within a few millimetres accuracy. The gathered data regarding the projectile deceleration can be derived and expressed in several ways, such as ballistic coefficients (BC) or drag coefficients (Cd). Because a spinning projectile experiences both precession and nutation about its center of gravity as it flies, further data reduction of doppler radar measurements is required to separate yaw induced drag and lift coefficients from the zero yaw drag coefficient, in order to make measurements fully applicable to 6-dof trajectory analysis.

Doppler radar measurement results for a lathe-turned monolithic solid .50 BMG very-low-drag bullet (Lost River J40 .510-773 grain monolithic solid bullet / twist rate 1:15 in) look like this:

The initial rise in the BC value is attributed to a projectile&#x27;s always present yaw and precession out of the bore. The test results were obtained from many shots not just a single shot. The bullet was assigned 1.062 for its BC number by the bullet&#x27;s manufacturer Lost River Ballistic Technologies.

Doppler radar measurement results for a Lapua GB528 Scenar 19.44 g (300 gr) 8.59 mm (0.338 in) calibre very-low-drag bullet look like this:

This tested bullet experiences its maximum drag coefficient when entering the transonic flight regime around Mach 1.200.
With the help of Doppler radar measurements projectile specific drag models can be established that are most useful when shooting at extended ranges where the bullet speed slows to the transonic speed region near the speed of sound. This is where the projectile drag predicted by mathematic modeling can significantly depart from the actual drag experienced by the projectile. Further Doppler radar measurements are used to study subtle in-flight effects of various bullet constructions.

Governments, professional ballisticians, defence forces and ammunition manufacturers can supplement Doppler radar measurements with measurements gathered by telemetry probes fitted to larger projectiles.

===General trends in drag or ballistic coefficient===
In general, a pointed projectile will have a better drag coefficient (Cd) or ballistic coefficient (BC) than a round nosed bullet, and a round nosed bullet will have a better Cd or BC than a flat point bullet. Large radius curves, resulting in a shallower point angle, will produce lower drags, particularly at supersonic velocities. Hollow point bullets behave much like a flat point of the same point diameter. Projectiles designed for supersonic use often have a slightly tapered base at the rear, called a boat tail, which reduces air resistance in flight. The usefulness of a &quot;tapered rear&quot; for long-range firing was well established already by early 1870s, but technological difficulties prevented their wide adoption before well into 20th century. Cannelures, which are recessed rings around the projectile used to crimp the projectile securely into the case, will cause an increase in drag.

Analytical software was developed by the Ballistics Research Laboratory – later called the Army Research Laboratory – which reduced actual test range data to parametric relationships for projectile drag coefficient prediction. Large caliber artillery also employ drag reduction mechanisms in addition to streamlining geometry. Rocket-assisted projectiles employ a small rocket motor that ignites upon muzzle exit providing additional thrust to overcome aerodynamic drag. Rocket assist is most effective with subsonic artillery projectiles. For supersonic long range artillery, where base drag dominates, base bleed is employed. Base bleed is a form of a gas generator that does not provide significant thrust, but rather fills the low-pressure area behind the projectile with gas, effectively reducing the base drag and the overall projectile drag coefficient.

===Transonic problem===
A projectile fired at supersonic muzzle velocity will at some point slow to approach the speed of sound. At the transonic region (about Mach 1.2–0.8) the centre of pressure (CP) of most non spherical projectiles shifts forward as the projectile decelerates. That CP shift affects the (dynamic) stability of the projectile. If the projectile is not well stabilized, it cannot remain pointing forward through the transonic region (the projectile starts to exhibit an unwanted precession or coning motion called limit cycle yaw that, if not damped out, can eventually end in uncontrollable tumbling along the length axis). However, even if the projectile has sufficient stability (static and dynamic) to be able to fly through the transonic region and stays pointing forward, it is still affected. The erratic and sudden CP shift and (temporary) decrease of dynamic stability can cause significant dispersion (and hence significant accuracy decay), even if the projectile&#x27;s flight becomes well behaved again when it enters the subsonic region. This makes accurately predicting the ballistic behavior of projectiles in the transonic region very difficult. 

Because of this, marksmen normally restrict themselves to engaging targets close enough that the projectile is still supersonic. In 2015, the American ballistician Bryan Litz introduced the &quot;Extended Long Range&quot; concept to define rifle shooting at ranges where supersonic fired (rifle) bullets enter the transonic region. According to Litz, &quot;Extended Long Range starts whenever the bullet slows to its transonic range. As the bullet slows down to approach Mach 1, it starts to encounter transonic effects, which are more complex and difficult to account for, compared to the supersonic range where the bullet is relatively well-behaved.&quot;

The ambient air density has a significant effect on dynamic stability during transonic transition. Though the ambient air density is a variable environmental factor, adverse transonic transition effects can be negated better by a projectile traveling through less dense air, than when traveling through denser air. Projectile or bullet length also affects limit cycle yaw. Longer projectiles experience more limit cycle yaw than shorter projectiles of the same diameter. Another feature of projectile design that has been identified as having an effect on the unwanted limit cycle yaw motion is the chamfer at the base of the projectile. At the very base, or heel of a projectile or bullet, there is a chamfer, or radius. The presence of this radius causes the projectile to fly with greater limit cycle yaw angles. Rifling can also have a subtle effect on limit cycle yaw. In general faster spinning projectiles experience less limit cycle yaw.

====Research into guided projectiles====
To circumvent the transonic problems encountered by spin-stabilized projectiles, projectiles can theoretically be guided during flight. The Sandia National Laboratories announced in January 2012 it has researched and test-fired 4-inch (102 mm) long prototype dart-like, self-guided bullets for small-caliber, smooth-bore firearms that could hit laser-designated targets at distances of more than a mile (about 1,610 meters or 1760 yards). These projectiles are not spin stabilized and the flight path can steered within limits with an electromagnetic actuator 30 times per second. The researchers also claim they have video of the bullet radically pitching as it exits the barrel and pitching less as it flies down range, a disputed phenomenon known to long-range firearms experts as “going to sleep”. Because the bullet&#x27;s motions settle the longer it is in flight, accuracy improves at longer ranges, Sandia researcher Red Jones said. “Nobody had ever seen that, but we’ve got high-speed video photography that shows that it’s true,” he said. Recent testing indicates it may be approaching or already achieved initial operational capability.

===Testing the predictive qualities of software===
Due to the practical inability to know in advance and compensate for all the variables of flight, no software simulation, however advanced, will yield predictions that will always perfectly match real world trajectories. It is however possible to obtain predictions that are very close to actual flight behavior.

====Empirical measurement method====
Ballistic prediction computer programs intended for (extreme) long ranges can be evaluated by conducting field tests at the supersonic to subsonic transition range (the last 10 to 20% of the supersonic range of the rifle/cartridge/bullet combination). For a typical .338 Lapua Magnum rifle for example, shooting standard 16.2 gram (250 gr) Lapua Scenar GB488 bullets at 905 m/s (2969 ft/s) muzzle velocity, field testing of the software should be done at ≈ 1200-1300 meters (1312-1422 yd) under International Standard Atmosphere sea level conditions (air density ρ = 1.225 kg/m³). To check how well the software predicts the trajectory at shorter to medium range, field tests at 20, 40 and 60% of the supersonic range have to be conducted. At those shorter to medium ranges, transonic problems and hence unbehaved bullet flight should not occur, and the BC is less likely to be transient. Testing the predictive qualities of software at (extreme) long ranges is expensive because it consumes ammunition; the actual muzzle velocity of all shots fired must be measured to be able to make statistically dependable statements. Sample groups of less than 24 shots may not obtain the desired statistically significant confidence interval.

====Doppler radar measurement method====
Governments, professional ballisticians, defence forces and a few ammunition manufacturers use Doppler radars and/or telemetry probes fitted to larger projectiles to obtain precise real world data regarding the flight behavior of the specific projectiles of their interest and thereupon compare the gathered real world data against the predictions calculated by ballistic computer programs. The normal shooting or aerodynamics enthusiast, however, has no access to such expensive professional measurement devices. Authorities and projectile manufacturers are generally reluctant to share the results of Doppler radar tests and the test derived drag coefficients (Cd) of projectiles with the general public. Around 2020 more affordable but less capable (amateur) Doppler rader equipment to determine free flight drag coefficients became available for the general public.

In January 2009, the Scandinavian ammunition manufacturer Nammo/Lapua published Doppler radar test-derived drag coefficient data for most of their rifle projectiles.
In 2015 the US ammunition manufacturer Berger Bullets announced the use of Doppler radar in unison with PRODAS 6 DoF software to generate trajectory solutions.
In 2016 US ammunition manufacturer Hornady announced the use of Doppler radar derived drag data in software utilizing a modified point mass model to generate trajectory solutions.
With the measurement derived Cd data engineers can create algorithms that utilize both known mathematical ballistic models as well as test specific, tabular data in unison. When used by predictive software like QuickTARGET Unlimited, Lapua Edition, Lapua Ballistics or Hornady 4DOF the Doppler radar test-derived drag coefficient data can be used for more accurate external ballistic predictions.

Some of the Lapua-provided drag coefficient data shows drastic increases in the measured drag around or below the Mach 1 flight velocity region. This behavior was observed for most of the measured small calibre bullets, and not so much for the larger calibre bullets. This implies some (mostly smaller calibre) rifle bullets exhibited more limit cycle yaw (coning and/or tumbling) in the transonic/subsonic flight velocity regime.
The information regarding unfavourable transonic/subsonic flight behavior for some of the tested projectiles is important. This is a limiting factor for extended range shooting use, because the effects of limit cycle yaw are not easily predictable and potentially catastrophic for the best ballistic prediction models and software.

Presented Cd data can not be simply used for every gun-ammunition combination, since it was measured for the barrels, rotational (spin) velocities and ammunition lots the Lapua testers used during their test firings. Variables like differences in rifling (number of grooves, depth, width and other dimensional properties), twist rates and/or muzzle velocities impart different rotational (spin) velocities and rifling marks on projectiles. Changes in such variables and projectile production lot variations can yield different downrange interaction with the air the projectile passes through that can result in (minor) changes in flight behavior. This particular field of external ballistics is currently (2009) not elaborately studied nor well understood.

===Predictions of several drag resistance modelling and measuring methods===
The method employed to model and predict external ballistic behavior can yield differing results with increasing range and time of flight. To illustrate this several external ballistic behavior prediction methods for the Lapua Scenar GB528 19.44 g (300 gr) 8.59 mm (0.338 in) calibre very-low-drag rifle bullet with a manufacturer stated G1 ballistic coefficient (BC) of 0.785 fired at 830 m/s (2723 ft/s) muzzle velocity under International Standard Atmosphere sea level conditions (air density ρ = 1.225 kg/m³), Mach 1 = 340.3 m/s, Mach 1.2 = 408.4 m/s), predicted this for the projectile velocity and time of flight from 0 to 3,000 m (0 to 3,281 yd):

The table shows the Doppler radar test derived drag coefficients (Cd) prediction method and the 2017 Lapua Ballistics 6 DoF App predictions produce similar results. The 6 DoF modeling estimates bullet stability ((Sd) and (Sg)) that gravitates to over-stabilization for ranges over for this bullet. At the total drop predictions deviate 47.5 cm (19.7 in) or 0.20 mil (0.68 moa) at 50° latitude and up to the total drop predictions are within 0.30 mil (1 moa) at 50° latitude. The 2016 Lapua Ballistics 6 DoF App version predictions were even closer to the Doppler radar test predictions.

The traditional Siacci/Mayevski G1 drag curve model prediction method generally yields more optimistic results compared to the modern Doppler radar test derived drag coefficients (Cd) prediction method. At range the differences will be hardly noticeable, but at and beyond the differences grow over 10 m/s (32.8 ft/s) projectile velocity and gradually become significant.
At range the projectile velocity predictions deviate 25 m/s (82.0 ft/s), which equates to a predicted total drop difference of 125.6 cm (49.4 in) or 0.83 mil (2.87 moa) at 50° latitude.

The Pejsa drag model closed-form solution prediction method, without slope constant factor fine tuning, yields very similar results in the supersonic flight regime compared to the Doppler radar test derived drag coefficients (Cd) prediction method. At range the projectile velocity predictions deviate 10 m/s (32.8 ft/s), which equates to a predicted total drop difference of 23.6 cm (9.3 in) or 0.16 mil (0.54 moa) at 50° latitude.

The G7 drag curve model prediction method (recommended by some manufacturers for very-low-drag shaped rifle bullets) when using a G7 ballistic coefficient (BC) of 0.377 yields very similar results in the supersonic flight regime compared to the Doppler radar test derived drag coefficients (Cd) prediction method. At range the projectile velocity predictions have their maximum deviation of 10 m/s (32.8 ft/s). The predicted total drop difference at is 0.4 cm (0.16 in) at 50° latitude. The predicted total drop difference at is 45.0 cm (17.7 in), which equates to 0.25 mil (0.86 moa).

Decent prediction models are expected to yield similar results in the supersonic flight regime. The five example models down to all predict supersonic Mach 1.2+ projectile velocities and total drop differences within a 51 cm (20.1 in) bandwidth. In the transonic flight regime at the models predict projectile velocities around Mach 1.0 to Mach 1.1 and total drop differences within a much larger 150 cm (59 in) bandwidth.

==External factors==

===Wind===
Wind has a range of effects, the first being the effect of making the projectile deviate to the side (horizontal deflection). From a scientific perspective, the &quot;wind pushing on the side of the projectile&quot; is not what causes horizontal wind drift. What causes wind drift is drag. Drag makes the projectile turn into the wind, much like a weather vane, keeping the centre of air pressure on its nose. From the shooter’s perspective, this causes the nose of the projectile to turn into the wind and the tail to turn away from the wind. The result of this turning effect is that the drag pushes the projectile downwind in a nose-to-tail direction.

Wind also causes aerodynamic jump which is the vertical component of cross wind deflection caused by lateral (wind) impulses activated during free flight of a projectile or at or very near the muzzle leading to dynamic imbalance. The amount of aerodynamic jump is dependent on cross wind speed, the gyroscopic stability of the bullet at the muzzle and if the barrel twist is clockwise or anti-clockwise. Like the wind direction reversing the twist direction will reverse the aerodynamic jump direction.

A somewhat less obvious effect is caused by head or tailwinds. A headwind will slightly increase the relative velocity of the projectile, and increase drag and the corresponding drop. A tailwind will reduce the drag and the projectile/bullet drop. In the real world, pure head or tailwinds are rare, since wind is seldom constant in force and direction and normally interacts with the terrain it is blowing over. This often makes ultra long range shooting in head or tailwind conditions difficult.

===Vertical angles===
The vertical angle (or elevation) of a shot will also affect the trajectory of the shot. Ballistic tables for small calibre projectiles (fired from pistols or rifles) assume a horizontal line of sight between the shooter and target with gravity acting perpendicular to the earth. Therefore, if the shooter-to-target angle is up or down, (the direction of the gravity component does not change with slope direction), then the trajectory curving acceleration due to gravity will actually be less, in proportion to the cosine of the slant angle. As a result, a projectile fired upward or downward, on a so-called &quot;slant range,&quot; will over-shoot the same target distance on flat ground. The effect is of sufficient magnitude that hunters must adjust their target hold off accordingly in mountainous terrain. A well known formula for slant range adjustment to horizontal range hold off is known as the Rifleman&#x27;s rule. The Rifleman&#x27;s rule and the slightly more complex and less well known Improved Rifleman&#x27;s rule models produce sufficiently accurate predictions for many small arms applications. Simple prediction models however ignore minor gravity effects when shooting uphill or downhill. The only practical way to compensate for this is to use a ballistic computer program. Besides gravity at very steep angles over long distances, the effect of air density changes the projectile encounters during flight become problematic.
The mathematical prediction models available for inclined fire scenarios, depending on the amount and direction (uphill or downhill) of the inclination angle and range, yield varying accuracy expectation levels.
Less advanced ballistic computer programs predict the same trajectory for uphill and downhill shots at the same vertical angle and range. The more advanced programs factor in the small effect of gravity on uphill and on downhill shots resulting in slightly differing trajectories at the same vertical angle and range. No publicly available ballistic computer program currently (2017) accounts for the complicated phenomena of differing air densities the projectile encounters during flight.

===Ambient air density===
Air pressure, temperature, and humidity variations make up the ambient air density. Humidity has a counter intuitive impact. Since water vapor has a density of 0.8 grams per litre, while dry air averages about 1.225 grams per litre, higher humidity actually decreases the air density, and therefore decreases the drag.

===Precipitation===
Precipitation can cause significant yaw and accompanying deflection when a bullet collides with a raindrop. The further downrange such a coincidental collision occurs, the less the deflection on target will be. The weight of the raindrop and bullet also influences how much yaw is induced during such a collision. A big heavy raindrop and a light bullet will yield maximal yaw effect. A heavy bullet colliding with an equal raindrop will experience significant less yaw effect.

==Long range factors==

===Gyroscopic drift (spin drift)===
Gyroscopic drift is an interaction of the bullet&#x27;s mass and aerodynamics with the atmosphere that it is flying in.
Even in completely calm air, with no sideways air movement at all, a spin-stabilized projectile will experience a spin-induced sideways component, due to a gyroscopic phenomenon known as &quot;yaw of repose.&quot; For a right hand (clockwise) direction of rotation this component will always be to the right. For a left hand (counterclockwise) direction of rotation this component will always be to the left. This is because the projectile&#x27;s longitudinal axis (its axis of rotation) and the direction of the velocity vector of the center of gravity (CG) deviate by a small angle, which is said to be the equilibrium yaw or the yaw of repose. The magnitude of the yaw of repose angle is typically less than 0.5 degree. Since rotating objects react with an angular velocity vector 90 degrees from the applied torque vector, the bullet&#x27;s axis of symmetry moves with a component in the vertical plane and a component in the horizontal plane; for right-handed (clockwise) spinning bullets, the bullet&#x27;s axis of symmetry deflects to the right and a little bit upward with respect to the direction of the velocity vector, as the projectile moves along its ballistic arc. As the result of this small inclination, there is a continuous air stream, which tends to deflect the bullet to the right. Thus the occurrence of the yaw of repose is the reason for the bullet drifting to the right (for right-handed spin) or to the left (for left-handed spin). This means that the bullet is &quot;skidding&quot; sideways at any given moment, and thus experiencing a sideways component.

The following variables affect the magnitude of gyroscopic drift:
* Projectile or bullet length: longer projectiles experience more gyroscopic drift because they produce more lateral &quot;lift&quot; for a given yaw angle.
* Spin rate: faster spin rates will produce more gyroscopic drift because the nose ends up pointing farther to the side.
* Range, time of flight and trajectory height: gyroscopic drift increases with all of these variables.
* density of the atmosphere: denser air will increase gyroscopic drift.

Doppler radar measurement results for the gyroscopic drift of several US military and other very-low-drag bullets at 1000 yards (914.4 m) look like this:
The table shows that the gyroscopic drift cannot be predicted on weight and diameter alone. In order to make accurate predictions on gyroscopic drift several details about both the external and internal ballistics must be considered. Factors such as the twist rate of the barrel, the velocity of the projectile as it exits the muzzle, barrel harmonics, and atmospheric conditions, all contribute to the path of a projectile.

===Magnus effect===
Spin stabilized projectiles are affected by the Magnus effect, whereby the spin of the bullet creates a force acting either up or down, perpendicular to the sideways vector of the wind.
In the simple case of horizontal wind, and a right hand (clockwise) direction of rotation, the Magnus effect induced pressure differences around the bullet cause a downward (wind from the right) or upward (wind from the left) force viewed from the point of firing to act on the projectile, affecting its point of impact. The vertical deflection value tends to be small in comparison with the horizontal wind induced deflection component, but it may nevertheless be significant in winds that exceed 4 m/s (14.4 km/h or 9 mph).

====Magnus effect and bullet stability====
The Magnus effect has a significant role in bullet stability because the Magnus force does not act upon the bullet&#x27;s center of gravity, but the center of pressure affecting the &quot;yaw&quot; of the bullet. The Magnus effect will act as a &quot;destabilizing&quot; force on any bullet with a center of pressure located &quot;ahead&quot; of the center of gravity, while conversely acting as a &quot;stabilizing&quot; force on any bullet with the center of pressure located &quot;behind&quot; the center of gravity. The location of the center of pressure depends on the flow field structure, in other words, depending on whether the bullet is in supersonic, transonic or subsonic flight. What this means in practice depends on the shape and other attributes of the bullet, in any case the Magnus force greatly affects stability because it tries to &quot;twist&quot; the bullet along its flight path.

Paradoxically, very-low-drag bullets, owing to their length, have a tendency to exhibit greater Magnus destabilizing errors because they have a greater surface area to present to the oncoming air they are travelling through, thereby reducing their aerodynamic efficiency. This subtle effect is one of the reasons why a calculated Cd or BC based on shape and sectional density is of limited use.

===Poisson effect===
Another minor cause of drift, which depends on the nose of the projectile being above the trajectory, is the Poisson Effect. This, if it occurs at all, acts in the same direction as the gyroscopic drift and is even less important than the Magnus effect. It supposes that the uptilted nose of the projectile causes an air cushion to build up underneath it. It further supposes that there is an increase of friction between this cushion and the projectile so that the latter, with its spin, will tend to roll off the cushion and move sideways.

This simple explanation is quite popular. There is, however, no evidence to show that increased pressure means increased friction and unless this is so, there can be no effect. Even if it does exist it must be quite insignificant compared with the gyroscopic and Coriolis drifts.

Both the Poisson and Magnus Effects will reverse their directions of drift if the nose falls below the trajectory. When the nose is off to one side, as in equilibrium yaw, these effects will make minute alterations in range.

===Coriolis drift===

The Coriolis effect causes Coriolis drift in a direction perpendicular to the Earth&#x27;s axis; for most locations on Earth and firing directions, this deflection includes horizontal and vertical components. The deflection is to the right of the trajectory in the northern hemisphere, to the left in the southern hemisphere, upward for eastward shots, and downward for westward shots. The vertical Coriolis deflection is also known as the Eötvös effect. Coriolis drift is not an aerodynamic effect; it is a consequence of the rotation of the Earth.

The magnitude of the Coriolis effect is small. For small arms, the magnitude of the Coriolis effect is generally insignificant (for high powered rifles in the order of about at ), but for ballistic projectiles with long flight times, such as extreme long-range rifle projectiles, artillery, and rockets like intercontinental ballistic missiles, it is a significant factor in calculating the trajectory. The magnitude of the drift depends on the firing and target location, azimuth of firing, projectile velocity and time of flight.

====Horizontal effect====
Viewed from a non-rotating reference frame (i.e. not one rotating with the Earth) and ignoring the forces of gravity and air resistance, a projectile moves in a straight line. When viewed from a reference frame fixed with respect to the Earth, that straight trajectory appears to curve sideways. The direction of this horizontal curvature is to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern hemisphere, and does not depend on the azimuth of the shot. The horizontal curvature is largest at the poles and decreases to zero at the equator.

====Vertical (Eötvös) effect====
The Eötvös effect changes the perceived gravitational pull on a moving object based on the relationship between the direction and velocity of movement and the direction of the Earth&#x27;s rotation.

The Eötvös effect is largest at the equator and decreases to zero at the poles. It causes eastward-traveling projectiles to deflect upward, and westward-traveling projectiles to deflect downward. The effect is less pronounced for trajectories in other directions, and is zero for trajectories aimed due north or south. In the case of large changes of momentum, such as a spacecraft being launched into Earth orbit, the effect becomes significant. It contributes to the fastest and most fuel-efficient path to orbit: a launch from the equator that curves to a directly eastward heading.

==Equipment factors==
Though not forces acting on projectile trajectories there are some equipment related factors that influence trajectories. Since these factors can cause otherwise unexplainable external ballistic flight behavior they have to be briefly mentioned.

===Lateral jump===
Lateral jump is caused by a slight lateral and rotational movement of a gun barrel at the instant of firing. It has the effect of a small error in bearing. The effect is ignored, since it is small and varies from round to round.

===Lateral throw-off===
Lateral throw-off is caused by mass imbalance in applied spin stabilized projectiles or pressure imbalances during the transitional flight phase when a projectile leaves a gun barrel off axis leading to static imbalance. If present it causes dispersion. The effect is unpredictable, since it is generally small and varies from projectile to projectile, round to round and/or gun barrel to gun barrel.

==Maximum effective small arms range==
The maximum practical range of all small arms and especially high-powered sniper rifles depends mainly on the aerodynamic or ballistic efficiency of the spin stabilised projectiles used. Long-range shooters must also collect relevant information to calculate elevation and windage corrections to be able to achieve first shot strikes at point targets. The data to calculate these fire control corrections has a long list of variables including:
* ballistic coefficient or test derived drag coefficients (Cd)/behavior of the bullets used
* height of the sighting components above the rifle bore axis
* the zero range at which the sighting components and rifle combination were sighted in
* bullet mass
* actual muzzle velocity (powder temperature affects muzzle velocity, primer ignition is also temperature dependent)
* range to target
* supersonic range of the employed gun, cartridge and bullet combination
* inclination angle in case of uphill/downhill firing
* target speed and direction
* wind speed and direction (main cause for horizontal projectile deflection and generally the hardest ballistic variable to measure and judge correctly. Wind effects can also cause vertical deflection.)
* air pressure, temperature, altitude and humidity variations (these make up the ambient air density)
* Earth&#x27;s gravity (changes slightly with latitude and altitude) 
* gyroscopic drift (horizontal and vertical plane gyroscopic effect — often known as spin drift - induced by the barrel&#x27;s twist direction and twist rate)
* Coriolis effect drift (latitude, direction of fire and northern or southern hemisphere data dictate this effect)
* Eötvös effect (interrelated with the Coriolis effect, latitude and direction of fire dictate this effect)
* aerodynamic jump (the vertical component of cross wind deflection caused by lateral (wind) impulses activated during free flight or at or very near the muzzle leading to dynamic imbalance)
* lateral throw-off (dispersion that is caused by mass imbalance in the applied projectile or it leaving the barrel off axis leading to static imbalance)
* the inherent potential accuracy and adjustment range of the sighting components
* the inherent potential accuracy of the rifle
* the inherent potential accuracy of the ammunition
* the inherent potential accuracy of the computer program and other firing control components used to calculate the trajectory

The ambient air density is at its maximum at Arctic sea level conditions. Cold gunpowder also produces lower pressures and hence lower muzzle velocities than warm powder. This means that the maximum practical range of rifles will be at it shortest at Arctic sea level conditions.

The ability to hit a point target at great range has a lot to do with the ability to tackle environmental and meteorological factors and a good understanding of exterior ballistics and the limitations of equipment. Without (computer) support and highly accurate laser rangefinders and meteorological measuring equipment as aids to determine ballistic solutions, long-range shooting beyond 1000 m (1100 yd) at unknown ranges becomes guesswork for even the most expert long-range marksmen.

&quot;Interesting further reading: &quot;

==Using ballistics data==
Here is an example of a ballistic table for a .30 calibre Speer 169 grain (11 g) pointed boat tail match bullet, with a BC of 0.480. It assumes sights 1.5 inches (38 mm) above the bore line, and sights adjusted to result in point of aim and point of impact matching 200 yards (183 m) and 300 yards (274 m) respectively.

This table demonstrates that, even with a fairly aerodynamic bullet fired at high velocity, the &quot;bullet drop&quot; or change in the point of impact is significant. This change in point of impact has two important implications. Firstly, estimating the distance to the target is critical at longer ranges, because the difference in the point of impact between 400 and is 25–32 in (depending on zero), in other words if the shooter estimates that the target is 400 yd away when it is in fact 500 yd away the shot will impact 25–32 in (635–813 mm) below where it was aimed, possibly missing the target completely. Secondly, the rifle should be zeroed to a distance appropriate to the typical range of targets, because the shooter might have to aim so far above the target to compensate for a large bullet drop that he may lose sight of the target completely (for instance being outside the field of view of a telescopic sight). In the example of the rifle zeroed at , the shooter would have to aim 49 in or more than 4 ft (1.2 m) above the point of impact for a target at 500 yd.

==See also==
*Internal ballistics - The behavior of the projectile and propellant before it leaves the barrel.
*Transitional ballistics - The behavior of the projectile from the time it leaves the muzzle until the pressure behind the projectile is equalized.
*Terminal ballistics - The behavior of the projectile upon impact with the target.
*Trajectory of a projectile - Basic external ballistics mathematic formulas.
*Rifleman&#x27;s rule - Procedures or &quot;rules&quot; for a rifleman for aiming at targets at a distance either uphill or downhill.
*Franklin Ware Mann - Early scientific study of external ballistics.
*Table of handgun and rifle cartridges
*Sighting in - Calibrating the sights on a ranged weapon so that the point of aim intersects with the trajectory at a given distance, allowing the user to consistently hit the target being aimed at. 

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
General external ballistics
* (Simplified calculation of the motion of a projectile under a drag force proportional to the square of the velocity)
* - basketball ballistics.

Small arms external ballistics
* Software for calculating ball ballistics
* How do bullets fly? by Ruprecht Nennstiel, Wiesbaden, Germany
* Exterior Ballistics.com articles 
* A Short Course in External Ballistics
* Articles on long range shooting by Bryan Litz
* Probabalistic Weapon Employment Zone (WEZ) Analysis A Conceptual Overview by Bryan Litz 
* Weite Schüsse - part 4, Basic explanation of the Pejsa model by Lutz Möller 
* Patagonia Ballistics ballistics mathematical software engine
* JBM Small Arms Ballistics with online ballistics calculators
* Bison Ballistics Point Mass Online Ballistics Calculator 
* Virtual Wind Tunnel Experiments for Small Caliber Ammunition Aerodynamic Characterization - Paul Weinacht US Army Research Laboratory Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD

Artillery external ballistics
* British Artillery Fire Control - Ballistics &amp; Data
* Field Artillery, Volume 6, Ballistics and Ammunition
* The Production of Firing Tables for Cannon Artillery, BRL rapport no. 1371 by Elizabeth R. Dickinson, U.S. Army Materiel Command Ballistic Research Laboratories, November 1967
* NABK (NATO Armament Ballistic Kernel) Based Next Generation Ballistic Table Tookit, 23rd International Symposium on Ballistics, Tarragona, Spain 16-20 April 2007
*Trajectory Calculator in C++ that can deduce drag function from firing tables

===Freeware small arms external ballistics software===
* Hawke X-ACT Pro FREE ballistics app. iOS, Android, OSX &amp; Windows.
* ChairGun Pro free ballistics for rim fire and pellet guns.
* Ballistic_XLR. (MS Excel spreadsheet)] - A substantial enhancement &amp; modification of the Pejsa spreadsheet (below).
* GNU Exterior Ballistics Computer (GEBC) - An open source 3DOF ballistics computer for Windows, Linux, and Mac - Supports the G1, G2, G5, G6, G7, and G8 drag models. Created and maintained by Derek Yates.
* 6mmbr.com ballistics section links to / hosts 4 freeware external ballistics computer programs.
* 2DOF &amp; 3DOF R.L. McCoy - Gavre exterior ballistics (zip file) - Supports the G1, G2, G5, G6, G7, G8, GS, GL, GI, GB and RA4 drag models
* PointBlank Ballistics (zip file) - Siacci/Mayevski G1 drag model.
* Remington Shoot! A ballistic calculator for Remington factory ammunition (based on Pinsoft&#x27;s Shoot! software). - Siacci/Mayevski G1 drag model.
* JBM&#x27;s small-arms ballistics calculators Online trajectory calculators - Supports the G1, G2, G5, G6, G7 (for some projectiles experimentally measured G7 ballistic coefficients), G8, GI, GL and for some projectiles doppler radar-test derived (Cd) drag models.
* Pejsa Ballistics (MS Excel spreadsheet) - Pejsa model.
* Sharpshooter Friend (Palm PDA software) - Pejsa model.
* Quick Target Unlimited, Lapua Edition - A version of QuickTARGET Unlimited ballistic software (requires free registration to download) - Supports the G1, G2, G5, G6, G7, G8, GL, GS Spherical 9/16&quot;SAAMI, GS Spherical Don Miller, RA4, Soviet 1943, British 1909 Hatches Notebook and for some Lapua projectiles doppler radar-test derived (Cd) drag models.
* Lapua Ballistics Exterior ballistic software for Java or Android mobile phones. Based on doppler radar-test derived (Cd) drag models for Lapua projectiles and cartridges.
* Lapua Ballistics App 6 DoF model limited to Lapua bullets for Android and iOS.
* BfX - Ballistics for Excel Set of MS Excel add-ins functions - Supports the G1, G2, G5, G6, G7 G8 and RA4 and Pejsa drag models as well as one for air rifle pellets. Able to handle user supplied models, e.g. Lapua projectiles doppler radar-test derived (Cd) ones.
* GunSim &quot;GunSim&quot; free browser-based ballistics simulator program for Windows and Mac.
* BallisticSimulator &quot;Ballistic Simulator&quot; free ballistics simulator program for Windows.
* 5H0T Free online web-based ballistics calculator, with data export capability and charting.
* SAKO Ballistics Free online ballistic calculatoy by SAKO. Calculator also available as an android app (maybe on iOS also, I don&#x27;t know) under &quot;SAKO Ballistics&quot; name.
* py-ballisticcalc LGPL Python library for point-mass ballistic calculations .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q789762" start="0" end="19" title="External ballistics" label="External ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q789762" start="23" end="42" title="External ballistics" label="exterior ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184631" start="58" end="68" title="ballistics" label="ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="103" end="113" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="423" end="433" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="481" end="491" title="gun barrel" label="gun barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545" start="946" end="950" title="ball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="953" end="958" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="1036" end="1041" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="1057" end="1067" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="1072" end="1079" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="1081" end="1085" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="1103" end="1107" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q605931" start="1335" end="1348" title="line-of-sight propagation" label="line-of-sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="1350" end="1354" title="Drag (physics)" label="Drag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1827" end="1843" title="External ballistics#External factors" label="external factors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2220" end="2238" title="External ballistics#Long range factors" label="long range factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="2514" end="2526" title="trajectories" label="trajectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="2555" end="2564" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="2667" end="2676" title="parabola" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2856" end="2872" title="External ballistics#External factors" label="external factors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2877" end="2895" title="External ballistics#Long range factors" label="long range factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897627" start="2944" end="2967" title="large-calibre artillery" label="large-calibre artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q753063" start="2984" end="2993" title="Paris Gun" label="Paris Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="3105" end="3122" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="3487" end="3492" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580802" start="3508" end="3514" title="Sabot (firearms)" label="sabots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881043" start="3527" end="3589" title="M829 (munition)" label="M829 Armor-Piercing, Fin-Stabilized, Discarding Sabot (APFSDS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q604830" start="3625" end="3643" title="Center of pressure (fluid mechanics)" label="center of pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="3662" end="3676" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="4414" end="4421" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12412053" start="4561" end="4568" title="sighting in" label="zeroing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="4676" end="4685" title="parabola" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="4693" end="4705" title="trajectories" label="trajectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q10281355" start="6739" end="6759" title="ballistic trajectory" label="ballistic trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q56216691" start="8086" end="8101" title="ballistic table" label="ballistic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620992" start="11439" end="11456" title="point-blank range" label="point-blank range"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="12087" end="12105" title="Mathematical model" label="Mathematical model"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12596" end="12611" title="Ballistic coefficient#The Mayevski.2FSiacci Method" label="Mayevski/Siacci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12623" end="12636" title="Ballistic coefficient#The G Model" label="G1 drag model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221081" start="12755" end="12776" title="ballistic coefficient" label="ballistic coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="12844" end="12860" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392786" start="12870" end="12887" title="sectional density" label="sectional density"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="12955" end="12959" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q679201" start="13546" end="13551" title="Krupp" label="Krupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="13751" end="13758" title="caliber" label="calibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q171628" start="13816" end="13823" title=".50 BMG" label="12.7 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923040" start="13949" end="13969" title="Very-low-drag bullet" label="Very-low-drag bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392786" start="14159" end="14176" title="Sectional density" label="Sectional density"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="14350" end="14352" title="pi" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="14619" end="14630" title="scale model" label="scale model"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="14830" end="14840" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="14845" end="14853" title="speed of sound" label="subsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="14996" end="15001" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="15035" end="15045" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="15145" end="15155" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579556" start="15157" end="15166" title="transonic" label="transonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="15271" end="15279" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="15305" end="15316" title="Mach number" label="Mach number"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="15373" end="15387" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q850120" start="15747" end="15756" title="wadcutter" label="wadcutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923040" start="15790" end="15803" title="very-low-drag bullet" label="very-low-drag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16282" end="16295" title="Nose cone design#Tangent ogive" label="tangent ogive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16329" end="16341" title="Nose cone design#Secant ogive" label="secant ogive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18570" end="18585" title="Arthur J. Pejsa" label="Arthur J. Pejsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="18838" end="18858" title="Closed-form expression" label="closed-form solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q214881" start="19172" end="19181" title="curvature" label="curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923040" start="19598" end="19618" title="very-low-drag bullet" label="very-low-drag bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711325" start="20602" end="20607" title="speed" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="20714" end="20728" title="power function" label="power function"/>
<link wikidata="Q214881" start="20752" end="20761" title="curvature" label="curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q188191" start="20771" end="20776" title="chord (geometry)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="22093" end="22105" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22915" end="22949" title="Mean#Mean of a function" label="average of any integrable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="23315" end="23337" title="closed-form expression" label="closed-form expression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23750" end="23800" title=".30-06 Springfield#History" label=".30-06 Springfield Cartridge, Ball, Caliber .30 M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578330" start="23807" end="23821" title="spitzer bullet" label="spitzer bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="24800" end="24811" title="Density of air" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26224" end="26250" title="Rheinmetall 120 mm gun#Ammunition" label="120 mm tank gun ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q725944" start="28195" end="28228" title="Runge–Kutta methods" label="Runge–Kutta integration algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071507" start="28764" end="28786" title="six degrees of freedom" label="six degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="30223" end="30233" title="precession" label="precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738570" start="31034" end="31058" title="mobile computing" label="mobile computing devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="31077" end="31103" title="personal digital assistant" label="personal digital assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="31106" end="31121" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="31126" end="31136" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964355" start="31260" end="31274" title="Nammo" label="Nammo Lapua Oy"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="31397" end="31407" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="31935" end="31954" title="fire-control system" label="fire-control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390041" start="31979" end="32027" title="SG2 Shareable (Fire Control) Software Suite (S4)" label="SG2 Shareable (Fire Control) Software Suite (S4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334213" start="33100" end="33113" title="Doppler radar" label="Doppler radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334213" start="33176" end="33189" title="Doppler radar" label="Doppler radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="33725" end="33741" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923040" start="34169" end="34189" title="very-low-drag bullet" label="very-low-drag bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923040" start="34697" end="34717" title="very-low-drag bullet" label="very-low-drag bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="35656" end="35672" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221081" start="35681" end="35702" title="ballistic coefficient" label="ballistic coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481079" start="35938" end="35957" title="Hollow point bullet" label="Hollow point bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851787" start="36555" end="36585" title="Ballistic Research Laboratory" label="Ballistics Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889516" start="36605" end="36629" title="United States Army Research Laboratory" label="Army Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q841739" start="36841" end="36867" title="Rocket-assisted projectile" label="Rocket-assisted projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q809816" start="37118" end="37128" title="base bleed" label="base bleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="37422" end="37432" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579556" start="37512" end="37521" title="transonic" label="transonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="37536" end="37540" title="Mach number" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="37874" end="37884" title="precession" label="precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="38429" end="38437" title="Speed of sound" label="subsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="39230" end="39241" title="air density" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="40346" end="40374" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q579176" start="42252" end="42285" title="International Standard Atmosphere" label="International Standard Atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="42308" end="42319" title="air density" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="42969" end="42988" title="confidence interval" label="confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="43676" end="43692" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040770" start="44264" end="44271" title="Hornady" label="Hornady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271667" start="44620" end="44641" title="QuickLOAD" label="QuickTARGET Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q161635" start="45689" end="45717" title="angular velocity" label="rotational (spin) velocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923040" start="46690" end="46716" title="Very-low-drag bullet" label="very-low-drag rifle bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q579176" start="46834" end="46867" title="International Standard Atmosphere" label="International Standard Atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="46890" end="46901" title="air density" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065153" start="47423" end="47426" title="Milliradian" label="mil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="47433" end="47436" title="Minute of arc" label="moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376323" start="50947" end="50964" title="relative velocity" label="relative velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="51371" end="51385" title="vertical (angles)" label="vertical angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q641888" start="51390" end="51399" title="elevation (ballistics)" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333274" start="52273" end="52293" title="Rifleman&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Rifleman&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="53551" end="53559" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="53561" end="53572" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="53578" end="53586" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="53618" end="53629" title="air density" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="53678" end="53689" title="water vapor" label="water vapor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54213" end="54221" title="Drop_(liquid)#Size" label="raindrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459269" start="55167" end="55170" title="flight dynamics" label="yaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923040" start="56741" end="56761" title="very-low-drag bullet" label="very-low-drag bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q622975" start="57297" end="57310" title="Magnus effect" label="Magnus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923040" start="58925" end="58945" title="very-low-drag bullet" label="very-low-drag bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q169973" start="60403" end="60418" title="Coriolis effect" label="Coriolis effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q752977" start="60839" end="60852" title="Eötvös effect" label="Eötvös effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="61001" end="61011" title="small arms" label="small arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="61230" end="61239" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="61245" end="61252" title="rockets" label="rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="61258" end="61293" title="intercontinental ballistic missiles" label="intercontinental ballistic missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q124274" start="61423" end="61430" title="azimuth" label="azimuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q752977" start="62108" end="62121" title="Eötvös effect" label="Eötvös effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q320128" start="63552" end="63577" title="Transitional ballistics" label="transitional flight phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="63909" end="63919" title="small arms" label="small arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q190570" start="63948" end="63960" title="sniper rifle" label="sniper rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q920165" start="64584" end="64599" title="muzzle velocity" label="muzzle velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="64868" end="64872" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="65075" end="65083" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="65085" end="65096" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="65098" end="65106" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="65111" end="65119" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="65158" end="65169" title="air density" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="Q673166" start="65173" end="65193" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s gravity" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="65217" end="65225" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="65230" end="65238" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="65243" end="65253" title="gyroscopic" label="gyroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q622975" start="65326" end="65336" title="magnus effect" label="spin drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q169973" start="65402" end="65417" title="Coriolis effect" label="Coriolis effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="65425" end="65433" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="65457" end="65488" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="northern or southern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q752977" start="65517" end="65530" title="Eötvös effect" label="Eötvös effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="66356" end="66365" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426632" start="66820" end="66837" title="laser rangefinder" label="laser rangefinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q950319" start="68533" end="68552" title="Internal ballistics" label="Internal ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q320128" start="68631" end="68654" title="Transitional ballistics" label="Transitional ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q198944" start="68779" end="68798" title="Terminal ballistics" label="Terminal ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10281355" start="68862" end="68888" title="Trajectory of a projectile" label="Trajectory of a projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333274" start="68939" end="68959" title="Rifleman&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Rifleman&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492093" start="69073" end="69091" title="Franklin Ware Mann" label="Franklin Ware Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673227" start="69142" end="69179" title="Table of handgun and rifle cartridges" label="Table of handgun and rifle cartridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12412053" start="69181" end="69192" title="Sighting in" label="Sighting in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134322" start="69211" end="69217" title="Sight (device)" label="sights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72357" end="72378" title="QuickLOAD#QuickTARGET external ballistics predictor computer program" label="QuickTARGET Unlimited"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584914" wikidata="Q339702" url="?curid=584914" title="Bill Rancic">
<text>William Rancic ( ; born May 16, 1971) is an American entrepreneur who was the first candidate hired by The Trump Organization at the conclusion of the first season of Donald Trump&#x27;s reality television show &quot;The Apprentice&quot;. He is married to E! News host Giuliana Rancic and currently resides in Chicago, Illinois.

==Early life==
Rancic was born on May 16, 1971, in Chicago to Gail () and Edward Rancic, who died of cancer in 1999. Rancic has three sisters, Beth, Katie, and Karen. He grew up in the suburb of Orland Park, in a family of Croatian and Irish heritage. His paternal grandfather Nikola Rančić had immigrated to the United States from Split. Rancic attended St. Michael&#x27;s School and graduated from Carl Sandburg High School. He earned a B.S. from Loyola University Chicago.

==&quot;The Apprentice&quot;==
Rancic was one of the job applicants in the first season of &quot;The Apprentice&quot; during the spring of 2004, as one of 16 contestants. Rancic was hired at the conclusion of the 14-week job interview after Donald Trump selected him over finalist Kwame Jackson.

For the final challenge against competitor Kwame Jackson, Trump gave Rancic the task of running a celebrity golf outing at Trump National Golf Club Westchester in Briarcliff Manor, New York, while Jackson was tasked to manage a Jessica Simpson concert. At the final board meeting, Jackson remarked that running a golf outing was the easier of the two tasks, which brought a disagreement from Trump VP Carolyn Kepcher, who was managing a golf course when Trump hired her. Trump hired Rancic.

Rancic was elected to take charge of the construction of the Trump Tower Chicago in his native Chicago, on the site of the demolished &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; building. His other option was to oversee and manage a new Trump National Golf Course and resort in Los Angeles.

Rancic said that, after his one-year contract as Trump&#x27;s Apprentice expired, he would leave the job and start his own company. He instead opted to remain part of the Trump Organization, and in some seasons filled in as a judge when regular judge George H. Ross was away on business.

==Career after &quot;The Apprentice&quot;==
===Entertainment===
In September 2007, Rancic co-hosted iVillage&#x27;s &quot;In the Loop with iVillage,&quot; a TV show and webcast produced by NBC Universal. NBC commissioned a set at the Universal Orlando Resort in Florida. In September 2008, Rancic began as host for the A&amp;E reality show &quot;We Mean Business,&quot; in which small business owners undergo business make-overs.

In 2008, Rancic and his wife, TV host Giuliana Rancic (née DePandi), started a joint television production company, You and I Productions, which produces reality and scripted programming for television. In 2009, they started their own reality-television show &quot;Giuliana and Bill&quot; which aired on the E! network. In 2010, Rancic started hosting a news program called &quot;America Now,&quot; which is broadcast across the United States on stations owned by Raycom Media. The following year, &quot;America Now&quot; was brought back for a second season, with Leeza Gibbons joining Bill Rancic. Originally, the show was on every weekend, but when Leeza Gibbons joined the show, it moved to a Monday through Friday timeslot.

In 2012, Rancic became a television spokesperson for the product Rogaine, appearing in national commercials detailing his experience with hair loss. In April 2014, Rancic began hosting the Food Network competitive cooking series &quot;Kitchen Casino&quot;, where chefs participate in three casino-themed challenges in an attempt to win up to $30,000.

In 2016, Rancic published his first novel, &quot;First Light&quot;, to mixed reviews.

===Chicago real estate===
In 2009, Rancic sold a century-old Gold Coast row house he had bought in 2007, after extensive renovations. In 2011, Rancic sold a condo on the 50th floor of the Park Tower building, on the Magnificent Mile in Chicago, less than 20 months after purchasing the unit.

Rancic owned a home in Hinsdale, Illinois, which was prominently featured on his reality show. He sold it in February 2011 after extensive renovations.

In 2013, Rancic and his wife purchased a 19th-century house on Bellevue Place, which they rehabbed and sold in 2019.

===Restaurants===
In August 2011, Rancic and his wife entered into a partnership with Lettuce Entertain You Enterprises to open an Italian restaurant in Chicago. The restaurant was named &quot;RPM Italian&quot;, and it opened in February 2012 in Chicago&#x27;s River North District. They opened several more restaurants, including &quot;RPM Steak&quot; in Chicago, another &quot;RPM Italian&quot; in Washington, D.C., and a planned &quot;RPM On the Water&quot; opening in 2019 in Chicago. The restaurants have been popular with celebrities, including Barack Obama and Michelle Obama.

==Personal life==
In December 2006, he became engaged to Giuliana DePandi, and the couple wed in September 2007 in Chiesa di Santa Sofia, Capri.

On April 23, 2012, Giuliana and Rancic announced on &quot;The Today Show&quot; that they were expecting their first child via gestational carrier. In August 2012, the couple had a son in Denver, Colorado.

==Published works==
*
*

==References==
==External links==
* 
* The Apprentice Rules Bill Rancic Bio
* Giuliana and Bill
* IVillage Official Website
* SupportSquad Ultra Fast Video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q339702" start="0" end="14" title="Bill Rancic" label="William Rancic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="53" end="65" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462124" start="103" end="125" title="The Trump Organization" label="The Trump Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="167" end="179" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q863122" start="217" end="231" title="The Apprentice (American TV series)" label="The Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321351" start="256" end="263" title="E! News" label="E! News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281335" start="269" end="284" title="Giuliana Rancic" label="Giuliana Rancic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="310" end="327" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="381" end="388" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013520" start="525" end="536" title="Orland Park, Illinois" label="Orland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="553" end="558" title="Croat" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="566" end="571" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="643" end="656" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="662" end="667" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040757" start="730" end="755" title="Carl Sandburg High School" label="Carl Sandburg High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537759" start="779" end="804" title="Loyola University Chicago" label="Loyola University Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240395" start="882" end="894" title="The Apprentice (American season 1)" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q863122" start="904" end="918" title="The Apprentice (American TV series)" label="The Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q24658294" start="1227" end="1263" title="Trump National Golf Club Westchester" label="Trump National Golf Club Westchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452629" start="1267" end="1293" title="Briarcliff Manor, New York" label="Briarcliff Manor, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045398" start="1505" end="1520" title="Carolyn Kepcher" label="Carolyn Kepcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q546221" start="1657" end="1676" title="Trump International Hotel and Tower (Chicago)" label="Trump Tower Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="1736" end="1753" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847774" start="1819" end="1845" title="Trump National Golf Course" label="Trump National Golf Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507484" start="2125" end="2139" title="George H. Ross" label="George H. Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997482" start="2263" end="2271" title="iVillage" label="iVillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997482" start="2285" end="2310" title="In the Loop with iVillage" label="In the Loop with iVillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109638" start="2332" end="2339" title="webcast" label="webcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="2352" end="2365" title="NBC Universal" label="NBC Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q778011" start="2397" end="2421" title="Universal Orlando Resort" label="Universal Orlando Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977676" start="2509" end="2525" title="We Mean Business (TV series)" label="We Mean Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281335" start="2632" end="2647" title="Giuliana Rancic" label="Giuliana Rancic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="2829" end="2847" title="reality-television" label="reality-television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565222" start="2859" end="2876" title="Giuliana and Bill" label="Giuliana and Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="2902" end="2904" title="E!" label="E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134015" start="3058" end="3070" title="Raycom Media" label="Raycom Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q512367" start="3159" end="3172" title="Leeza Gibbons" label="Leeza Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q424165" start="3389" end="3396" title="Minoxidil" label="Rogaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435969" start="3513" end="3525" title="Food Network" label="Food Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998459" start="3559" end="3573" title="Kitchen Casino" label="Kitchen Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578644" start="3824" end="3834" title="Gold Coast Historic District (Chicago)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810424" start="3951" end="3961" title="Park Tower (Chicago)" label="Park Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q285218" start="3979" end="3995" title="Magnificent Mile" label="Magnificent Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q939529" start="4079" end="4097" title="Hinsdale, Illinois" label="Hinsdale, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533864" start="4413" end="4446" title="Lettuce Entertain You Enterprises" label="Lettuce Entertain You Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337657" start="4588" end="4608" title="River North Gallery District, Near North Side, Chicago" label="River North District"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4727" end="4743" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="4878" end="4890" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="4895" end="4909" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281335" start="4969" end="4985" title="Giuliana Rancic" label="Giuliana DePandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674220" start="5027" end="5055" title="Chiesa di Santa Sofia, Capri" label="Chiesa di Santa Sofia, Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="5245" end="5251" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584915" wikidata="Q3326170" url="?curid=584915" title="Mouse Trap (1981 video game)">
<text>Mouse Trap is a maze video game developed by Exidy and released in arcades in 1981. It is similar to &quot;Pac-Man&quot;, with the main character replaced by a mouse, the dots with cheese, the ghosts with cats, and the energizers with bones. After collecting a bone, pressing a button turns the mouse into a dog for a brief period of time. Color-coded doors in the maze can be toggled by pressing a button of the same color. A hawk periodically flies across the maze, unrestricted by walls.

Coleco ported &quot;Mouse Trap&quot; to ColecoVision as a 1982 launch title, then later to the Intellivision and Atari 2600.

==Gameplay==
The player uses a four-position joystick to maneuver a mouse throughout a maze and eat pieces of cheese scattered along the paths. Six cats patrol the maze and chase the player, with two present at the outset and four more being released one at a time. The maze has three sets of color-coded doors, which the player can open or close by pressing the corresponding buttons in order to block the cats&#x27; approach. The player can also escape the cats by entering the &quot;IN&quot; box at the center of the screen, which will teleport the mouse to one of the four corners at random. Contact between the mouse and a cat costs the player one life.

The player can pick up bones from the corners of the maze, then use them later by pressing a fourth button. Doing so turns the mouse into a dog for a short time, during which it can eat the cats for bonus points and temporarily remove them from the maze, but the cats will move at a faster speed when they re-spawn into the maze. Unused bones carry over from one level to the next and from one life to the next.

At times, a hawk will fly through the maze, trying to catch the player. The hawk can eat both the mouse and the dog, costing the player one life, and it can fly over the walls. It can only be foiled by using the &quot;IN&quot; box, which causes it to fly randomly and then leave the maze.

At any given time, a bonus object is present in the maze and can be eaten for points, causing a more valuable object to appear elsewhere. The bonus sequence restarts when the player either loses a life or eats the most valuable object in the sequence. When all of the cheese has been eaten, the player earns a bonus and moves to the next level.

==Ports==
Coleco ported &quot;Mouse Trap&quot; to its own ColecoVision console, with 15 prizes instead of 32, an option to leave the hawk out, and different sound effects. Coleco&#x27;s Intellivision port adds an audio warning when a cat is about to enter the maze. The score differs: cheese is worth 
90 points, and cats are worth 100, 300, 500, 700, 900 and 1100 points.

Coleco also ported &quot;Mouse Trap&quot; to the Atari 2600, simplifying graphics and gameplay. The maze is more squat with brighter walls, and doors form a single-colored set that flickers. Gameplay basics are the same, but the hawk, the &quot;IN&quot; area, and the bonus prizes are missing; there are three cats instead of six, and all doors move at once. Additionally, pressing the single joystick button will switch the doors&#x27; positions or activate a stored bone, depending on if the player does a long press or a quick tap. Scoring is also reduced significantly: cheese is worth 1 point instead of 10 points, cats are worth 10 points and do not increase in value, and clearing a maze awards only 100 points.

==Reception==
In his 1982 book &quot;How to Beat the Video Games&quot; Michael Blanchet said that &quot;Mousetrap&quot;&#x27;s gameplay &quot;closely resembles that of &quot;Pac-Man&quot; with a couple of very interesting twists&quot;.
According to &quot;Electronic Games&quot; in 1983, &quot;Mouse Trap&quot; was unsuccessful because arcade owners viewed it as another &quot;basic&quot; maze game.

===Reviews===
* &quot;Games&quot; #44

==Legacy==
In 1982, Buckner &amp; Garcia recorded the song &quot;Mousetrap&quot; using sound effects from the game and released it on the album &quot;Pac-Man Fever&quot;. When they re-recorded the album in 1999, they were unable to find a machine and instead used dog and cat sounds recorded in a pet store.

==See also==
* &quot;Lady Bug&quot;
* &quot;Lock &#x27;n&#x27; Chase&quot;

==References==
== External links ==
* &quot;Mouse Trap&quot; at Giant Bomb
* &quot;Mouse Trap&quot; at Killer List of Videogames</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q636926" start="45" end="50" title="Exidy" label="Exidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="107" end="114" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046862" start="532" end="544" title="ColecoVision" label="ColecoVision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061441" start="587" end="600" title="Intellivision" label="Intellivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="605" end="615" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="686" end="691" title="mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="728" end="734" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="766" end="769" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="1418" end="1421" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="1703" end="1707" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q954124" start="2337" end="2343" title="Coleco" label="Coleco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046862" start="2385" end="2397" title="ColecoVision" label="ColecoVision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061441" start="2513" end="2526" title="Intellivision" label="Intellivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="2750" end="2760" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037983" start="3676" end="3692" title="Electronic Games" label="Electronic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="3843" end="3848" title="Games (magazine)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q999892" start="3880" end="3900" title="Buckner &amp;amp; Garcia" label="Buckner &amp;amp; Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117474" start="4010" end="4023" title="Pac-Man Fever (album)" label="Pac-Man Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800074" start="4190" end="4198" title="Lady Bug (video game)" label="Lady Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093914" start="4213" end="4237" title="Lock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Chase" label="Lock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657282" start="4309" end="4319" title="Giant Bomb" label="Giant Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741369" start="4348" end="4373" title="Killer List of Videogames" label="Killer List of Videogames"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584921" wikidata="Q4914810" url="?curid=584921" title="Biofact">
<text>Biofact may refer to:

*Biofact (archaeology)
*Biofact (biology)
*Biofact (philosophy)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2505628" start="24" end="45" title="Biofact (archaeology)" label="Biofact (archaeology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914811" start="47" end="64" title="Biofact (biology)" label="Biofact (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q864305" start="66" end="86" title="Biofact (philosophy)" label="Biofact (philosophy)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584924" wikidata="Q246189" url="?curid=584924" title="PPT">
<text>PPT may refer to:
== Organizations ==
* Parti Progressiste Tchadien, a political party active in Chad between 1947 and 1973
* Partido del Pueblo Trabajador (Working People&#x27;s Party of Puerto Rico), a political party in Puerto Rico
* Patria Para Todos, a left-wing political party in Venezuela
* Permanent Peoples&#x27; Tribunal, an international opinion tribunal founded in Bologna, 1979
* Plunge Protection Team, a nickname of the United States President&#x27;s Working Group on Financial Markets
* Porin Pallo-Toverit, the former name of the Finnish football club FC Jazz
* PTT Public Company Limited, Thai state-owned oil and gas company

== Science and technology ==
* .ppt, the file format used by Microsoft PowerPoint presentation software
* Parts-per notation for &quot;parts-per-trillion&quot; (more common) or &quot;parts-per-thousand&quot; (less common)
* PerlPowerTools, a revitalized of the classic Unix command set in pure Perl
* Positive partial transpose, a criterion used in quantum mechanics
* Power point tracking, a solar energy charging technology
* Primitive Pythagorean triple, three integers that form a right triangle
* Probabilistic polynomial-time, a class of Turing machines that are probabilistic and run in polynomial-time
* Pulsed plasma thruster, a method of spacecraft propulsion

=== Biology and medicine ===
* Palmitoyl protein thioesterase, enzymes that remove thioester-linked fatty acyl groups
** PPT1, a member of the palmitoyl protein thioesterase family
** PPT2, a member of the palmitoyl protein thioesterase family
* Pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus, a collection of neurons located in the brainstem
* Peritoneal pull-through vaginoplasty, a surgical procedure used in gender-affirming care
* Podophyllotoxin, a medical cream to treat genital warts
* Propylpyrazoletriol, a selective agonist of ERα used in scientific research
* Protopanaxatriol, a molecule found in ginseng

== Transportation ==
* Faa&#x27;a International Airport (IATA airport code), Papeete, Tahiti, French Polynesia
* Personal public transport, a transportation model

== Games ==
* Partouche Poker Tour, a poker tournament
* Professional Poker Tour, a series of televised poker tournaments

== Other ==
* Periodismo para todos, a journalist TV programme of Argentina</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246189" start="0" end="3" title="PPT" label="PPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970314" start="40" end="67" title="Parti Progressiste Tchadien" label="Parti Progressiste Tchadien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847555" start="126" end="155" title="Partido del Pueblo Trabajador" label="Partido del Pueblo Trabajador"/>
<link wikidata="Q60668" start="237" end="254" title="Patria Para Todos" label="Patria Para Todos"/>
<link wikidata="Q574461" start="299" end="331" title="Permanent Peoples&amp;#x27; Tribunal" label="Permanent Peoples&amp;#x27; Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="467" end="501" title="Working Group on Financial Markets#Plunge Protection Team" label="Working Group on Financial Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387226" start="570" end="577" title="FC Jazz" label="FC Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810389" start="580" end="606" title="PTT Public Company Limited" label="PTT Public Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q11266" start="677" end="681" title=".ppt" label=".ppt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="752" end="770" title="Parts-per notation" label="Parts-per notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913287" start="870" end="884" title="PerlPowerTools" label="PerlPowerTools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167895" start="947" end="973" title="Positive partial transpose" label="Positive partial transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052007" start="1015" end="1035" title="Power point tracking" label="Power point tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q208225" start="1074" end="1102" title="Pythagorean triple" label="Primitive Pythagorean triple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563053" start="1148" end="1177" title="Probabilistic polynomial-time" label="Probabilistic polynomial-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509676" start="1258" end="1280" title="Pulsed plasma thruster" label="Pulsed plasma thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128404" start="1348" end="1378" title="Palmitoyl protein thioesterase" label="Palmitoyl protein thioesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030738" start="1438" end="1442" title="PPT1" label="PPT1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18034041" start="1501" end="1505" title="PPT2" label="PPT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345673" start="1563" end="1597" title="Pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus" label="Pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458534" start="1650" end="1686" title="Peritoneal pull-through vaginoplasty" label="Peritoneal pull-through vaginoplasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q421193" start="1741" end="1756" title="Podophyllotoxin" label="Podophyllotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100746" start="1799" end="1818" title="Propylpyrazoletriol" label="Propylpyrazoletriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252078" start="1877" end="1893" title="Protopanaxatriol" label="Protopanaxatriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049719" start="1947" end="1979" title="Faa&amp;#x27;a International Airport" label="Faa&amp;#x27;a International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170534" start="2037" end="2062" title="Personal public transport" label="Personal public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036907" start="2102" end="2122" title="Partouche Poker Tour" label="Partouche Poker Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412834" start="2145" end="2168" title="Professional Poker Tour" label="Professional Poker Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583105" start="2225" end="2246" title="Periodismo para todos" label="Periodismo para todos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584928" wikidata="Q706084" url="?curid=584928" title="Ed Sanders">
<text>Edward Sanders (born August 17, 1939) is an American poet, singer, activist, author, publisher and longtime member of the rock band the Fugs. He has been called a bridge between the Beat and hippie generations. Sanders is considered to have been active and &quot;present at the counterculture&#x27;s creation.&quot;

==Biography==
Sanders was born in Kansas City, Missouri. He dropped out of the University of Missouri in 1958 and hitchhiked to New York City&#x27;s Greenwich Village to attend New York University. He graduated in 1964, with a degree in Greek.

Sanders wrote his first notable poem, &quot;Poem from Jail&quot;, on toilet paper in his cell after being jailed for protesting the launch of nuclear submarines armed with nuclear missiles in 1961. In 1962, he founded the avant-garde journal &quot;Fuck You/A Magazine of the Arts&quot;. Sanders opened the Peace Eye Bookstore at 383 East Tenth Street in what was then the Lower East Side; the store became a gathering place for Bohemians, writers and radicals. On January 1, 1966, police raided Peace Eye Bookstore and charged Sanders with obscenity, charges he fended off with the aid of the ACLU. Notoriety generated by the case led to his appearance on the February 17, 1967 cover of &quot;Life Magazine&quot;, which proclaimed him &quot;a leader of New York&#x27;s Other Culture.&quot;

In late 1964, Sanders founded the Fugs with Tuli Kupferberg. The band broke up in 1969 and reformed in 1984. On October 21, 1967, on the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam&#x27;s March on the Pentagon, Sanders helped The Fugs and the San Francisco Diggers in an attempt to &quot;exorcise&quot; The Pentagon. In 1968, he signed the &quot;Writers and Editors War Tax Protest&quot; pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War.

In 1969, Sanders recorded and released his first solo album for Reprise Records, &quot;Sanders&#x27; Truck Stop&quot;. Reviewing in &quot;Christgau&#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies&quot; (1981), Robert Christgau wrote: &quot;This is literally a country-rock takeoff—not a parody but a departure. But though I hesitate to criticize a man who is not only a saint and a genius but who says hello to me at the post office, I must point out that the yodeling country twang Sanders developed with the Fugs has never known the difference between parody and departure, which makes some of these songs seem crueller than they&#x27;re intended to be. Of course, sometimes they&#x27;re cruel on purpose—like &#x27;The Iliad,&#x27; a saga of good old queer-bashing with a Greek-to-me intro. And sometimes, like &#x27;Jimmy Joe, the Hippybilly Boy,&#x27; they&#x27;re—snurfle—lyrical and sad.&quot;

In 1971, Sanders wrote &quot;The Family&quot;, a profile of the events leading up to the Tate-LaBianca murders. He attended the Manson group&#x27;s murder trial, and spent time at their residence at the Spahn Movie Ranch. There have been two updated editions of &quot;The Family&quot;, the most recent in 2002. The Process Church of the Final Judgement sued Sanders&#x27;s U.S. publisher for defamation over a chapter linking them with Manson&#x27;s activities. The case was settled by the publisher, who removed the disputed chapter from future editions. The Process Church then sued Sanders&#x27;s British publisher, but lost the suit and were forced to pay the defendant&#x27;s legal fees.

Later in the 1970s, Sanders contracted to write a book about the popular rock band the Eagles. In an interview, Sanders described the contract as paying &quot;very, very well.&quot; He worked on it for two years, generating a four volume manuscript that was never published. In 2005, he sold lyrics worksheets that he&#x27;d received in connection with the intended biography, leading to the buyer&#x27;s and others&#x27; prosecution in 2024 for conspiracy to criminally possess stolen property; however, the trial would later be dropped by prosecutors. Sanders was not charged.

Sanders is the founder of the Investigative Poetry movement. His 1976 manifesto &quot;Investigative Poetry&quot;, published by Lawrence Ferlinghetti&#x27;s City Lights Books, influenced investigative writing and poetry during the ensuing decades. In the 1990s, Sanders began utilizing the principles of Investigative Poetry to create a series of book-length poems on literary figures and American History. Among these works are &quot;Chekhov&quot;, &quot;1968: A History in Verse&quot;, and &quot;The Poetry and Life of Allen Ginsberg&quot;. In 1998, Sanders began work on a 9-volume &quot;America, A History in Verse&quot;. The first five volumes, tracing the history of the 20th century, were published in a CD format at over 2,000 pages in length.

Sanders received a Guggenheim Fellowship in poetry in 1983, and a National Endowment for the Arts Fellowship in poetry in 1987. His &quot;Thirsting for Peace in a Raging Century, Selected Poems 1961–1985&quot; won an American Book Award in 1988. He was chosen to deliver the Charles Olson Memorial Lectures at SUNY Buffalo in 1983. In 1997, he received a Writers Community residency sponsored by the YMCA National Writer&#x27;s Voice through the Lila Wallace Reader&#x27;s Digest Fund.

In 1997, he was awarded a grant from the Foundation for Contemporary Arts Grants to Artists Award. In 2000 and 2003, he was Writer-in-Residence at the New York State Writers Institute in Albany, New York.

Sanders lives in Woodstock, New York, where he publishes the online &quot;Woodstock Journal&quot; with his wife of over 47 years, writer and painter Miriam R. Sanders. He also invents musical instruments, including the Talking Tie, the microtonal Microlyre, and the Lisa Lyre, a musical contraption involving light-activated switches and a reproduction of Da Vinci&#x27;s &quot;Mona Lisa&quot;.

==Selected bibliography==
*&quot;Fuck You: A Magazine of the Arts&quot;, New York: Peace Eye Bookstore (1962-1965)
*&quot;Poem from Jail&quot;, San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1963
*&quot;Peace Eye&quot; (1965)
*&quot;Shards of God&quot; (1970)
*&quot;The Family: The Story of Charles Manson&#x27;s Dune Buggy Attack Battalion&quot; (1971, New Edition, 1990)
*&quot;Egyptian Hieroglyphics&quot; (1973)
*&quot;Tales of Beatnik Glory&quot;, Volume 1 (1975)
*&quot;Investigative Poetry&quot; (1976)
*&quot;20,000 A.D.&quot; (1976)
*&quot;The Party: A Chronological Perspective on a Confrontation at a Buddhist Seminary&quot;, Woodstock, N.Y.: Poetry, Crime &amp; Culture Press (1977)
*&quot;Fame &amp; Love in New York&quot; (1980)
*&quot;The Z-D Generation&quot; (1981)
*&quot;The Cutting Prow&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Hymn to Maple Syrup &amp; Other Poems&quot; (1985)
*&quot;Thirsting for Peace in a Raging Century: Selected Poems 1961–1985&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Poems for Robin&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Tales of Beatnik Glory&quot;, Volumes 1 &amp; 2 (1990) New York: Citadel Underground. 
*&quot;Hymn to the Rebel Cafe&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Chekhov&quot; (1995)
*&quot;1968: A History in Verse&quot; (1997)
*&quot;America, A History in Verse&quot;, Vol. 1 (1900–1939) (2000)
*&quot;The Poetry and Life of Allen Ginsberg,&quot; The Overlook Press (2000)
*&quot;America, A History in Verse&quot;, Vol. 2 (1940–1961) (2001)
*&quot;America, A History in Verse&quot;, Vol. 3 (1962–1970) (2004)
*&quot;Poems for New Orleans&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Thirsting for Peace in a Raging Century&quot;, Selected Poems (1961–1985) (2009)
*&quot;Let&#x27;s Not Keep Fighting the Trojan War&quot;, New and Selected Poems (1986–2009) (2009)
*&quot;Edward Sanders | Glyphs&quot; The Brother in Elysium (2011)
*&quot;&quot;A Book of Glyphs&quot; (trade edition) Granary Books (2014)
*&quot;A Book of Glyphs&quot; (limited edition) Granary Books (2014)
*&quot;Glyph Notes: Commentary on A Book of Glyphs&quot; (pdf of booklet included with the limited edition) Granary Books (2014)
*&quot;Sharon Tate: A Life&quot; (2015)
*&quot;Broken Glory: The Final Years of Robert F. Kennedy&quot; Arcade Publishing (2018) illustrated by Rick Veitch

==Selected solo discography==
*&quot;Sanders&#x27; Truckstop&quot; 1969
*&quot;Beer Cans on the Moon&quot; 1972
*&quot;Yiddish-speaking socialists of the Lower East Side&quot; 1991
*&quot;Songs in ancient Greek&quot; 1992
*&quot;American Bard&quot; 1996
*&quot;Thirsting for Peace&quot; 2005
*&quot;Poems for New Orleans&quot; 2007
*&quot;Surreal Housewives of Woodstock&quot; 2011 (never released, with Jules Shear)
*&quot;The Sanders-Olufsen Poetry and Classical Music Project&quot; 2023
*&quot;Ed Sanders and The Plastic People of the Universe - The Garden is Open - In Concert at the Prague Writers Festival 2005&quot; Released 2024
*&quot;Ed Sanders - Rare and Unreleased Recordings 1965-99&quot; - 4 CD BOX Set in Hardcover Book Format Released 2024

==Discography with the Fugs==
*See Fugs Discography

==See also==
*List of peace activists
*&quot;Poetry in Motion&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Woodstock Journal&quot;

==Bibliography==
*Charters, Ann (ed.). &quot;The Portable Beat Reader&quot;. Penguin Books. New York. 1992. 

==References==
==External links==
*Guide to the Ed Sanders Papers at the University of Connecticut Archives &amp; Special Collections
*The Woodstock Journal
*Photo Ed Sanders Performing With The Fugs, NYC, 1967 by Michael Maggid
*Feature on Ed Sanders from Paste Magazine by Matt Fink
*Audio recordings of Ed Sanders, from Maryland Institute College of Art&#x27;s Decker Library, Internet Archive
*Interview with Ed Sanders by Stephen McKiernan, from Binghamton University Libraries Center for the Study of the 1960s.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q706084" start="0" end="14" title="Ed Sanders" label="Edward Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q928304" start="132" end="140" title="the Fugs" label="the Fugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="182" end="186" title="Beat generation" label="Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="191" end="197" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="278" end="299" title="counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="351" end="372" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="396" end="418" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="466" end="483" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="494" end="513" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="554" end="559" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="704" end="721" title="nuclear submarine" label="nuclear submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="784" end="795" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506990" start="810" end="841" title="Fuck You (magazine)" label="Fuck You/A Magazine of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="934" end="949" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="990" end="999" title="Bohemianism" label="Bohemians"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="1155" end="1159" title="ACLU" label="ACLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="1255" end="1268" title="Life Magazine" label="Life Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q928304" start="1383" end="1391" title="the Fugs" label="the Fugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348546" start="1397" end="1412" title="Tuli Kupferberg" label="Tuli Kupferberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974373" start="1490" end="1547" title="National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam" label="National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1555" end="1576" title="National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam#1967 March on the Pentagon" label="March on the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206345" start="1610" end="1631" title="Diggers (theater)" label="San Francisco Diggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="1655" end="1663" title="exorcise" label="exorcise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="1670" end="1682" title="The Pentagon" label="The Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004557" start="1713" end="1748" title="Writers and Editors War Tax Protest" label="Writers and Editors War Tax Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1816" end="1827" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="1894" end="1909" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise Records"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1968" end="2027" title="Christgau&amp;#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies" label="Christgau&amp;#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="2042" end="2058" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q613408" start="2092" end="2104" title="country-rock" label="country-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310282" start="2586" end="2599" title="gay bashing" label="queer-bashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q612282" start="2607" end="2618" title="Greek to me" label="Greek-to-me"/>
<link wikidata="Q24930704" start="2823" end="2844" title="Leno and Rosemary LaBianca" label="Tate-LaBianca murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q485508" start="2862" end="2868" title="Charlie Manson" label="Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572840" start="2937" end="2954" title="Spahn Movie Ranch" label="Spahn Movie Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504919" start="3045" end="3086" title="The Process Church of The Final Judgment" label="The Process Church of the Final Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="3126" end="3136" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="3511" end="3521" title="Eagles (band)" label="the Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q314269" start="4135" end="4156" title="Lawrence Ferlinghetti" label="Lawrence Ferlinghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="4779" end="4800" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="4826" end="4857" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q463606" start="4977" end="4996" title="American Book Awards" label="American Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q681025" start="5070" end="5082" title="University at Buffalo, The State University of New York" label="SUNY Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="5160" end="5164" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089168" start="5206" end="5244" title="Lila Wallace Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest Fund" label="Lila Wallace Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474406" start="5288" end="5320" title="Foundation for Contemporary Arts" label="Foundation for Contemporary Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="5434" end="5450" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q608293" start="5470" end="5489" title="Woodstock, New York" label="Woodstock, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045756" start="5689" end="5699" title="microtonal music" label="microtonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="5809" end="5817" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="5831" end="5840" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394278" start="6008" end="6025" title="City Lights Bookstore" label="City Lights Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755744" start="7166" end="7184" title="The Overlook Press" label="The Overlook Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7595" end="7617" title="The Brother in Elysium" label="The Brother in Elysium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150386" start="7677" end="7690" title="Granary Books" label="Granary Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150386" start="7746" end="7759" title="Granary Books" label="Granary Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150386" start="7875" end="7888" title="Granary Books" label="Granary Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785084" start="8000" end="8017" title="Arcade Publishing" label="Arcade Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431609" start="8040" end="8051" title="Rick Veitch" label="Rick Veitch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8845" end="8861" title="The Fugs#Discography" label="Fugs Discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="8877" end="8900" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207526" start="8908" end="8924" title="Poetry in Motion (film)" label="Poetry in Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781349" start="9404" end="9437" title="Maryland Institute College of Art" label="Maryland Institute College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="9461" end="9477" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584934" wikidata="Q700730" url="?curid=584934" title="Harold Raynsford Stark">
<text>Harold Raynsford Stark (November 12, 1880 – August 20, 1972) was an officer in the United States Navy during World War I and World War II, who served as the 8th Chief of Naval Operations from August 1, 1939, to March 26, 1942.

==Early life and career==
Stark enrolled in the United States Naval Academy in 1899 and graduated with the class of 1903. As a plebe there he received the nickname &quot;Betty&quot;. From 1907 to 1909, Stark served on the battleship before and during the United States Atlantic Fleet&#x27;s cruise around the world.

==World War I==
Subsequently, Stark had extensive duty in torpedo boats and destroyers, including command of the Asiatic Fleet&#x27;s torpedo flotilla in 1917, when these old and small destroyers steamed from the Philippines to the Mediterranean to join in World War I operations. Stark served on the staff of Commander, United States Naval Forces operating in Europe from November 1917 to January 1919.

==Interwar years==
Following World War I, Stark was executive officer of the battleships and , attended the Naval War College, commanded the ammunition ship and served in naval ordnance positions.

During the later 1920s and into the mid-1930s, with the rank of captain, Stark was successively Chief of Staff to the Commander, Destroyer Squadrons Battle Fleet, Aide to the Secretary of the Navy, and Commanding Officer of USS &quot;West Virginia&quot;. From 1934 to 1937, Rear Admiral Stark was Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance. Then from July 1938, he served at sea as Commander Cruiser Division Three and Commander of Cruisers in the Battle Fleet, with the rank of vice admiral.

==Chief of Naval Operations and beginning of World War II==
In August 1939, Stark became Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) with the rank of admiral. In that position, he oversaw the expansion of the navy during 1940 and 1941, and its involvement in the Neutrality Patrols against German submarines in the Atlantic during the latter part of 1941. It was at this time that he authored the Plan Dog memo, which laid the basis for America&#x27;s Europe first policy. He also orchestrated the navy&#x27;s change to adopting unrestricted submarine warfare in case of war with Japan; Stark expressly ordered it at 17:52 Washington time on 7 December 1941, not quite four hours after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. It appears the decision was taken without the knowledge or prior consent of the government. It violated the London Naval Treaty, to which the United States was signatory.

==After Pearl Harbor==
As CNO, Stark oversaw combat operations against Japan and the European Axis Powers that officially began in December 1941.

In March 1942, Stark was relieved as CNO by Admiral Ernest King. He went to Britain the next month to become Commander of United States Naval Forces Europe.

From his London headquarters, Stark nominally directed the naval part of the great buildup in England and US naval operations and training activities on the European side of the Atlantic. He received the additional title of Commander of the Twelfth Fleet in October 1943, and he supervised USN participation in the landings in Normandy, France, in June 1944. Stark built and maintained close relations with British civilian and naval leaders, who &quot;generally adored him,&quot; and also with the leaders of other Allied powers. Stark was particularly important in dealing with Charles de Gaulle; it was thanks to Stark that the US-British-Free French relationship continued to work. He earned high praise from Admiral King for his work.

After the Normandy landings, Stark faced a Court of Inquiry over his actions leading up to Pearl Harbor. The Court concluded that Stark had not conveyed the danger or provided enough information to Kimmel but that he had not been derelict. Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal had ordered the 1944 Board of Inquiry. Upon reviewing the report, Forrestal felt that the court had been too lenient in assigning blame for the disaster. The court had found that the Army and Navy had adequately cooperated in the defense of Pearl Harbor, there had been no information indicating that Japanese carriers were on their way to attack Pearl Harbor, and the attack had succeeded principally because of the aerial torpedo, a secret weapon whose use could not have been predicted.

Forrestal disapproved all of those findings and judged that Kimmel could have done more with the information he had had to prevent or mitigate the attack. Forrestal concluded that both Kimmel and Stark had &quot;failed to demonstrate the superior judgment necessary for exercising command commensurate with their rank and their assigned duties.&quot;
King&#x27;s endorsement of the report was scalding, leading to Stark being relieved.

In 1948, King reconsidered and requested that the endorsement be expunged: &quot;It was the only time that King ever admitted he had been wrong.&quot; The controversy surrounding him persisted after his death.
Stark&#x27;s most controversial service involved the growing menace of Japanese forces in the period before America was bombed into the war by the attack on Pearl Harbor. The controversy centers on whether he and his Director of War Plans Admiral Richmond K. Turner provided sufficient information to Admiral Husband E. Kimmel, Commander of the Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor, about Japanese moves in the fall of 1941 to enable Kimmel to anticipate an attack and to take steps to counter it. Captain (later Rear Admiral) Edwin T. Layton was Kimmel&#x27;s chief intelligence officer (later also Admiral Chester W. Nimitz&#x27;s intelligence officer) at the time of the attack. In his book, &quot;And I Was There: Pearl Harbor and MidwayBreaking the Secrets&quot; (1985), Layton maintained that Stark offered meaningless advice throughout the period; withheld vital information at the insistence of his Director of War Plans, Admiral Turner; showed timidity in dealing with the Japanese; and utterly failed to provide anything of use to Kimmel. John Costello (Layton&#x27;s co-author), in &quot;Days of Infamy&quot; (Pocket, 1994), points out that Douglas MacArthur had complete access to both and JN-25, with over eight hours warning, and was still caught by surprise.

Moreover, as the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers official historian Gordon Prange and his colleagues note in &quot;December 7, 1941&quot; (McGraw-Hill, 1988), the defense of the fleet was General Walter C. Short&#x27;s responsibility, not Kimmel&#x27;s. Turner&#x27;s insistence on having intelligence go through War Plans led Office of Naval Intelligence to a wrong belief that it was only to collect intelligence. Turner did not correct his view or aid Stark in understanding the problem. Among others, Morison and Layton agree that Turner was most responsible for the debacle, as does Ned Beach in &quot;Scapegoats&quot; (Annapolis, 1995).

In addition, there was considerable confusion over where Japan might strike: the United States, the Soviet Union, or British colonies in Asia and the Far East.

==Postwar==
From August 1945 until he left active duty in April 1946, Stark served in Washington, D.C., and made his home there after retirement. He died in 1972 and was buried at Arlington National Cemetery.

Stark maintained a family summer residence on Lake Carey in Tunkhannock, Pennsylvania, north of his native Wilkes-Barre, for many years and flew in by naval seaplane for weekends during his career. The cottage still stands on the western shore of the lake.

==Awards==

==Legacy==
The frigate was named in honor of Stark. Stark Learning Center, a major instructional facility at Wilkes University in Wilkes-Barre, PA, was also named in his honor, as was research and development laboratory and office building at the Naval Surface Warfare Center Dahlgren Division.

Stark was portrayed by actor Edward Andrews in the 1970 film &quot;Tora! Tora! Tora!&quot;.

==References==


==External links==
* Harold R Stark at ArlingtonCemetery.net, an unofficial website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q700730" start="0" end="22" title="Harold Raynsford Stark" label="Harold Raynsford Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="83" end="101" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="109" end="120" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="125" end="137" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="161" end="186" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="276" end="303" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204338" start="355" end="360" title="Plebe summer" label="plebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="450" end="460" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="483" end="511" title="United States Atlantic Fleet" label="United States Atlantic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q782583" start="519" end="542" title="Great White Fleet" label="cruise around the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="603" end="615" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="621" end="631" title="destroyers" label="destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263696" start="658" end="671" title="Asiatic Fleet" label="Asiatic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="758" end="769" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="777" end="790" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="1002" end="1019" title="executive officer" label="executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="1058" end="1075" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747343" start="1091" end="1106" title="ammunition ship" label="ammunition ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="1212" end="1219" title="Captain (naval)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870041" start="1297" end="1309" title="Battle Fleet" label="Battle Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="1323" end="1344" title="Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="1422" end="1434" title="Rear admiral (United States)" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906424" start="1458" end="1476" title="Bureau of Ordnance" label="Bureau of Ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870041" start="1585" end="1597" title="Battle Fleet" label="Battle Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="1720" end="1745" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="1769" end="1776" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q303469" start="1811" end="1832" title="Two-Ocean Navy Act" label="expansion of the navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q469062" start="1882" end="1899" title="Neutrality Patrol" label="Neutrality Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="1916" end="1926" title="submarines" label="submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1934" end="1942" title="Atlantic (ocean)" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200894" start="2016" end="2029" title="Plan Dog memo" label="Plan Dog memo"/>
<link wikidata="Q557479" start="2071" end="2083" title="Europe first" label="Europe first"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119089" start="2148" end="2178" title="unrestricted submarine warfare" label="unrestricted submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="2318" end="2340" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q704536" start="2450" end="2469" title="London Naval Treaty" label="London Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="2599" end="2619" title="Axis Powers" label="European Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q366731" start="2713" end="2724" title="Ernest King" label="Ernest King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495404" start="2783" end="2816" title="United States Naval Forces Europe - Naval Forces Africa" label="United States Naval Forces Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2828" end="2834" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7778500" start="3060" end="3073" title="United States Twelfth Fleet" label="Twelfth Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="3134" end="3154" title="Normandy Landings" label="landings in Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3335" end="3348" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="3399" end="3416" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981768" start="3603" end="3619" title="Naval Board of Inquiry" label="Court of Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q463385" start="3822" end="3837" title="James Forrestal" label="James Forrestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688039" start="4255" end="4269" title="aerial torpedo" label="aerial torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q728413" start="5223" end="5241" title="Richmond K. Turner" label="Richmond K. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q353110" start="5285" end="5302" title="Husband E. Kimmel" label="Husband E. Kimmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346859" start="5496" end="5511" title="Edwin T. Layton" label="Edwin T. Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="5577" end="5594" title="Chester W. Nimitz" label="Chester W. Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="6121" end="6138" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q471889" start="6261" end="6299" title="Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers" label="Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585690" start="6319" end="6332" title="Gordon Prange" label="Gordon Prange"/>
<link wikidata="Q954591" start="6447" end="6462" title="Walter C. Short" label="Walter C. Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967781" start="6578" end="6606" title="Office of Naval Intelligence" label="Office of Naval Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292826" start="6839" end="6848" title="Edward L. Beach, Jr." label="Ned Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="7142" end="7158" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="7236" end="7263" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184965" start="7326" end="7351" title="Tunkhannock, Pennsylvania" label="Tunkhannock, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q745594" start="7373" end="7385" title="Wilkes-Barre" label="Wilkes-Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002474" start="7645" end="7662" title="Wilkes University" label="Wilkes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981960" start="7783" end="7829" title="Naval Surface Warfare Center Dahlgren Division" label="Naval Surface Warfare Center Dahlgren Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048431" start="7861" end="7875" title="Edward Andrews" label="Edward Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q258092" start="7899" end="7916" title="Tora! Tora! Tora!" label="Tora! Tora! Tora!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584935" wikidata="Q3545675" url="?curid=584935" title="City of license">
<text>In U.S., Canadian, and Mexican broadcasting, a city of license or community of license is the community that a radio station or television station is officially licensed to serve by that country&#x27;s broadcast regulator.

In North American broadcast law, the concept of &quot;community of license&quot; dates to the early days of AM radio broadcasting. The requirement that a broadcasting station operate a &quot;main studio&quot; within a prescribed distance of the community which the station is licensed to serve appears in U.S. law as early as 1939.

Various specific obligations have been applied to broadcasters by governments to fulfill public policy objectives of broadcast localism, both in radio and later also in television, based on the legislative presumption that a broadcaster fills a similar role to that held by community newspaper publishers.

== United States ==
In the United States, the Communications Act of 1934 requires that &quot;the Commission shall make such distribution of licenses, frequencies, hours of operation, and of ower among the several States and communities as to provide a fair, efficient, and equitable distribution of radio service to each of the same.&quot; The Federal Communications Commission interprets this as requiring that every broadcast station &quot;be licensed to the principal community or other political subdivision which it primarily serves.&quot; For each broadcast service, the FCC defines a standard for what it means to serve a community; for example, commercial FM radio stations are required to provide a field strength of at least 3.16 millivolts per meter (mV/m) over the entire land area of the community, whereas non-commercial educational FM stations need only provide a field strength of 1 mV/m over 50% of the community&#x27;s population. This electric field contour is called the &quot;principal community contour&quot;.

The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) makes other requirements on stations relative to their communities of license; these requirements have varied over time. One example is the requirement for stations to identify themselves, by call sign and community, at sign-on, sign-off, and at the top of every hour of operation. Other current requirements include providing a local telephone number in the community&#x27;s calling area (or else a toll-free number). The former requirement to (in most cases) maintain an official main studio within 25 miles of the community&#x27;s geographic center was discontinued in December 2017 when the regulation was amended.

== Policy and regulatory issues ==

===Nominal main studio requirements===
The requirement that a station maintain a main studio within a station&#x27;s primary coverage area or within a maximum distance of the community of license originated in an era in which stations were legally required to generate local content and the majority of a station&#x27;s local, non-network programming was expected to originate in one central studio location. In this context, the view of broadcast regulators held that an expedient way to ensure that content broadcast reflected the needs of a local community was to allocate local broadcast stations and studios to each individual city.

The nominal main studio requirement has become less relevant with the introduction of videotape recorders in 1956 (which allowed local content to be easily generated off-site and transported to stations), the growing portability of broadcast-quality production equipment due to transistorization, and the elimination of requirements (in 1987 for most classes of US broadcast stations) that broadcasters originate any minimum amount of local content.

While the main studio concept nominally remains in US broadcast regulations, and certain administrative requirements (such as the local employment of a manager and the equivalent of at least one other full-time staff member, as well as the maintenance of a public inspection file) are still applied, removal of the requirement that stations originate local content greatly weakens the significance of maintaining a local main studio. A facility capable of originating programming and feeding it to a transmitter must still exist, but under normal conditions there most often is no requirement that these local studio actually be in active use to originate any specific local programming.

In many cases, the use of centralcasting and broadcast automation has greatly weakened the role and importance of manual control by staff at the nominal local station studio facilities.

Exceptions to these rules have been made by regulators, primarily on a case-by-case basis, to deal with &quot;satellite stations&quot;: transmitters which are licensed to comply with the technical requirements of full service broadcast facilities and have their own independent call signs and communities of license but are used simply as full-power broadcast translators to rebroadcast another station. These are most often non-commercial educational stations or stations serving thinly populated areas which otherwise would be too small to support an independent local full-service broadcaster.

===Political considerations===
The requirement that a full-service station maintain local presence in its community of license has been used by proponents of localism and community broadcasting as a means to oppose the construction and use of local stations as mere rebroadcasters or satellite-fed translators of distant stations. Without specific requirements for service to the local community of license, stations could be constructed in large number by out-of-region broadcasters who feed transmitters via satellite and offer no local content.

There also has been a de facto preference by regulators to encourage the assignment of broadcast licenses to smaller cities which otherwise would have no local voice, instead of allowing all broadcast activity to be concentrated in large metropolitan areas already served by many existing broadcasters.

When dealing with multiple competing US radio station applications, current FM allotment priorities are: (1) first full-time aural service; (2) second full-time aural service; (3) first local aural transmission service; and (4) Other public interest matters.

Similar criteria were extended to competing applicants for non-commercial stations by US legislation passed in 2000.

====Suburban community problem====
Any policy favoring applicants for communities not already served by an existing station has had the unintended effect of encouraging applicants to merely list a small suburb of a large city, claiming to be the &quot;first station in the community&quot; even though the larger city is well served by many existing stations. &quot;The Suburban Community Problem&quot; was recognized in FCC policy as early as 1965. &quot;Stations in metropolitan areas often tend to seek out national and regional advertisers and to identify themselves with the entire metropolitan area rather than with the particular needs of their specified communities,&quot; according to an FCC policy statement of the era. In order &quot;to discourage applicants for smaller communities who would be merely substandard stations for neighboring, larger communities,&quot; the FCC established the so-called &quot;Suburban Community presumption&quot; which required applicants for AM stations in such markets to demonstrate that they had ascertained the unmet programming needs of the specific communities and were prepared to satisfy those needs.

By 1969, the same issues had spread to FM licensing; instead of building transmitters in the community to nominally be served, applicants would often seek to locate the tower site at least halfway to the next major city. In one such precedent case (the Berwick Doctrine), the FCC required a hearing before Berwick, a prospective broadcaster, could locate transmitters midway between Pittston, Pennsylvania (the city of license), and a larger audience in Wilkes-Barre.

A related problem was that of &#x27;move-in&#x27;. Outlying communities would find their small-town local stations sold to outsiders, who would then attempt to change the community of license to a suburb of the nearest major city, move transmitter locations or remove existing local content from broadcasts in an attempt to move into the larger city.

The small town of Anniston, Alabama, due to its location 90 miles west of Atlanta and 65 miles east of Birmingham, has lost local content from both TV and FM stations which were re-targeted at one of the two larger urban centers or moved outright. (WHMA-FM Anniston is now licensed as WNNX College Park, Georgia—an Atlanta suburb—after a failed attempt to relicense it to Sandy Springs, Georgia—another Atlanta suburb. Transmitters are now in downtown Atlanta.) 
The same is true for WJSU, which served East Alabama with local news until the station was merged into a triplex to form ABC 33/40 which focuses its coverage on the central part of the state.

A 1988 precedent case (Faye and Richard Tuck, 3 FCC Rcd 5374, 1988) created the &quot;Tuck Analysis&quot; as a standard which attempts to address the Suburban Community Problem on a case-by-case basis by examining:
# the station&#x27;s proposed signal coverage over the urbanized area (the &quot;Coverage Factor&quot;);
# the relative population size and distance between the suburban community and the urban market (the &quot;Relative Size and Distance Factor&quot;); and
# the independence of the suburban community, based on various factors that would indicate self-sufficiency (the &quot;Independence Factor&quot;).

Despite the best intentions of regulators, the system remains prone to manipulation.

===Licensing and on-air identity===
While becoming less meaningful over the decades, stations are still required to post a public file somewhere within 25 miles of the city, and to cover the entire city with a local radio signal. In the United States, a station&#x27;s transmitter must be located so that it can provide a strong signal over nearly all of its &quot;principal community&quot; (5 mV/m or stronger at night for AM stations, 70 dbuV for FM, 35 dbu for DTV channels 2–6, 43 dbu for channels 7-13 and 48 dbu for channels 14+), even if it primarily serves another city. For example, American television station WTTV primarily serves Indianapolis; however, the transmitter is located farther south than the other stations in that city because it is licensed to Bloomington, 50 miles south of Indianapolis (it maintains a satellite station, WTTK, licensed to Kokomo, Indiana, but in the digital age, WTTK is for all intents and purposes the station&#x27;s main signal, transmitting from the traditional Indianapolis transmitter site). In some cases, such as Jeannette, Pennsylvania-licensed WPKD-TV 19, the FCC has waived this requirement; the station claimed that retaining an existing transmitter site 25.6 miles southeast of its new community of license of Jeannette would be in compliance with the commission&#x27;s minimum distance separation requirements (avoiding interference to co-channel WOIO 19 Shaker Heights). Another extreme example of a station&#x27;s transmitter located far from the city of license is the FM station KPNT, formerly licensed to Ste. Genevieve, Missouri, and transmitting from Hillsboro, but serving the St. Louis and Metro East market to the north. In 2015, the station was allowed by the FCC to move their city of license to Collinsville, Illinois, and have a transmitter in St. Louis proper with a power decrease.

FCC regulations also require stations at least once an hour to state the station&#x27;s call letters, followed by the city of license. However, the FCC has no restrictions on additional names after the city of license, so many stations afterwards add the nearest large city. For example, CBS affiliate WOIO is licensed to Shaker Heights, a suburb of Cleveland, and thus identifies as &quot;WOIO Shaker Heights-Cleveland.&quot; Similarly, northern New York&#x27;s WWNY-TV (also a CBS affiliate) identifies as &quot;WWNY-TV 7 Carthage-Watertown&quot; as a historical artifact; the original broadcasts originated from Champion Hill in 1954 so the license still reflects this tiny location.

If the station is licensed in the primary city served, on occasion the station will list a second city or region next to it. For example, the Tampa Bay region&#x27;s Fox owned-and-operated station WTVT is licensed to Tampa, Florida, its primary city, but identifies on-air as &quot;WTVT Tampa/St. Petersburg&quot;, as St. Petersburg is another major city in the market. To encompass Appleton and the smaller cities clustered around the Fox River southwest of Green Bay, Wisconsin, stations in the Green Bay–Appleton area identify as &quot;Green Bay/Fox Cities&quot; (e.g. &quot;WBAY-TV, Green Bay/Fox Cities&quot;); Green Bay-licensed stations thus still carry an official identification, while providing the ability for stations licensed to other places in the region to officially prefix their name before the mention of &quot;Green Bay/Fox Cities&quot;.

There is no longer a requirement to carry programs relevant to the particular community, or even necessarily to operate or transmit from that community. Accordingly, stations licensed to smaller communities in major metropolitan markets often target programming toward the entire market rather than the official home community, and often move their studio facilities to the larger urban centre as well. For instance, the Canadian radio station CFNY-FM is officially licensed to Brampton, Ontario, although its studio and transmitter facilities are located in downtown Toronto.

This may, at times, lead to confusion — while media directories normally list broadcast stations by their legal community of license, audiences often disregard (or may even be entirely unaware of) the distinction. For instance, for a short time while resolving a license conflict and ownership transaction in 1989, the current day KCAL-TV in Los Angeles was licensed to the little-known southeast suburb of Norwalk, California, with the station&#x27;s identifications at the time only vocally mentioning the temporary city of license in a rushed form, with Norwalk barely receiving any visual mention on the station; at no time were any station assets actually based in Norwalk, nor was public affairs or news programming adjusted to become Norwalk-centric over that of Los Angeles and Southern California. The station returned to its Los Angeles city of license after the transaction was complete.

Often, a station will keep a tiny outlying community in its licensing and on-air identity long after the original rationale for choosing that location is no longer truly applicable. Sneedville, Tennessee, as city of license for PBS member station WETP-TV originally made sense as a compromise location to serve both Knoxville and the Tri-Cities of Tennessee and Virginia on VHF channel 2. It met the minimum distance requirements to two other channel 2 stations in the region, WKRN in Nashville and WSB-TV in Atlanta. This became less important after full-power UHF satellite WKOP-TV signed on in Knoxville, and irrelevant once the 2003-09 DTV transition and 2016-21 repack moved WETP&#x27;s main signal to physical channel UHF 24. Nonetheless, broadcasters and regulatory authorities are more likely to retain the original city of license, rather than bring unwanted scrutiny for taking away a small community&#x27;s only station, which may be a mark of civic pride, only to move it to some larger center which already has multiple stations.

== Table of allotments ==
In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission maintains a Table of Allotments, which assigns individual channel frequencies to individual cities or communities for both TV and FM radio.

A corresponding Table of Allotments for digital television was created in 1997. To operate a licensed station, a broadcaster must first obtain allocation of the desired frequencies in the FCC&#x27;s Table of Allotments for the intended city of license. This process is subject to various political and bureaucratic restrictions, based on considerations including the number of existing stations in the area.

The term &quot;city&quot; has in some cases been relaxed to mean &quot;community&quot;, often including the unincorporated areas around the city that share a mailing address. This sometimes leads to inconsistencies, such as the licensing of one metro Atlanta station to the unincorporated Cobb County community of Mableton, but the refusal to license another to Sandy Springs, which is one of the largest cities in the state, and was at the time an unincorporated part of Fulton County due to political complications involving its eventual incorporation from both the state and its containing county of Fulton.

The definition of a &quot;community&quot; also comes into play when a broadcaster wants to take a station away from a tiny hamlet like North Pole, New York, whose population is in decline. In general, regulators are loath to allow a community&#x27;s only license to be moved away - especially to a city which already has a station. A broadcaster may make the case that the &quot;community&quot; functionally no longer exists in order to be released from its local obligations. 

Often, the city of license does not correspond to the location of the station itself, of the primary audience or of the communities identified in the station&#x27;s branding and advertising.

Some of the more common reasons for a community of license to be listed as a point far from the actual audience include:

===The &quot;compromise&quot; location===
A broadcaster may wish to serve two different communities, both in the same region but far enough from each other that a transmitter in one market would provide poor service to the other. While a transmitter in each community served would be preferable, occasionally a station licensed to a small town between the two larger centres will be used.

===The suburban station===
In FM radio broadcasting, small local stations were sometimes built to serve suburban or outlying areas in an era where AM radio stations held the largest audiences and much of the FM spectrum lay vacant. In the era of vacuum tubes, the five-tube AM radio with no FM tuning capability and limited audio quality was common; later advances in receiver design were to make good-quality FM commonplace (even though most AM/FM stereo receivers still have severely limited AM frequency response and no AM stereo decoders). Eventually FM spectrum became a very scarce commodity in many markets as AM stations moved to the FM dial, relegating AM largely to talk radio. As cities expanded, former small-town FM stations found themselves not only in what were now becoming rapidly expanding suburbs but also on what was becoming some of the most valuable spectrum in broadcast radio. The once-tiny FM stations would often then be sold, increased (where possible) to much-higher power and used to serve a huge mainstream audience in the larger metropolitan area.

===The short-spaced station===
To avoid co-channel interference, a minimum distance is maintained between stations operating on the same frequency in different markets. On VHF, full-power stations are typically 175 miles or more apart before the same channel is used again. An otherwise-desirable channel may therefore be unavailable to a community unless either it is operated at greatly reduced-height and power, forced onto a strongly directional antenna pattern to protect the distant co-channel station or relocated to some other, more distant location in the region to maintain proper spacing. The choice of another community as home for a station can be one possible means to avoid short-spacing, effectively shifting the entire station&#x27;s coverage area to maintain the required distances between transmitters.
===The distant mountaintop antenna===
In hilly or mountainous regions, a city would often be built in a waterfront or lakeside location (such as Plattsburgh-Burlington, both on Lake Champlain) - lower ground which in turn would be surrounded by tall mountain peaks. The only reliable means to get the VHF television or radio signals over the mountains was to build a station atop one of the mountain peaks. This occasionally left stations with a distant mountaintop (or its nearest small crossroads) as the historical city of license, even though the audience was elsewhere.

===The relocation of an existing station===
Often, a license for a new station will not be available in a community, either because a regulatory agency was only willing to accept new applications within specified narrow timeframes or because there are no suitable vacant channels. A prospective broadcaster must therefore buy an existing station as the only way to readily enter the market, in some cases being left with a station in a suburban, outlying or adjacent-market area if that were the only facility available for sale.

===The border blaster===
Occasionally, a community on an international border is served using a station licensed to another country. This may provide access to less restrictive broadcast regulation or represent a means to use local marketing agreements or adjacent-market licenses to circumvent limits on the number of stations under common ownership.

===The last-available frequency allocation===
In the early days of television, the majority of stations could be found on the VHF band; in North America, this currently represents just twelve possible channels and in large markets any suitable allocations in this range were mostly full by the early 1950s. Occasionally, a prospective broadcaster could obtain one of these coveted positions by acquiring an existing station or permit in an adjacent community - although in some cases this meant a move out-of-state.

===The new entrant===
A new network or station group will often enter a market after all of the most valuable available frequencies (such as the analogue VHF TV assignments in major cities) are already taken. This often results in building a network by constructing outlying stations, UHF stations, underpowered stations or some mix of all three. That can leave transmitters licensed to some very strange or tiny places. This happened to some degree with networks which signed on in the 1960s, such as National Educational Television in the US or the CTV Television Network in Canada. Later entrants fared worse.

In the U.S., PAX Network (now Ion Television) was prone to this, building a network largely from outlying owned-and-operated UHF stations.

In Canada, third networks such as Global were often a motley collection of outlying stations in their early years. CKGN-TV, Ontario&#x27;s original &quot;Global Television Network&quot; repeater chain, signed on in 1974 in an already densely-packed stretch of the beaten-path Windsor-Quebec corridor in which few desirable channels were available. Cities such as Windsor, London, Toronto, Peterborough, Kingston and Cornwall are notable by their absence from the network&#x27;s original roster. The five transmitters on-air in 1984 (after a decade of operation as a struggling &quot;third network&quot;) were:
:* Sarnia transmitting from Oil Springs on UHF 29 (370kW)
:* Paris on VHF 6 (at the full 100kW, the most allocated to a station of this class in Ontario)
:* Uxbridge on UHF 22 (at the full 5000kW, the most powerful in the nation, but on an undesirable suburban UHF allocation nowhere near downtown Toronto)
:* Bancroft on VHF 2 (at 87kW - and later increased to the full 100kW, but in the speck-on-a-map unincorporated hamlet of Vennachar, near Denbigh).
:* Ottawa on VHF 6 (at one-eighth the typical power for a station in its class, and on a sharp directional pattern focussed on Ottawa). This station had to protect CBMT (VHF 6, CBC Montréal) less than 120 miles distant - and this at a time when full-power VHF TV co-channel stations were typically spaced 175-200 miles (280-320km) apart to prevent interference.
The majority of these transmitters were not licensed to the primary community served. Many were underpowered, short-spaced or in undesirable locations - often just putting enough signal into key communities to obtain cable must-carry protection. As the only transmitters to be operating on then-valuable VHF channels at anything other than greatly-reduced power were licensed to Paris and Bancroft, both awkward outlying communities, the Paris transmitter was arbitrarily listed as the main station for the entire network.

===The cable or digital TV placeholder===
Sometimes, putting a usable over-the-air signal into the primary community served is anywhere from second-priority to not a priority at all. A station could be barely within the market&#x27;s boundaries or be underpowered to the point of putting a &quot;B&quot; grade signal into the community at best. On anything less than a huge rooftop antenna, the station is unwatchable — but, even if the underlying over-the-air signal was not valuable, the corresponding cable television slots in the various communities it was almost serving were. Any full-service domestic signal above some arbitrary minimum had access to &quot;must carry&quot; protection, could request favourable placement on the dial and (in Canada) could engage in signal substitution to take ad revenue from other stations already carrying the same content.

The 2016-2020 OTA TV repack opened additional possibilities for using an outlying community&#x27;s licence as an over-the-air placeholder. Buy a station, return the licensed broadcast spectrum to the government, then claim to be &quot;sharing&quot; a channel with another broadcaster by using the orphan licence to place content on one of their digital subchannels. Suddenly, an outlying commercial low-power station in New Hampshire is &quot;sharing&quot; space on WGBX, a full-power non-commercial station in the heart of the Boston market. The same transmitter can, by using two different licences in a &quot;channel sharing&quot; arrangement, have two different communities of licence - which may allow more flexibility for its location. It is also possible to mix commercial and non-commercial licences. In Canada, where CRTC regulations prevent carrying any additional, unique programming on digital subchannels without obtaining a second licence (and taking all the obligations which go with it) for each subchannel, returning just the spectrum (and keeping the licence) can be used as a means to recycle licences from abandoned, defunct outlying stations for use elsewhere in the network.

===The use of an adjacent market===
Occasionally, a station owner would reach a legal limit on concentration of media ownership, already having the maximum number of commonly owned stations in a market. Additional stations would be possible by transmitting the extra signals from a station technically in an adjacent market.

===The arbitrary nominal location===
In some cases, stations were constructed or acquired with the express purpose of driving a regional or province-wide chain of full-power repeaters. Which of these &quot;satellite stations&quot; would be designated as the main signal could be an arbitrary choice, as the programming carried on all stations in the system would be identical.
==See also==
* All-Channel Receiver Act
* Border blaster
* Rimshot (broadcasting)
* Duopoly (broadcasting), also known as a twinstick
* Flag of convenience (business)

==Notes==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3545675" start="47" end="62" title="City of license" label="city of license"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545675" start="66" end="86" title="City of license" label="community of license"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="111" end="124" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="128" end="146" title="television station" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="332" end="340" title="AM radio" label="AM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="529" end="537" title="United States federal law" label="U.S. law"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="646" end="659" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149297" start="684" end="692" title="localism (politics)" label="localism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989681" start="910" end="936" title="Communications Act of 1934" label="Communications Act of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="1208" end="1241" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="1528" end="1536" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365197" start="1572" end="1586" title="field strength" label="field strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="1604" end="1613" title="millivolt" label="millivolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145784" start="1684" end="1710" title="non-commercial educational" label="non-commercial educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="1901" end="1934" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150152" start="2133" end="2142" title="North American call sign" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="3322" end="3331" title="videotape" label="videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="3514" end="3524" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="4187" end="4198" title="transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062163" start="4402" end="4416" title="centralcasting" label="centralcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972096" start="4421" end="4441" title="broadcast automation" label="broadcast automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508202" start="4776" end="4788" title="Full service (radio format)" label="full service"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="4841" end="4850" title="call sign" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q357742" start="4913" end="4933" title="broadcast translator" label="broadcast translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149297" start="5319" end="5327" title="localism (politics)" label="localism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179112" start="5332" end="5354" title="community radio" label="community broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="5671" end="5680" title="communications satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185835" start="7927" end="7949" title="Pittston, Pennsylvania" label="Pittston, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q745594" start="7998" end="8010" title="Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania" label="Wilkes-Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q79474" start="8383" end="8400" title="Anniston, Alabama" label="Anniston, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="8439" end="8446" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="8468" end="8478" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953528" start="8614" end="8621" title="WNNX" label="WHMA-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q388435" start="8655" end="8676" title="College Park, Georgia" label="College Park, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q914884" start="8737" end="8759" title="Sandy Springs, Georgia" label="Sandy Springs, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8768" end="8782" title="Metro Atlanta#Surrounding cities" label="Atlanta suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564624" start="8949" end="8958" title="WBMA" label="ABC 33/40"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257741" start="9851" end="9862" title="public file" label="public file"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="9944" end="9956" title="radio signal" label="radio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="9997" end="10008" title="transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688889" start="10348" end="10352" title="WTTV" label="WTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="10370" end="10382" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="10497" end="10508" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q913209" start="10594" end="10609" title="Kokomo, Indiana" label="Kokomo, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187079" start="10793" end="10816" title="Jeannette, Pennsylvania" label="Jeannette, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954207" start="10826" end="10833" title="WPKD-TV" label="WPKD-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137431" start="11122" end="11132" title="co-channel interference" label="co-channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953839" start="11133" end="11137" title="WOIO" label="WOIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065497" start="11141" end="11155" title="Shaker Heights, Ohio" label="Shaker Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704385" start="11269" end="11273" title="KPNT" label="KPNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q959718" start="11296" end="11320" title="Ste. Genevieve, Missouri" label="Ste. Genevieve, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q962387" start="11344" end="11353" title="Hillsboro, Missouri" label="Hillsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="11371" end="11380" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q368723" start="11385" end="11395" title="Metro East" label="Metro East"/>
<link wikidata="Q577845" start="11494" end="11516" title="Collinsville, Illinois" label="Collinsville, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953839" start="11887" end="11891" title="WOIO" label="WOIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065497" start="11907" end="11921" title="Shaker Heights, Ohio" label="Shaker Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="11935" end="11944" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="12032" end="12040" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957397" start="12048" end="12055" title="WWNY-TV" label="WWNY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053935" start="12107" end="12108" title="North American broadcast television frequencies" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q533728" start="12109" end="12117" title="Carthage, New York" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378026" start="12118" end="12127" title="Watertown, New York" label="Watertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710644" start="12200" end="12213" title="Champion, New York" label="Champion Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059534" start="12415" end="12424" title="Tampa Bay" label="Tampa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956484" start="12470" end="12474" title="WTVT" label="WTVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="12490" end="12504" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="12566" end="12580" title="St. Petersburg, Florida" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="12656" end="12664" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147392" start="12709" end="12718" title="Fox River (Green Bay tributary)" label="Fox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="12732" end="12752" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476644" start="12822" end="12832" title="Fox Cities" label="Fox Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946982" start="12851" end="12858" title="WBAY-TV" label="WBAY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q603948" start="13173" end="13180" title="program (management)" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="13347" end="13367" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010744" start="13575" end="13582" title="CFNY-FM" label="CFNY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q44198" start="13609" end="13626" title="Brampton" label="Brampton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="13699" end="13706" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="14040" end="14047" title="KCAL-TV" label="KCAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="14051" end="14062" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q494715" start="14116" end="14135" title="Norwalk, California" label="Norwalk, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="14495" end="14514" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304930" start="14791" end="14812" title="Sneedville, Tennessee" label="Sneedville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329503" start="14856" end="14863" title="WETP-TV" label="WETP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="14925" end="14934" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255586" start="14943" end="14979" title="Tri-Cities, Tennessee" label="Tri-Cities of Tennessee and Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951891" start="15086" end="15090" title="WKRN" label="WKRN"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="15094" end="15103" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955494" start="15108" end="15114" title="WSB-TV" label="WSB-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="15118" end="15125" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329503" start="15185" end="15192" title="WKOP-TV" label="WKOP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922416" start="15241" end="15263" title="Digital television transition in the United States" label="2003-09 DTV transition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15268" end="15282" title="2016 United States wireless spectrum auction#Repacking" label="2016-21 repack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910544" start="15564" end="15575" title="Boosterism" label="civic pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="15686" end="15699" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="15705" end="15738" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="15862" end="15864" title="television" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="15869" end="15877" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="15920" end="15938" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q971998" start="16534" end="16547" title="metro Atlanta" label="metro Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q484247" start="16578" end="16589" title="Cobb County, Georgia" label="Cobb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656942" start="16603" end="16611" title="Mableton, Georgia" label="Mableton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16640" end="16647" title="WNNX#History" label="another"/>
<link wikidata="Q914884" start="16651" end="16664" title="Sandy Springs, Georgia" label="Sandy Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q486633" start="16761" end="16774" title="Fulton County, Georgia" label="Fulton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q486633" start="16892" end="16898" title="Fulton County, Georgia" label="Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327488" start="17036" end="17056" title="North Pole, New York" label="North Pole, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="18114" end="18122" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="18188" end="18194" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="18231" end="18239" title="AM radio" label="AM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="18330" end="18341" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002739" start="18607" end="18616" title="AM stereo" label="AM stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="18760" end="18770" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137431" start="19204" end="19227" title="co-channel interference" label="co-channel interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="19336" end="19339" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q998669" start="20131" end="20142" title="Plattsburgh, New York" label="Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q31058" start="20143" end="20153" title="Burlington, Vermont" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="20163" end="20177" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="20287" end="20290" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q773067" start="21189" end="21224" title="border blaster" label="station licensed to another country"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108877" start="21319" end="21344" title="local marketing agreement" label="local marketing agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="21572" end="21575" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873154" start="22465" end="22496" title="National Educational Television" label="National Educational Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="22514" end="22536" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="22590" end="22601" title="PAX Network" label="PAX Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="22607" end="22621" title="Ion Television" label="Ion Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359017" start="22683" end="22701" title="owned-and-operated station" label="owned-and-operated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="22751" end="22757" title="Global Television Network" label="Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931513" start="22832" end="22839" title="CIII-TV" label="CKGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="23080" end="23087" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="23089" end="23095" title="London, Ontario" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="23097" end="23104" title="Toronto, Ontario" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q776930" start="23106" end="23118" title="Peterborough, Ontario" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="23120" end="23128" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q956690" start="23133" end="23141" title="Cornwall, Ontario" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34106" start="23330" end="23336" title="Sarnia, Ontario" label="Sarnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305306" start="23388" end="23393" title="Paris, Ontario" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q386959" start="23484" end="23492" title="Uxbridge, Ontario" label="Uxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850051" start="23637" end="23645" title="Bancroft, Ontario" label="Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681184" start="23756" end="23765" title="Addington Highlands" label="Vennachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="23785" end="23791" title="Ottawa, Ontario" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931033" start="23946" end="23950" title="CBMT" label="CBMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="23959" end="23971" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992014" start="24367" end="24377" title="must-carry" label="must-carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334506" start="24870" end="24883" title="rimshot (broadcasting)" label="barely within"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="24888" end="24912" title="Designated Market Area" label="market&amp;#x27;s boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="25172" end="25188" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992014" start="25332" end="25342" title="must carry" label="must carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502680" start="25440" end="25459" title="signal substitution" label="signal substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17162837" start="25539" end="25562" title="2016 United States wireless spectrum auction" label="2016-2020 OTA TV repack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276171" start="25880" end="25898" title="digital subchannel" label="digital subchannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="25955" end="25968" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949677" start="26001" end="26005" title="WGBX" label="WGBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="26063" end="26069" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993801" start="26361" end="26365" title="CRTC" label="CRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="26828" end="26860" title="concentration of media ownership" label="concentration of media ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727812" start="27451" end="27475" title="All-Channel Receiver Act" label="All-Channel Receiver Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q773067" start="27478" end="27492" title="Border blaster" label="Border blaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334506" start="27495" end="27517" title="Rimshot (broadcasting)" label="Rimshot (broadcasting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315897" start="27520" end="27542" title="Duopoly (broadcasting)" label="Duopoly (broadcasting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456845" start="27572" end="27602" title="Flag of convenience (business)" label="Flag of convenience (business)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584940" wikidata="Q1193741" url="?curid=584940" title="WCW Monday Nitro">
<text>WCW Monday Nitro, also known as WCW Nitro or simply Nitro, is an American professional wrestling television program that was produced by World Championship Wrestling (WCW) and broadcast weekly every Monday night on TNT in the United States from September 4, 1995 to March 26, 2001.

Created by Eric Bischoff and Ted Turner, the show&#x27;s premiere was notable for sparking a period of television known as the &quot;Monday Night War&quot;. For the entirety of the show&#x27;s run, &quot;Nitro&quot; went head-to-head in the ratings with the World Wrestling Federation&#x27;s (WWF; now WWE) &quot;Monday Night Raw&quot;. Although comparable to &quot;Raw&quot; in popularity from the beginning, &quot;Nitro&quot; began to dominate in ratings, based largely on the strength of the New World Order (nWo), a rebellious group of wrestlers that wanted to take over WCW. Beginning in June 1996, &quot;Nitro&quot; beat &quot;Raw&quot; in the ratings for 83 consecutive weeks, forcing WWF owner Vince McMahon to usher in the more adult-oriented &quot;Attitude Era&quot;. In April 1998, &quot;Raw&quot; beat &quot;Nitro&quot; in the ratings for the first time in almost two years. The shows would continue to trade ratings wins back and forth until November 1998 when &quot;Raw&quot; pulled ahead of &quot;Nitro&quot; for good.

Besides broadcasting from various arenas and locations across the United States and Canada, such as Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota (from which the first episode was broadcast), &quot;Nitro&quot; also organized special broadcasts from the Disney-MGM Studios in Orlando in 1996; aired annual &quot;Spring Break-Out&quot; episodes from Panama City Beach, Florida or South Padre Island, Texas starting in March 1997; and filmed some episodes in Australia and the United Kingdom during the Fall of 2000.

As of June 30, 2023, all episodes are available for streaming on the WWE Network and Peacock. WWE has also released three &quot;Best of WCW Monday Nitro&quot; DVD sets.

==History==
===Premiere===
The first episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; was broadcast from the Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota on September 4, 1995. The featured matches on the one-hour broadcast were Brian Pillman versus Jushin Thunder Liger, Ric Flair versus WCW United States Heavyweight Champion Sting, and WCW World Heavyweight Champion Hulk Hogan taking on Big Bubba Rogers. The show was also highlighted by the return of Lex Luger to WCW after having spent the previous two plus years wrestling for the WWF, where he had been one of the promotion&#x27;s top stars. Luger had just wrestled a match for the WWF the previous evening; the match was his final contractual obligation with the WWF, and Luger signed with WCW the morning of his appearance. The event prefigured the similar defections of WWF wrestlers Scott Hall and Kevin Nash the following year.

The title video for the debut episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; featured multiple shots of Big Van Vader (one of four wrestlers featured, along with Hulk Hogan, Sting and Macho Man Randy Savage), who parted ways with WCW following a backstage altercation with Paul Orndorff. Absent from the first episode, he had been scheduled to face Hogan for the WCW World Heavyweight Championship on the September 11 edition, but was replaced by Lex Luger, who issued a challenge to Hogan on the debut show. Vader would never perform on &quot;Nitro&quot;, and embarked on a WWF career in January 1996.

=== Monday Night War ===

The advent of &quot;Nitro&quot; brought with it a television ratings rivalry with the WWF&#x27;s &quot;Monday Night Raw&quot;, known to wrestling fans as the &quot;Monday Night War&quot;. Throughout this period, &quot;Nitro&quot; would grow in popularity and eventually surpass &quot;Raw&quot; in the ratings for 83 consecutive weeks.

Since &quot;Nitro&quot; was live, the show was seen as far less predictable than its WWF counterpart. Initially only sixty minutes in length (as was &quot;Raw&quot; at the time), &quot;Nitro&quot; was expanded to two hours following the 1996 NBA Playoffs (&quot;Raw&quot; would later extend to two hours in February 1997). In January 1998, the show was extended to three hours. At its peak, the rivalry resulted in performers on either show trading verbal insults and challenges. In retaliation for a segment of &quot;Raw&quot; in which D-Generation X (DX) travelled to the Norfolk Scope arena in Norfolk where &quot;Nitro&quot; was being broadcast (WWF was nearby in Hampton, Virginia the same night), Eric Bischoff challenged Vince McMahon to face him in a match to be held at Slamboree 1998; McMahon never formally recognized the challenge and did not appear.

The July 6, 1998, episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; from the Georgia Dome in Atlanta saw Goldberg defeat Hollywood Hogan for the WCW World Heavyweight Championship.

&quot;Nitro&quot; is best remembered for the New World Order (nWo), with former WWF wrestlers Scott Hall, Kevin Nash and &quot;Hollywood&quot; Hulk Hogan as rebellious heels plotting to take over WCW. Despite ratings success, both the angle and stable would later be criticized for the heel wrestlers almost never losing, and for what was seen as overexposure. As the nWo expanded, the stable would ultimately split into several warring factions within itself, while most WCW-branded wrestlers would eventually become neutral.

=== Changes ===
As &quot;Raw&quot; began to overtake &quot;Nitro&quot; in the ratings in 1998 thanks to the WWF&#x27;s Attitude Era programming, WCW was frequently criticized for several faults, including an inability to create new stars while over-relying on established stars to support ratings.

On January 4, 1999 Mick Foley, who had wrestled for WCW during the early 1990s as Cactus Jack, won the WWF Championship as Mankind on a pre-taped episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. &quot;Nitro&quot; announcer Tony Schiavone sarcastically commented on the match, which unexpectedly resulted in &quot;Nitro&quot; losing in the ratings battle when several hundred thousand viewers switched over to &quot;Raw&quot; to see the title change. That night&#x27;s episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; would be notorious for the &quot;Fingerpoke of Doom&quot;, in which a WCW World Heavyweight Championship match between Kevin Nash and Hollywood Hogan was quickly revealed to be a ruse that reunited the core members of the nWo as the &quot;nWo Elite&quot;. The match was universally panned and was considered to have damaged WCW&#x27;s credibility and begin their decline.

In October 1999, former WWF writers Vince Russo and Ed Ferrara were hired by WCW. Both men attempted to bring their WWF-style writing to &quot;Nitro&quot;, including edgier storylines, lengthier non-wrestling segments, and an increased amount of sexuality. Many WCW fans greatly resented Russo and Ferrara for changing their programming to be like the WWF, as they preferred the traditional method of wrestling over long skits, screwjobs, and risque innuendo that were widely popular among WWF audiences.

&quot;Nitro&quot; would be reduced to two hours in January 2000, returning the program to an 8-10 p.m. timeslot, with the first hour running unopposed and the second hour competing with the first hour of &quot;Raw&quot;. Eric Bischoff would be brought back to &quot;Nitro&quot; and was paired with Russo to &quot;reboot&quot; WCW on April 10, 2000. None of these changes were able to help recover &quot;Nitro&quot;″s ratings and Bischoff eventually left WCW in July 2000 after an incident involving Hogan and Russo at the Bash at the Beach event. Russo would later suffer a severe concussion after being speared through a cage by Goldberg, later leaving WCW on extended leave to recover. Further declines from late 2000 would see WCW search for new ownership beginning in early 2001.

== Notable episodes ==
=== The Night of Champions – Final broadcast ===
In an attempt to save WCW and &quot;Nitro&quot;, Bischoff attempted to purchase WCW with a group of investors. However, although Bischoff&#x27;s offer had been accepted, recently appointed Turner Broadcasting executive Jamie Kellner announced shortly after his arrival that &quot;Nitro&quot; and all WCW programming was immediately canceled on both TNT and TBS Superstation. Bischoff&#x27;s group then withdrew their deal, as it was contingent on keeping WCW programming on some outlet. Instead, WCW&#x27;s trademarks and certain assets (such as its video library and the contracts of 24 wrestlers), though not WCW itself (which existed as a Time Warner-owned legal entity under the name Universal Wrestling Corporation until late 2017), were bought by Vince McMahon&#x27;s WWF (now WWE), its long-time competitor.

Around the time of the cancellation, WCW was preparing to make its yearly trip to Panama City, Florida for spring break. Since the premiere of &quot;Nitro&quot;, WCW had gone to Club La Vela or South Padre Island every March to try to gain favor with adolescent and young adult viewers who might not otherwise be tuning into the program. It was announced that the upcoming March 26, 2001, episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; from Panama City (which was actually held at the nearby Boardwalk Beach Resort) was to be the finale and the show was dubbed &quot;The Night of Champions.&quot; The show began with McMahon appearing via satellite from Gund Arena in Cleveland, Ohio, the site of that Monday&#x27;s &quot;Raw is War&quot; broadcast on TNN. McMahon announced his purchase of WCW to the crowd and appeared in vignettes throughout the show, including one where he terminated WCW&#x27;s Jeff Jarrett on air due to bad blood the two had in the past.

The show was unique in that all five of WCW&#x27;s major championships (excluding the WCW Hardcore Championship) were defended that night and in six of the seven matches contested on the show, the faces won. (Traditionally WCW was seen as the promotion where heels were often the top stars as opposed to the WWF, where faces were often the top stars. Shawn Stasiak was the only heel to emerge victorious on the final episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;.) In addition, various WCW wrestlers were interviewed giving their honest, out-of-character responses to the selling of WCW. The co-main event of the evening was WCW World Heavyweight Champion Scott Steiner taking on WCW United States Heavyweight Champion Booker T in a match with both belts on the line; Booker T defeated Steiner for his fourth WCW World Heavyweight Championship while retaining the WCW United States Heavyweight Championship.

Just as it had been on the initial &quot;Nitro&quot;, the final match of the final &quot;Nitro&quot; and the final match in WCW as a whole was between long-time WCW rivals Ric Flair and Sting, a match that was more informal than their usual encounters (Sting and Flair were seen smiling and nodding respectfully towards each other throughout the match). Sting won using his finishing move, the Scorpion Deathlock. After the match, the two competitors stood in the middle of the ring and embraced to show respect for one another.
In a closing segment, simulcast between both &quot;Nitro&quot; and &quot;Raw&quot;, Vince addressed the audience in Cleveland and gloated about the purchase, stating that he wanted Turner to personally deliver the sale contract to him so he could sign it at WrestleMania X-Seven that weekend. However, the speech was interrupted by Vince&#x27;s son Shane McMahon, who announced (in kayfabe) from &quot;Nitro&quot; that he had already signed the sale contract himself, and that the WCW would continue to compete against the WWF. The twist came as part of the set up of their match at WrestleMania X-Seven, and of what would later become WWF&#x27;s &quot;Invasion&quot; storyline.

In addition to the tape library and other intellectual properties, WWF also purchased several contracts of WCW talent, keeping many of the younger stars. Four of WCW&#x27;s championships found their way into the WWF; in addition to Booker T carrying both the WCW Championship (as it was renamed) and United States Championship with him into the WWF, McMahon also signed then-WCW Cruiserweight Champion Shane Helms and then-WCW Tag Team Champions Chuck Palumbo and Sean O&#x27;Haire to contracts. Palumbo and O&#x27;Haire would defeat Team Canada (Mike Awesome and Lance Storm) on the final episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;. (The WWF scrapped the WCW Hardcore Championship, as it was officially retired immediately following the final &quot;Nitro&quot; despite no one holding it since Meng departed for the WWF in early 2001, and the WCW Cruiserweight Tag Team Championship for undisclosed reasons; Billy Kidman and Rey Mysterio were the last champions and McMahon was only able to sign Kidman to a contract at the time.)

&quot;The Night of Champions&quot; was the penultimate WCW broadcast, prior to the final episode of &quot;WorldWide&quot; on the weekend of March 31–April 1, 2001. &quot;WCW Monday Nitro&quot; was the last professional wrestling program to air on TNT until the first episode of &quot;AEW Dynamite&quot; on October 2, 2019.

==== Results ====
== Other notable moments ==
When then-WWF Women&#x27;s Champion Alundra Blayze signed with WCW in 1995 (going back to her old name of &quot;Madusa&quot;), she brought the WWF Women&#x27;s title belt with her and threw it in a trash can on the December 18, 1995 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; (the third week that &quot;Nitro&quot; started before the top of the hour), and the title itself would become inactive for the next three years. Many cite this incident as one of the causes of the infamous Montreal Screwjob. This infamous event would be parodied by WCW on a 2000 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;, when Scott Hall threw the WCW World Television Championship in the trash and &quot;Hacksaw&quot; Jim Duggan found and claimed the belt weeks later on an episode of &quot;Saturday Night&quot;.

The only wrestler to appear on both &quot;Nitro&quot; and &quot;Raw&quot; on the same night was Rick Rude. Rude was able to appear on both shows because he was not under contract with the WWF at the time, appearing on a handshake deal with McMahon on &quot;Raw&quot; – which was still pre-recorded at the time while &quot;Nitro&quot; was broadcast live. To emphasize that only &quot;Nitro&quot; was live, Rude had a full beard on the &quot;Raw&quot; broadcast but only a mustache on &quot;Nitro&quot;.

The January 13, 1997 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; ended with the first two minutes of the Hollywood Hogan vs. The Giant main event. Before the show went off the air, commentator Tony Schiavone announced the match was to continue during the commercial breaks of &quot;The New Adventures of Robin Hood&quot;, which premiered that night after &quot;Nitro&quot;. This resulted in the premiere episode of &quot;Robin Hood&quot; receiving high ratings due to WCW fans being lured in to watch the show for the Hogan/Giant match.

On the May 24, 1999 broadcast Bret Hart eulogized his brother Owen who was killed in an in-ring accident at the WWF pay-per-view event Over the Edge the night before.

The rock band KISS appeared in August 1999, and debuted a wrestler named The Demon while performing &quot;God of Thunder&quot;. According to Dean Malenko, it was the lowest rated &quot;Nitro&quot; ever.

Throughout the late summer and early fall of 1999, in an attempt to boost the show&#x27;s declining ratings, WCW organized a competition to find a new member of the Nitro Girls. Over the course of eight weeks, 300 women took part in the competition; two women who successfully passed the regional auditions were subject to Internet voting by home viewers. Eight women were selected to participate in the final round of the competition, which was held on the November 8, 1999 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;. Stacy Keibler was declared the winner of the competition after receiving the most internet votes among the eight finalists, and received a spot on the dance troupe along with a cash prize of $10,000.

== WWE home media and streaming ==
Since buying the WCW video library, WWE Home Video has included many &quot;Nitro&quot; matches and segments on some of their Superstar biography DVD sets. Episodes were also streamed on WWE Classics on Demand, as part of &quot;The Monday Night War&quot; feature.

While the service did show episodes of &quot;Nitro&quot;, they are often edited. Some WCW entrance theme music tracks are replaced with stock WWE music. A lot of the crowd noise is also removed on most episodes and pay-per-views. Beginning in July 2007, WWE Classics on Demand began deleting content from episodes of &quot;Nitro&quot;, as matches and some references to Chris Benoit are removed. Benoit is sometimes shown in segments where he is not the main issue of the segment. This was in light of the controversy surrounding the deaths of Benoit and his family on June 24 of that year.

In April 2009, WWE Classics went back to the first episodes that aired in September 1995. These shows alternate with the current &quot;Nitro&quot; airings (December 1997 and onwards).

A 3-disc DVD entitled &quot;The Very Best of WCW Monday Nitro&quot; was produced and released by WWE on June 7, 2011. The set is narrated by former three time WCW champion Diamond Dallas Page and highlights some of the biggest matches and moments in the history of &quot;WCW Monday Nitro&quot;. The sequel, &quot;The Best of WCW Monday Nitro Vol. 2&quot; was released on DVD and Blu-ray February 12, 2013. Followed by the final set titled, &quot;The Very best of WCW Monday Nitro Vol. 3&quot;, which was released on August 11, 2015.

As of 2016, all 288 episodes of &quot;Nitro&quot; (September 4, 1995 – March 26, 2001) are available on demand on the WWE Network.

== See also ==
* 1995 in American television

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="74" end="96" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="137" end="165" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="215" end="218" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="294" end="307" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="312" end="322" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q35530" start="416" end="432" title="Monday Night War" label="Monday Night War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="541" end="567" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="596" end="612" title="WWE Raw" label="Monday Night Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="778" end="793" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="985" end="998" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35560" start="1041" end="1053" title="Attitude Era" label="Attitude Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1384" end="1397" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1402" end="1408" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q659219" start="1418" end="1433" title="Mall of America" label="Mall of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q490737" start="1437" end="1459" title="Bloomington, Minnesota" label="Bloomington, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="1567" end="1585" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios" label="Disney-MGM Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="1589" end="1596" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075852" start="1662" end="1688" title="Panama City Beach, Florida" label="Panama City Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q982881" start="1692" end="1717" title="South Padre Island, Texas" label="South Padre Island, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1770" end="1779" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1788" end="1802" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36070" start="1898" end="1909" title="WWE Network" label="WWE Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="1914" end="1921" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="1988" end="1991" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125662526" start="2030" end="2064" title="WCW Monday Nitro debut episode" label="first episode of &amp;quot;Nitro&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q659219" start="2088" end="2103" title="Mall of America" label="Mall of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q490737" start="2107" end="2129" title="Bloomington, Minnesota" label="Bloomington, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q912923" start="2204" end="2217" title="Brian Pillman" label="Brian Pillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395975" start="2225" end="2245" title="Jushin Thunder Liger" label="Jushin Thunder Liger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="2247" end="2256" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="2264" end="2302" title="WWE United States Championship" label="WCW United States Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="2303" end="2308" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="2314" end="2344" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="2345" end="2355" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q461317" start="2366" end="2382" title="Big Boss Man (wrestler)" label="Big Bubba Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="2431" end="2440" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="2820" end="2830" title="Scott Hall (wrestler)" label="Scott Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="2835" end="2845" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q26848" start="2953" end="2966" title="Big Van Vader" label="Big Van Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635" start="3033" end="3055" title="Randy Savage" label="Macho Man Randy Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388872" start="3122" end="3135" title="Paul Orndorff" label="Paul Orndorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="3212" end="3246" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="3529" end="3547" title="Nielsen ratings" label="television ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="3582" end="3598" title="Monday Night Raw" label="Monday Night Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q35530" start="3643" end="3659" title="Monday Night War" label="Monday Night War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556693" start="4052" end="4069" title="1996 NBA Playoffs" label="1996 NBA Playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="4352" end="4366" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131230" start="4389" end="4402" title="Norfolk Scope" label="Norfolk Scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="4412" end="4419" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="4483" end="4500" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="Hampton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842794" start="4594" end="4608" title="Slamboree (1998)" label="Slamboree 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="4763" end="4771" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="4803" end="4837" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="4885" end="4900" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="4934" end="4944" title="Scott Hall (wrestler)" label="Scott Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="4946" end="4956" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="4983" end="4993" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35560" start="5487" end="5499" title="Attitude Era" label="Attitude Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="5686" end="5696" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="5770" end="5786" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823364" start="5869" end="5883" title="Tony Schiavone" label="Tony Schiavone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028031" start="6176" end="6194" title="Fingerpoke of Doom" label="Fingerpoke of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090803" start="6552" end="6563" title="Vince Russo" label="Vince Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718843" start="6568" end="6578" title="Ed Ferrara" label="Ed Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343020" start="7335" end="7341" title="Reboot (fiction)" label="reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842744" start="7544" end="7561" title="Bash at the Beach (2000)" label="Bash at the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="7603" end="7613" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="8068" end="8087" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="Turner Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147052" start="8098" end="8111" title="Jamie Kellner" label="Jamie Kellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="8632" end="8645" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="8662" end="8665" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q852591" start="8777" end="8797" title="Panama City, Florida" label="Panama City, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153162" start="8802" end="8814" title="spring break" label="spring break"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136277" start="8873" end="8885" title="Club La Vela" label="Club La Vela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568125" start="8889" end="8907" title="South Padre Island" label="South Padre Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q387157" start="9331" end="9341" title="Rocket Mortgage FieldHouse" label="Gund Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="9399" end="9409" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw is War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="9429" end="9432" title="Paramount Network" label="TNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="9577" end="9589" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q603030" start="9726" end="9751" title="WCW Hardcore Championship" label="WCW Hardcore Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304024" start="10161" end="10177" title="shoot (professional wrestling)" label="out-of-character"/>
<link wikidata="Q467367" start="10279" end="10292" title="Scott Steiner" label="Scott Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="10342" end="10350" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="10704" end="10713" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="10718" end="10723" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q50892" start="11319" end="11339" title="WrestleMania X-Seven" label="WrestleMania X-Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q861110" start="11410" end="11423" title="Shane McMahon" label="Shane McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35574" start="11714" end="11722" title="The Invasion (professional wrestling)" label="Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q910910" start="12116" end="12142" title="WWE Cruiserweight Championship (1991–2007)" label="WCW Cruiserweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q352884" start="12143" end="12154" title="Gregory Helms" label="Shane Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q460357" start="12187" end="12200" title="Chuck Palumbo" label="Chuck Palumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294059" start="12205" end="12222" title="Sean O&amp;#x27;Haire" label="Sean O&amp;#x27;Haire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340386" start="12288" end="12300" title="Mike Awesome" label="Mike Awesome"/>
<link wikidata="Q965119" start="12305" end="12316" title="Lance Storm" label="Lance Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386431" start="12521" end="12525" title="Haku (wrestler)" label="Meng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174800" start="12570" end="12609" title="WCW Cruiserweight Tag Team Championship" label="WCW Cruiserweight Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923560" start="12865" end="12874" title="WCW WorldWide" label="WorldWide"/>
<link wikidata="Q65684241" start="13043" end="13055" title="AEW Dynamite" label="AEW Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050380" start="13139" end="13164" title="WWE Women&amp;#x27;s Championship (1956–2010)" label="WWF Women&amp;#x27;s Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020929" start="13165" end="13179" title="Debrah Miceli" label="Alundra Blayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q35546" start="13597" end="13614" title="Montreal Screwjob" label="Montreal Screwjob"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="13706" end="13716" title="Scott Hall (wrestler)" label="Scott Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343090" start="13727" end="13760" title="WCW World Television Championship" label="WCW World Television Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q164260" start="13778" end="13808" title="Jim Duggan" label="&amp;quot;Hacksaw&amp;quot; Jim Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564650" start="13871" end="13885" title="WCW Saturday Night" label="Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="14507" end="14516" title="Big Show" label="The Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722244" start="14664" end="14696" title="The New Adventures of Robin Hood" label="The New Adventures of Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="15102" end="15106" title="Kiss (band)" label="KISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q672406" start="15161" end="15170" title="Dale Torborg" label="The Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756870" start="15194" end="15208" title="God of Thunder (song)" label="God of Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q729508" start="15229" end="15241" title="Dean Malenko" label="Dean Malenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q25359442" start="15457" end="15468" title="Nitro Girls" label="Nitro Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q238407" start="15797" end="15810" title="Stacy Keibler" label="Stacy Keibler"/>
<link wikidata="Q35985" start="16219" end="16241" title="WWE Classics on Demand" label="WWE Classics on Demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="16667" end="16679" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047902" start="16831" end="16862" title="Chris Benoit double murder and suicide" label="deaths of Benoit and his family"/>
<link wikidata="Q36070" start="17726" end="17737" title="WWE Network" label="WWE Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590815" start="17757" end="17784" title="1995 in American television" label="1995 in American television"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584945" wikidata="Q467367" url="?curid=584945" title="Scott Steiner">
<text>Scott Rechsteiner (born July 29, 1962), better known by the ring name Scott Steiner, is an American professional wrestler.

Steiner is perhaps best known for his time in World Championship Wrestling (WCW), and has also wrestled for Jim Crockett Promotions (JCP), World Wrestling Federation/Entertainment (WWF/WWE), Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA, later Impact Wrestling), and Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW). He is a four-time world champion in wrestling, being a one-time WCW World Heavyweight Champion, a one-time WWA World Heavyweight Champion, and a one-time WWC Universal Heavyweight Champion and a one-time WWA World Heavyweight Champion (Indianapolis version). He is the eighth WCW Triple Crown Champion.

During the 1980s and 1990s, Steiner wrestled alongside his older brother Rick as The Steiner Brothers. He has won several tag team titles, including the WWF Tag Team Championship, WCW World Tag Team Championship, IWGP Tag Team Championship, and the TNA/Impact World Tag Team Championship. He headlined multiple pay-per-view events for WCW and TNA, as well as the WWF&#x27;s Survivor Series in 1993.

== Early life ==
Scott Rechsteiner was born in Bay City, Michigan, on July 29, 1962. He was a folkstyle wrestler at 156 lbs during his time at the University of Michigan. He became a three-time Big 10 runner-up after finishing fifth as a freshman. In 1986, he became an NCAA Division I All-American and placed sixth in the nation his senior year. His brother, Rick Steiner, also wrestled for Michigan and became a professional wrestler.

== Professional wrestling career ==
=== Early career (1986–1989) ===
Rechsteiner trained under Dr. Jerry Graham Jr. at Torio&#x27;s Health Club in Toledo, Ohio, as well as The Sheik, and debuted under his real name in the Indianapolis-based World Wrestling Association in 1986. On August 14, 1986, in Dearborn, Michigan, Rechsteiner defeated The Great Wojo for the WWA World Heavyweight Championship. He held the title until May 3, 1987, when he lost it to Wojo in Toledo. He then formed a tag team with his trainer, Graham. On October 6, 1987, they defeated Chris Carter and Mohammad Saad for the WWA World Tag Team Championship. On December 6, they lost the title to Carter and Don Kent.

In 1988, Rechsteiner joined the Memphis-based Continental Wrestling Association (CWA) under his real name. He formed a tag team with Billy Joe Travis and defeated the Cuban Choir Boys for the CWA World Tag Team Championship on May 29. On June 6, they lost the title to Gary Young and Don Bass. Rechsteiner and Travis regained the title on June 27 and lost it to the Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll RPMs (Mike Davis and Tommy Lane) on August 15. Rechsteiner formed a new tag team with Jed Grundy, and on February 18, 1989, they dethroned CWA World Tag Team Champions Robert Fuller and Jimmy Golden. Rechsteiner&#x27;s third and final CWA reign ended on February 25, when Fuller and Golden regained the title. He left the CWA soon after.

=== World Championship Wrestling (1989–1992) ===

Rechsteiner, under the ring name Scott Steiner, debuted in World Championship Wrestling (WCW) during a backstage interview at Chi-Town Rumble, later accompanying his brother Rick to the ring as he lost the NWA World Television Championship to Mike Rotunda. Scott would begin wrestling in singles bouts on WCW programming before the Steiners began teaming together. The Steiners lost their first high-profile bout to Kevin Sullivan &amp; Rotunda at Clash of the Champions VII but defeated them in a rematch at the Great American Bash 1989. The Steiners also competed in the &quot;King of the Hill&quot; two-ring battle royal earlier in the show but were unsuccessful.

During this time, the Steiners were managed by Missy Hyatt and often brought their pitbull Arnold to the ring. Rick nervously began a relationship with a shy fan named &quot;Robin Green&quot; who eventually received a make-over and transformed into Woman. Green was responsible for tripping up Scott at Clash of the Champions VIII and costing the Steiners the NWA World Tag Team Championship as well as luring Scott into a parking lot assault by Sullivan and her new masked tag team, Doom. Doom, with Woman in their corner, defeated the Steiners at Halloween Havoc &#x27;89 after Woman interfered.

On November 1, 1989, in Atlanta, Georgia, The Steiner Brothers defeated The Fabulous Freebirds (Michael Hayes and Jimmy Garvin) for the NWA World Tag Team Championship. They held the title for over five months before losing it to Doom (Butch Reed and Ron Simmons) in Washington, D.C., at Capital Combat. The Steiner Brothers defeated The Midnight Express (Bobby Eaton and Stan Lane) for the NWA United States Tag Team Championship on August 24, in East Rutherford, New Jersey. During their title reign, WCW withdrew from the National Wrestling Alliance (in January 1991) and the title was renamed the WCW United States Tag Team Championship. The Steiner Brothers competed in a WarGames match at WrestleWar 1991, which received a five-star rating from &quot;The Wrestling Observer&quot;. After winning the WCW World Tag Team Championship on February 18, they vacated the United States Tag Team Championship, on February 20. After they won the IWGP Tag Team Championship from Hiroshi Hase and Kensuke Sasaki at the WCW/New Japan Supershow on March 21, announcers began referring to them as &quot;Triple Crown Champions&quot;.

In 1990, Steiner began wrestling in singles matches. WCW&#x27;s weekend TBS shows (&quot;Power Hour&quot;, &quot;Saturday Night&quot;, and &quot;Main Event&quot;), featured the NWA/WCW Gauntlet Series, in which a wrestler was selected to face a different top star on each show that weekend, winning $10,000 if they defeated all three. Steiner was the first to successfully &quot;run the gauntlet&quot; from September 21–23, defeating Bobby Eaton, Ric Flair and Arn Anderson. On January 30, 1991, Steiner had a WCW World Heavyweight Championship match against Flair at &quot;Clash of the Champions XIV: Dixie Dynamite&quot;, which ended in a time limit draw. In late 1992 the Steiners temporarily disbanded when Rick suffered a torn pectoral muscle. Scott then started wrestling single matches, and then later teased a heel turn when he teamed with Marcus Bagwell against Steve Austin and Brian Pillman on an October 10, 1992, episode of &quot;WCW WorldWide&quot;. During the match Bagwell was injured when he was attacked by Arn Anderson and when Steiner went to tag Bagwell, he was unable to. An angry Steiner then kicked Bagwell and slammed him into the ring where he was attacked by Austin and Pillman who then won the match. Shortly after he won the WCW World Television Championship on October 17, 1992. Steiner later vacated the title when The Steiner Brothers left WCW for the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) that November, after a contract dispute with WCW Executive Vice President Bill Watts.

=== World Wrestling Federation (1992–1994) ===
WWF talent relation officials Pat Patterson and Bruce Prichard were enamored with Scott Steiner and pitched an idea to Vince McMahon for Scott to come in as a surprise entry into the Royal Rumble in 1993 and win the event, then moving on to win the world championship at WrestleMania IX. However Vince was not keen on the idea and both the Steiners themselves voiced their desire to remain as a tag team, therefore Vince began booking them as such. The Steiner Brothers made their WWF television debut with a promo on the December 21, 1992, episode of &quot;Prime Time Wrestling&quot;. They appeared on the debut episode of &quot;Raw&quot; on January 11, 1993. Their pay-per-view debut came on January 24, at the 1993 Royal Rumble, where they defeated The Beverly Brothers (Blake and Beau). At WrestleMania IX on April 4, The Steiner Brothers defeated The Headshrinkers (Samu and Fatu).

After WrestleMania, The Steiner Brothers feuded with Money Inc. (Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster). At King of the Ring on June 13, The Steiner Brothers and The Smokin&#x27; Gunns (Billy and Bart) defeated The Headshrinkers and Money Inc. in an eight-man tag match. The following evening in Columbus, Ohio, in an untelevised match at a &quot;Raw&quot; taping, The Steiner Brothers defeated Money Inc. for the WWF World Tag Team Championship. Money Inc. regained the title on June 16, at a house show in Rockford, Illinois, and lost it back to The Steiner Brothers at another house show, on June 19, in St. Louis, Missouri.

The Steiner Brothers defended the title against The Heavenly Bodies (Tom Prichard and Jimmy Del Ray) at SummerSlam on August 30 in their home state of Michigan and walked away victoriously with a pinfall win.

On the September 13 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; in New York, New York, The Steiner Brothers defended the title against The Quebecers (Jacques and Pierre) in a &quot;Province of Quebec Rules&quot; match, wherein the title could change hands via disqualification. The match ended when the manager of The Quebecers, Johnny Polo, threw a hockey stick into the ring and Scott caught it. When the referee saw Scott holding the foreign object, he disqualified The Steiner Brothers and awarded the title to The Quebecers. Scott defeated Pierre in a singles match the following week on &quot;Raw&quot;. Steiner competed in the elimination match main event of Survivor Series, marking his only headlining WWF pay-per-view appearance. On January 22, 1994, Scott Steiner was the first entrant in the Royal Rumble. After nine minutes, he was eliminated by Diesel. Following this, the Steiner Brothers left the WWF in mid-1994.

=== New Japan Pro Wrestling (1991–1995) ===
In 1991, the Steiners worked for New Japan Pro-Wrestling while under contract with WCW and WWF. On March 21, 1991, they defeated Hiroshi Hase and Kensuke Sasaki for the IWGP Tag Team Championship. They dropped the titles to Hase and Keiji Muto on November 5. Then On June 26, 1992, they defeated Big Van Vader and Bam Bam Bigelow for the titles. They dropped them to Scott Norton and Tony Halme on November 22. During their time in the WWF, they only did a few matches.

In 1994 after leaving the WWF, they returned to Japan as full-time workers until the end of 1995.

=== Extreme Championship Wrestling (1995) ===
On July 28, 1995, The Steiner Brothers debuted in Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW), at The Orange County Fairgrounds in Middletown, New York, defeating D&#x27;Von Dudley and Vampire Warrior. Rick had been in ECW by himself since April 1995. On August 4, in The Flagstaff in Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania, they defeated D&#x27;Von Dudley and 2 Cold Scorpio. They made their ECW Arena debut on August 5, at Wrestlepalooza, teaming with Eddie Guerrero to lose to Scorpio, Dean Malenko, and Cactus Jack. On August 25, in Jim Thorpe, they defeated Scorpio and Malenko, and defeated Scorpio and Chris Benoit the following evening. On August 28, they defeated Dudley Dudley and Dances with Dudley in the Big Apple Dinner Theater in Kennett Square, Pennsylvania. At Gangstas Paradise on September 16, they teamed with Taz and lost to The Eliminators (John Kronus and Perry Saturn) and Jason. On September 23, in Middletown, they defeated Raven and Stevie Richards. Scott Steiner made his final ECW appearance on October 28, teaming with Taz and losing to The Eliminators.

=== Return to WCW ===
==== Steiner Brothers (1996–1998) ====

The Steiner Brothers rejoined WCW in 1996, debuting on the March 11 edition of Monday Nitro. They won the World Tag Team Championship from Harlem Heat on July 24, but proceeded to lose it back to them just three days later. After the formation of the New World Order (nWo), the Steiner Brothers feuded with The Outsiders, who had won the World Tag Team Championship from Harlem Heat. The Steiners won the tag belts at Souled Out on January 25, 1997. The following Nitro, Eric Bischoff stripped them of the titles and returned them to The Outsiders due to WCW referee Randy Anderson, who was not an official referee for Souled Out, counting the fall. Harlem Heat would challenge the Steiners for their spot as contenders for the tag belts. The Steiners eventually won and earned a match with the Outsiders at Road Wild on August 9. Scott would cover Scott Hall for the fall but Kevin Nash pulled referee Nick Patrick out of the ring and Patrick ended the match as disqualification. The Steiners finally won the belts on October 13, defeating Hall and Syxx, who wrestled in the injuired Nash&#x27;s place via &quot;Wolfpac Rules&quot;.

From mid 1997 into early 1998, Scott Steiner underwent noticeable physical changes, such as massively increasing his muscle mass, cutting his signature mullet and growing a goatee. During this period, Steiner feuded with nWo member Buff Bagwell over who had the better physique. In early 1998, he began leaving Rick in the ring by himself during tag team matches, or starting the match without ever tagging his brother in.

==== New World Order (1998–2000) ====

On February 22, 1998, Steiner joined the nWo at SuperBrawl VIII, by attacking his brother Rick while they were defending the WCW World Tag Team Championship against The Outsiders, whom he personally handed the belts to. The next night, on Nitro he adopted a new gimmick, dyeing his hair and beard blond, and further increasing his muscle mass over the ensuing months. Scott then adopted the nicknames &quot;White Thunder&quot;, in reference to his bleached hair and goatee and his all-white singlet, and &quot;Superstar&quot;, as a homage to &quot;Superstar&quot; Billy Graham. However, he soon discarded both nicknames, and instead proclaimed himself as &quot;Big Poppa Pump&quot;. Steiner further altered his attire as he began wearing sunglasses and chain mail headgear as part of his ring entrance outfit. He then began teaming with Buff Bagwell and feuded with Rick for much of 98. At the same time, the nWo would split into rival factions, nWo Wolfpack led by Nash and nWo Hollywood led by Hollywood Hogan. Steiner and Bagwell established themselves as members of the latter. In November, Steiner would become leader of nWo Hollywood after Hogan went on hiatus.

In early 1999, Steiner would become a prominent member of a newly reunited nWo elite following the Fingerpoke of Doom. He feuded with Goldberg, Diamond Dallas Page, Booker T, and The Four Horsemen and won the United States Heavyweight Championship and World Television Championship. In March, he turned on Bagwell, kicking him out of the group, and eventually reunited with his brother. In mid-1999, he was sidelined with a back injury and stripped of the United States Heavyweight Title. On a December 1999 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;, Steiner cut a promo to announce his retirement from professional wrestling due to this injury. Later that evening, he revealed himself to, in fact, be in fine health, turning on and attacking Sid Vicious. He continued to be a top heel into 2000 and joined the reformed nWo.

==== Main event push and World Heavyweight Championship (2000–2001) ====
After the nWo disbanded again, Steiner briefly joined Vince Russo and Eric Bischoff&#x27;s New Blood stable before switching to The Millionaire&#x27;s Club, turning face for a brief time. At Spring Stampede, he competed in a tournament for the United States Championship, defeating The Wall by disqualification when he blinded him, which caused Wall to accidentally chokeslam the referee through a table instead. He then defeated Mike Awesome by submission with his finisher, the &quot;Steiner Recliner&quot; before ultimately winning the tournament after defeating Sting in the finals, albeit due to interference from Sting&#x27;s previous opponent Vampiro. Steiner would also feud with Tank Abbott and his brother, a now-heel Rick. Steiner would turn heel again on former nWo teammate Kevin Nash at Bash at the Beach by helping Goldberg defeat him in a match where fellow nWo alumnus Scott Hall&#x27;s contract was on the line, joining the New Blood in the process.

On November 26, 2000, at Mayhem, Steiner defeated Booker T to win the WCW World Heavyweight Championship, becoming a Triple Crown Champion in the process. In January 2001, Steiner became the centerpiece of Ric Flair&#x27;s Magnificent Seven stable. He feuded with Booker T over several months and pay-per-views until losing the WCW World Heavyweight Championship back to him on the final episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; on March 26, 2001. After WCW was purchased by the WWF, Rechsteiner, unlike many of his colleagues, did not join the WWF and instead opted to wait until his contract with AOL Time Warner expired later that year before seeking other opportunities.

=== World Wrestling All-Stars (2001–2002) ===
After his contract with AOL Time Warner expired in November 2001, Rechsteiner joined the World Wrestling All-Stars, where he was reunited with his former WCW valet Midajah. He appeared at WWA house shows in Europe and Australia throughout 2001 and 2002. At the third WWA pay-per-view, The Eruption, on April 12, 2002, at the Rod Laver Arena in Melbourne, Steiner challenged Nathan Jones for the WWA World Heavyweight Championship. Despite the presence of WWA Commissioner Sid at ringside, Steiner was able to cheat his way to victory, striking Jones with the title belt and making Jones submit with the Steiner Recliner. Steiner held the belt for several months (although never defending it) before vacating it in November 2002 and leaving WWA for World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE). Before joining WWE, Steiner teamed with his brother Rick to defeat Hiroshi Tanahashi and Kensuke Sasaki on May 2, 2002, in Japan, on New Japan Pro-Wrestling&#x27;s 30th Anniversary show.

=== Return to WWE (2002–2004) ===

In October 2002, Steiner signed a three-year contract with World Wrestling Entertainment, and returned to WWE television after an eight-year absence at Survivor Series in Madison Square Garden on November 17. There, Steiner attacked Matt Hardy and Christopher Nowinski after they delivered a promo insulting New York City, establishing him as a face.

Over the following weeks, General Managers Eric Bischoff and Stephanie McMahon both courted Steiner, each trying to sign him to their respective brand, Raw or SmackDown!. Bischoff was ultimately successful, after McMahon rejected Steiner&#x27;s sexual advances.

On &quot;Raw&quot; in January 2003 Steiner began feuding with World Heavyweight Champion Triple H, and his faction Evolution. They began competing against one another for strength and muscle conditioning leading to world title matches at the Royal Rumble on January 19 and No Way Out on February 23. Steiner won the first match by disqualification after Triple H attacked him with a sledgehammer, but lost the second match at No Way Out via pinfall. Both matches were not well received by fans with the first going on to win the Wrestling Observer Newsletter&#x27;s &quot;Worst Worked Match&quot; award.

On the April 14 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Steiner faced off against Nowinski in a debate over the Iraq War. Later that year, Steiner formed a tag team with Test, with Stacy Keibler as their manager. The team lasted several months, and feuded with La Résistance, losing to them at Judgment Day on May 18. They broke up after Test turned heel and began misogynistically treating Keibler. On June 15, Steiner defeated Test in a grudge match to win the managerial services of Keibler at Bad Blood, but lost her back to Test in a rematch on the August 18 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. At Unforgiven on September 21, Steiner faced Test with Keibler&#x27;s managerial services again on the line with the extra stipulation that, if Steiner lost, he would become Test&#x27;s manservant. Steiner lost after Keibler&#x27;s interference backfired, and the tag team was reunited at Test&#x27;s behest. After another mistake by Keibler cost the team a match on the September 29 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Steiner belly to belly suplexed her, resulting in Steiner turning heel and teaming on better terms with Test as Keibler was forced to remain their reluctant manager. At Survivor Series on November 16, Steiner and Team Bischoff defeated Team Austin in a 5-on-5 Survivor Series elimination match in which he was first man eliminated. On the December 1 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Mick Foley fired &quot;(kayfabe)&quot; Steiner and Test, freeing Stacy as their manager. At Armageddon on December 14, Steiner and Test competed in a Tag Team Turmoil match for the World Tag Team Championship which was won by Evolution (Batista and Ric Flair). On the January 19, 2004 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Steiner lost to Goldberg in a triple treat match also involving Test. Steiner&#x27;s last WWE match was as a part of the Royal Rumble match at the Royal Rumble on January 25, lasting six minutes before being eliminated by Booker T. Steiner suffered an injury, sidelining him for two months. While injured, he was released from WWE on August 17.

=== Independent circuit (2004–2006) ===
Rechsteiner underwent foot surgery in July 2004, having six screws inserted into his foot, a tendon transplant, and a bone graft. He then convalesced in a cast for eight months. Scott Steiner returned to the ring on August 28, 2005, in Asheville, North Carolina for the independent promotion, Universal Championship Wrestling, teaming with his brother Rick in 2006. On June 10, 2006, they defeated Disco Inferno and Jeff Lewis. He wrestled briefly in LAW, alongside Buff Bagwell, and feuded with the tag team Fame and Fortune.

On March 11, 2006, the Steiner Brothers defeated Eddie Venom &amp; Elvis Elliot at a UCW wrestling show in Bay City, Michigan.

On June 2, 2006, the Steiner Brothers defeated Elvis Elliot &amp; Original Sinn (Sinn Bodhi) at a UCW wrestling show at Bay City Western High School in Auburn, Michigan entitled &quot;Steiner Brothers Return Home.&quot;

=== Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ===
====Alliance with Jeff Jarrett (2006–2007)====

Steiner debuted in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) at Destination X on March 12, 2006, before making his &quot;Impact!&quot; debut on March 18, identifying himself as Jeff Jarrett&#x27;s bodyguard. In subsequent weeks, he attacked TNA wrestlers and staff, demanding to be hired.

At Lockdown on April 23, Steiner, Jarrett, and America&#x27;s Most Wanted lost to Sting, A.J. Styles, Ron Killings, and Rhino in a Lethal Lockdown match. Steiner and Jarrett then challenged Sting and a partner of his choosing to face them at Sacrifice on May 14. Sting hinted at three potential partners (Buff Bagwell, Lex Luger and Rick Steiner) before choosing Samoa Joe. Sting and Joe defeated Steiner and Jarrett.

After failing to defeat Sting to qualify for the third King of the Mountain match, Steiner lost to Samoa Joe at Slammiversary on June 18. At Victory Road on July 16, he faced Joe, Sting, and Christian Cage in a four-way bout to decide the number one contender for Jarrett&#x27;s NWA World Heavyweight Championship. Sting pinned Steiner to win, and Steiner resumed his role as Jarrett&#x27;s bodyguard. He then faced Christian Cage on the August 10 &quot;Impact&quot; and was in Jarrett&#x27;s corner at Hard Justice on August 13 before disappearing from TNA.

On February 8, 2007, Steiner returned as NWA World Heavyweight Champion Christian Cage&#x27;s &quot;special consultant&quot;, in Cage&#x27;s match with Kurt Angle at Against All Odds on February 11, interfering to cost Angle the match and joining Christian&#x27;s Coalition. Steiner eliminated Angle in a gauntlet match to determine a number one contender, then lost to him at Destination X on March 11. At Lockdown on April 15, Steiner was part of Team Cage, which lost to Team Angle in a Lethal Lockdown match.

====Steiner Brothers reunion and various storylines (2007–2008)====
At Sacrifice on May 13, the Steiner Brothers reunited. They were scheduled to wrestle Team 3D in a &quot;dream match&quot; at Slammiversary on June 17, but Scott was replaced by Road Warrior Animal after suffering a severe throat injury. Steiner returned on July 15, at Victory Road, costing Brother Ray a match. At Bound for Glory on October 14, The Steiner Brothers defeated Team 3D in a 2-out-of-3 Tables Match. At Genesis on November 11, they unsuccessfully challenged the tag team champions, Tomko and A.J. Styles.
At Turning Point on December 2, Steiner competed in the &quot;Feast or Fired Battle Royal&quot;, winning a briefcase containing a contract for a TNA World Heavyweight Championship match. On the December 13 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, he beat Petey Williams, B.G. James, and Christopher Daniels. Following the match, Jim Cornette offered him $50,000 for his briefcase, which he refused. Steiner then switched briefcases with Petey Williams (which contained an X Division Title contract), stating afterwards he would get his original briefcase back the next week. At Against All Odds on February 10, 2008, Steiner defeated Williams to win both briefcases, after a distraction from an unknown woman later introduced as Rhaka Khan. After winning both cases, Steiner issued a challenge to anyone, which Williams answered. Williams lost after more interference by Khan. Steiner then took Williams as his protégé and gave him the X Division briefcase on the April 17 edition of &quot;Impact!&quot;. Later that night, Williams cashed in the opportunity, beating Jay Lethal for the X Division title with the Canadian Destroyer. At Sacrifice on May 11, Steiner cashed in his briefcase and faced Samoa Joe for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. During the lead-up to the match, Steiner would make his now-infamous &quot;Scott Steiner math&quot; promo by saying that Samoa Joe had &quot;8 1/3% chance of winning&quot; while Steiner had &quot;141 2/3% chance of winning&quot;. However, Kurt Angle fell out of the mix by suffering an injury, which rendered Professor Steiner&#x27;s arithmetic obsolete. He lost, and tore his ACL, sidelining him and requiring surgery.

==== Main Event Mafia (2008–2010) ====
On the October 30 &quot;Impact!&quot;, Steiner returned, joining The Main Event Mafia and attacking several wrestlers with a lead pipe. On the November 13 &quot;Impact!&quot;, he turned on former protégé Petey Williams after Williams tried to talk with him about the Main Event Mafia situation. Steiner threw him off a ladder and the Main Event Mafia attacked him backstage.

At Genesis on January 11, 2009, Mick Foley, A.J. Styles and Brother Devon defeated Steiner, Booker T, and Cute Kip when Foley pinned Steiner after a double underhook DDT onto a steel chair. At Against All Odds on February 8, Steiner pinned Williams after a &quot;Steiner Screwdriver&quot; to end their feud.

Steiner and Booker T then formed a tag team. At Victory Road on July 19, they defeated Beer Money, Inc. (James Storm and Robert Roode) for the World Tag Team Championship. At Bound for Glory on October 18, they lost the titles to The British Invasion in a four way Full Metal Mayhem Tag Team match (which also included Team 3D and Beer Money).

On the following episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, Angle announced the disbanding of the Main Event Mafia, which Steiner refused to accept. Steiner then feuded with Bobby Lashley, defeating him in a Falls Count Anywhere Match at Turning Point on November 15. The next month, at Final Resolution on December 20, Lashley defeated Steiner in a Last Man Standing match.

On February 4, 2010, Steiner&#x27;s profile was removed from TNA&#x27;s official website. His departure from TNA was confirmed the following week.

=== World Wrestling Council (2010) ===
Steiner joined the Puerto Rican promotion World Wrestling Council (WWC) in March 2010, debuting in an angle where he attacked Universal Heavyweight Champion Ray González. On April 3, at &quot;Camino a la Gloria 2010&quot;, Steiner wrestled his first match for WWC, losing to González in a championship match. On April 24, he defeated González in a rematch to become the new Universal Heavyweight Champion. On May 29, he was stripped of the title, after a defense against González ended in a no contest. On July 11, González defeated Steiner (in a match refereed by Ricky Banderas) to regain the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship.

=== Return to TNA (2011–2012) ===
On the January 27, 2011, episode of &quot;Impact!&quot; (taped January 12), Steiner returned to TNA as a face, saving Kurt Angle, Matt Morgan, and Crimson from Fortune and Immortal. The next week, Fortune turned on Immortal and aligned themselves with Steiner, Angle and Crimson. On February 13, at Against All Odds, Steiner, James Storm and Robert Roode defeated Immortal members Rob Terry, Gunner and Murphy in a six-man tag match. Steiner pinned Gunner after the Frankensteiner. Steiner then began feuding with Rob Terry after Terry attacked him on the February 24 &quot;Impact!&quot;, during a &quot;posedown&quot; between the two. The following week, Steiner defeated Terry in a singles match.

On the March 24 &quot;Impact!&quot;, Steiner formed a tag team with Crimson and defeated Ink Inc. (Jesse Neal and Shannon Moore). After the match, Moore disrespected Steiner. This led to a match between the two the following week, which Steiner won. On April 17, at Lockdown, Steiner and Crimson lost a four-way tag team number one contenders cage match to Ink Inc.

On the next episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, Steiner turned heel by attacking Matt Morgan, after they had each announced their intention to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. The two brawled backstage on the April 28 &quot;Impact!&quot;. On the May 26 episode of the now renamed &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Steiner interfered in and cost Morgan his match with Jeff Jarrett. On the June 2 &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Steiner and Jarrett defeated Morgan and Kurt Angle, when Steiner pinned Morgan. At Slammiversary IX on June 12, Morgan defeated Steiner in a singles match to end the feud. On the June 30 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Steiner joined Immortal. At Hardcore Justice on August 7, Immortal (Steiner, Abyss and Gunner) lost to Fortune (A.J. Styles, Christopher Daniels, and Kazarian). At Turning Point on November 13, Steiner and Bully Ray lost to former Immortal stablemates Mr. Anderson and Abyss in a tag team match.

After three months of inactivity, Rechsteiner was released from TNA in March 2012.

=== Return to the independent circuit (2010–2015) ===
In 2010, Steiner defeated Brutus Beefcake to become Canadian Wrestling International (CWI)&#x27;s first Heavyweight Champion in Caledonia, Ontario. He retained the title in matches against Kevin Nash and Big Van Vader.

Following his departure from TNA, Steiner began performing for various European promotions on a European tour. On May 31, 2013, the Steiner Brothers won the Preston City Wrestling Tag Team Championship before losing it the following day. On June 2, Steiner won the Dutch Pro Wrestling Heavyweight Championship. On June 23, the Steiner Brothers defeated Eddie Kingston and Homicide at the House of Hardcore 2 event.

On June 7, 2015, Steiner was pinned by Rob Van Dam at Citi Field`s Legends of Wrestling show. After the match Steiner and Doc Gallows attacked RVD leading to Bill Goldberg coming to the aid of Van Dam and spearing Steiner.

=== Second return to Impact Wrestling (2017–2019) ===
On April 23, 2017, Steiner returned to TNA (by then, renamed Impact Wrestling), aligning himself with Josh Mathews. On July 2, 2017, at Slammiversary XV Steiner returned to action teaming with Josh Mathews in a losing effort to Joseph Park and Jeremy Borash.

At the April 22, 2018, television tapings Steiner was announced as Eli Drake&#x27;s partner for the Impact World Tag Team Championship match against The Latin American Xchange at Redemption. Steiner and Drake went on to win the tag team titles. A few weeks later, Steiner and Drake retained the Impact World Tag Team Championships in a rematch against LAX. On the May 17, 2018, episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling &quot;, Steiner and Drake lost the Impact World Tag Team Championships to Andrew Everett and DJZ. On the May 31, 2018, episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling: Under Pressure&quot;, Steiner was defeated by his former partner Eli Drake ending their partnership following their title loss. On the January 11, 2019, episode of Impact Wrestling, Steiner made a special return during Scarlett Bordeaux&#x27;s Smoke Show segment attacking The Desi Hit Squad. On the August 2, 2019, Unbreakable event, he teamed up with Petey Williams and Jordynne Grace defeated Dicky Mayer, Gentleman Jervis and Ryan Taylor this was Steiner&#x27;s last match in TNA.

=== National Wrestling Alliance (2019–2020) ===
Steiner made a surprise appearance at the December 17 tapings of NWA Powerrr. He was next seen on the January 7 episode where he was revealed to be the third member of Nick Aldis&#x27; team. He made his in ring debut on the following weeks episode, coming up short against team Morton. Steiner challenged Aron Stevens for the NWA National Championship at the Hard Times PPV. He defeated Stevens via Disqualification, meaning Stevens retained the championship.

=== WWE Hall of Fame Induction (2022) ===
On April 1, 2022, the Steiner Brothers were inducted in the WWE Hall of Fame

==Professional wrestling style and persona==
During his early years working with his brother Rick, they used an athletic style mixed with amateur background focused on suplex-based moves. He also created and popularized the Frankensteiner move, a &quot;Huracánrana&quot; where the opponent does not hit the ring with their back, but with their head instead. He also created the Steiner Screwdriver, a vertical suplex transitioned into a reverse piledriver.

Talking about his time as WCW World Champion, Eric Bischoff praised Steiner&#x27;s skills and said, &quot;I liked what he could do in the ring and his in-ring abilities were nothing short of amazing [but] he was volatile in and out of the ring.&quot;

On May 1, 2008, during the build up to that year&#x27;s Sacrifice, before his match against Samoa Joe and Kurt Angle, Steiner cut a promo talking about his chances of winning. This promo is notable due to Steiner&#x27;s humorous abuse of numbers, percentages, and math. His &quot;Steiner Math&quot; promo has been parodied several times by wrestlers and other people not associated with wrestling.

== Other media ==
In 2000 Steiner made an appearance in Charmed season 3 “Wrestling with Demons”

In 2001 Steiner appeared in an episode of The Jersey called The Sadie Incident alongside Booker T

In 2017, Steiner made acting debut in Costa Rican-Indian film &quot;1 Chor 2 Mastikhor&quot;.

In 2022 Steiner made an appearance on &quot;Judge Steve Harvey&quot; with wrestling promoter Ronnie Gossett.

== Business ventures ==
From April 2016 until August 2020, Rechsteiner and his wife operated a Shoney&#x27;s restaurant in Acworth, Georgia.

== Personal life ==
Steiner has been married to Christa Podsedly since June 7, 2000. They have two children together. His son Brandon is a point guard on the Virginia Tech men&#x27;s basketball team. His nephew Bronson Rechsteiner is also a professional wrestler and is currently signed to WWE, performing under the name Bron Breakker.

=== Incidents and controversies ===

Rechsteiner&#x27;s weight gain in the late 1990s led to allegations of steroid abuse, which he denied. Upon returning to WWE in late 2002, he was asked to undergo a steroid test, and agreed on the condition that Triple H take one as well; he claims that WWE did not follow through with either test.

On April 21, 1998, in Cherokee County, Georgia, Rechsteiner threatened Georgia Department of Transportation employee Paul Kaspereen after Kaspereen informed him that an exit ramp leading off Interstate 575 was closed. He then hit Kaspereen twice with his Ford F-250 pickup truck. Kaspereen was not seriously hurt. Rechsteiner was subsequently arrested and pleaded guilty on March 17, 1999, to aggravated assault and making terroristic threats, both of which are felonies carrying a maximum sentence of 30 years imprisonment. Under Georgia&#x27;s first-offender rules, which stipulate that a first-time offender will be found not guilty if they do not violate the terms of their probation, Judge C. Michael Roach sentenced Rechsteiner to 10 days in Cherokee County Jail. He also placed Rechsteiner on seven years&#x27; probation; ordered him to pay $25,000 in fines, restitution, and legal fees; and made him perform 200 hours of community service.

In December 2005, Rechsteiner, Lex Luger, and Buff Bagwell were removed from a flight from Minneapolis to Winnipeg following a disturbance on board the plane. They were detained for several hours before Rechsteiner and Bagwell were released and permitted to continue on their journey; Luger, however, was held without bail and later charged and jailed. Rechsteiner would later refer to the incident during his in-character interviews, describing himself as a violent criminal with little regard for the forces of law and order.

Following his departure from TNA, Rechsteiner began expressing his disdain with TNA management via Twitter, specifically Hulk Hogan and Eric Bischoff. As a result, he was contacted by TNA&#x27;s attorneys. After he continued making similar remarks, TNA filed a legal complaint against him in June 2012. He responded by filing a countersuit against TNA on September 10, claiming he was owed royalties. It was reported in November that a second lawsuit was filed by Rechsteiner, claiming he was injured as a result of TNA officials such as Hogan allowing Jeff Hardy to wrestle him while intoxicated. TNA&#x27;s lawsuit against Rechsteiner was dismissed by a judge in February 2016.

Rechsteiner was banned from attending the 2015 WWE Hall of Fame ceremony after Hogan&#x27;s wife accused him of accosting her at a San Jose airport. Hogan&#x27;s wife alleged that he threatened to kill Hogan, and the couple subsequently reported the incident to police. Rechsteiner denies making the death threat.

=== Health issues ===
At a TNA house show in San Juan on June 3, 2007, Rechsteiner was kicked in the throat by his opponent, Apolo. After he began coughing up blood, he was taken by ambulance to a hospital, where he was diagnosed with a torn trachea and given five hours to live. He was put in an induced coma for two days, while doctors cut through his ribs and lung to repair the tear, then began draining fluid from his lungs for the next two weeks. Unable to fly because the change in air pressure would have caused his lung to collapse, he eventually left on a cruise ship and arrived in the mainland U.S. one week later.

On March 6, 2020, during an &quot;Impact!&quot; taping in Atlanta it was reported that Reichsteiner had collapsed backstage and had stopped breathing, requiring his heart to be shocked with a defibrillator and being rushed to the hospital. He subsequently had a heart procedure after the health scare.

==Championships and accomplishments==
===Amateur wrestling===
* National Collegiate Athletic Association
** 1983 Division I Big 10 – Fifth place
** 1984 Division I Big 10 – Runner-up
** 1985 Division I Big 10 – Runner-up
** 1986 Division I Big 10 – Runner-up
** 1986 Division I All American – Sixth place

=== Professional wrestling ===
* Big Time Wrestling
** BTW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
** Jimmy Valiant Boogie Jam Battle Royal (2022)
* Canadian Wrestling&#x27;s Elite
** CWE 123Approved.ca Television Championship (1 time)
* Canadian Wrestling International
** CWI Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* Continental Wrestling Association
** CWA Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Billy Travis (2) and Jed Grundy (1)
** Renegade Rampage Tournament (1988)
* Dutch Pro Wrestling
** Dutch Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* George Tragos/Lou Thesz Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
** Class of 2014
* Jim Crockett Promotions / World Championship Wrestling
** WCW World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
** WCW World Television Championship (2 times)
** WCW United States Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
** NWA/WCW United States Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner
** WCW World Tag Team Championship (7 times) – with Rick Steiner
** Pat O&#x27;Connor Memorial Tag Team Tournament (1990) – with Rick Steiner
** WCW United States Championship Tournament (1999)
**WCW United States Championship Tournament (April 2000)
**London Lethal Lottery Tag Team Tournament - with Sting
** Eighth WCW Triple Crown Champion
*Memphis Wrestling Hall of Fame
**Class of 2021
* Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling1
**MACW Hardcore Championship (3 times)
** NWA Mid-Atlantic Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
** NWA Mid-Atlantic Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner
* New Japan Pro-Wrestling
**IWGP Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Rick Steiner
* Preston City Wrestling
** PCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner
* Pro Wrestling America
** PWA Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner
* Pro Wrestling Illustrated
** Match of the Year (1991) 
** Tag Team of the Year (1990, 1993) 
** Most Improved Wrestler of the Year (1989)
** PWI ranked him No. 6 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the year in the PWI 500 in 1991
** PWI ranked him No. 77 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; in 2003
** PWI ranked him No. 2 of the Top 100 Tag Teams of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; with Rick Steiner in 2003
* Pure Action Championship Wrestling
** PACW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner
* Ring Ka King
** RKK Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Abyss
** World Cup of Ring Ka King (2012) – with Abyss, Sir Brutus Magnus, Deadly Danda, and Sonjay Dutt
* Stars and Stripes Championship Wrestling
** SSCW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* Total Nonstop Action Wrestling / Impact Wrestling
** TNA/Impact World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Booker T (1) and Eli Drake (1)
** Feast or Fired (2007 – X Division Championship contract)2
** Feast or Fired (2007 – World Heavyweight Championship contract)3
* United Wrestling Federation
** Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Express Tag Team Tournament (2007) - with Rick Steiner
* Universal Championship Wrestling
** UCW Universal Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
*World League Wrestling
**WLW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Kyle Roberts
* World Wrestling All-Stars
** WWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* World Wrestling Association (Indianapolis)
** WWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
** WWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Jerry Graham Jr.
* World Wrestling Council
** WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* World Wrestling Federation/WWE
** WWF World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Rick Steiner
**WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2022) - as a member of The Steiner Brothers
* World Wide Wrestling Association
** WWWA Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter
** Best Wrestling Maneuver (1989, 1990) 
** Match of the Year (1991) 
** Tag Team of the Year (1990) 
** Worst Worked Match of the Year (2003) 

1
2
3

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Impact Wrestling Profile
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q467367" start="0" end="17" title="Scott Steiner" label="Scott Rechsteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132964" start="60" end="69" title="ring name" label="ring name"/>
<link wikidata="Q467367" start="70" end="83" title="Scott Steiner" label="Scott Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="100" end="121" title="professional wrestler" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="170" end="198" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931754" start="232" end="255" title="Jim Crockett Promotions" label="Jim Crockett Promotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="263" end="303" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation/Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="315" end="345" title="Impact Wrestling" label="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q73002" start="381" end="411" title="Extreme Championship Wrestling" label="Extreme Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344963" start="437" end="451" title="world champion" label="world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="474" end="482" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="one-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="483" end="513" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="517" end="525" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship#Title history" label="one-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957106" start="526" end="556" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="WWA World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185117" start="564" end="572" title="List of WWC Universal Heavyweight Champions" label="one-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577958" start="573" end="607" title="WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship" label="WWC Universal Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957107" start="623" end="653" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship (Indianapolis version)" label="WWA World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="695" end="720" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)#List of WCW Triple Crown winners" label="WCW Triple Crown Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="796" end="800" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405303" start="804" end="824" title="The Steiner Brothers" label="The Steiner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="876" end="901" title="WWF Tag Team Championship" label="WWF Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="903" end="934" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655107" start="936" end="962" title="IWGP Tag Team Championship" label="IWGP Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q722801" start="972" end="1010" title="Impact Tag Team Championship" label="TNA/Impact World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="1034" end="1046" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178296" start="1047" end="1061" title="List of NWA/WCW closed-circuit events and pay-per-view events" label="events for WCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559577" start="1066" end="1069" title="List of Impact Wrestling pay-per-view events" label="TNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q80354" start="1097" end="1120" title="Survivor Series (1993)" label="Survivor Series in 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q746820" start="1170" end="1188" title="Bay City, Michigan" label="Bay City, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="1270" end="1292" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="1317" end="1323" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="1393" end="1408" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="1409" end="1420" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="1483" end="1495" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="1708" end="1720" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q783592" start="1733" end="1742" title="The Sheik (wrestler)" label="The Sheik"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036530" start="1783" end="1829" title="World Wrestling Association (Indianapolis)" label="Indianapolis-based World Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q430464" start="1862" end="1880" title="Dearborn, Michigan" label="Dearborn, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606442" start="1903" end="1917" title="The Great Wojo" label="The Great Wojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957107" start="1926" end="1960" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship (Indianapolis version)" label="WWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="2051" end="2059" title="tag team" label="tag team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292904" start="2241" end="2249" title="Don Kent (wrestler)" label="Don Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="2284" end="2291" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128866" start="2298" end="2331" title="Continental Wrestling Association" label="Continental Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354237" start="2618" end="2646" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll RPMs" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll RPMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846513" start="2648" end="2658" title="Mike Davis (wrestler)" label="Mike Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819623" start="2663" end="2673" title="Tommy Lee Jones (wrestler)" label="Tommy Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435167" start="2810" end="2823" title="Robert Fuller (wrestler)" label="Robert Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997776" start="2828" end="2840" title="Bunkhouse Buck" label="Jimmy Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="3090" end="3118" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050510" start="3157" end="3172" title="Chi-Town Rumble" label="Chi-Town Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="3205" end="3209" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343090" start="3237" end="3270" title="WCW World Television Championship" label="NWA World Television Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933507" start="3274" end="3286" title="Mike Rotunda" label="Mike Rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405303" start="3378" end="3394" title="The Steiner Brothers" label="teaming together"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382255" start="3447" end="3461" title="Kevin Sullivan (wrestler)" label="Kevin Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="3479" end="3505" title="Clash of the Champions VII" label="Clash of the Champions VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737632" start="3544" end="3568" title="The Great American Bash (1989)" label="Great American Bash 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879951" start="3746" end="3757" title="Missy Hyatt" label="Missy Hyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529268" start="3873" end="3884" title="Nancy Benoit" label="Robin Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529268" start="3948" end="3953" title="Nancy Benoit" label="Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="4002" end="4029" title="Clash of the Champions VIII" label="Clash of the Champions VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="4059" end="4090" title="WCW Tag Team Championship" label="NWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297056" start="4183" end="4187" title="Doom (professional wrestling)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599828" start="4248" end="4272" title="Halloween Havoc &amp;#x27;89" label="Halloween Havoc &amp;#x27;89"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="4322" end="4338" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q280049" start="4370" end="4392" title="Fabulous Freebirds" label="The Fabulous Freebirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q974049" start="4394" end="4407" title="Michael Hayes (wrestler)" label="Michael Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200169" start="4412" end="4424" title="Jimmy Garvin" label="Jimmy Garvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961703" start="4434" end="4465" title="NWA World Tag Team Championship" label="NWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297056" start="4528" end="4532" title="Doom (professional wrestling)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993402" start="4534" end="4544" title="Butch Reed" label="Butch Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q447463" start="4549" end="4560" title="Ron Simmons" label="Ron Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4565" end="4581" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1050180" start="4586" end="4600" title="Capital Combat" label="Capital Combat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4632" end="4652" title="The Midnight Express (professional wrestling)#Bobby Eaton and Stan Lane" label="The Midnight Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934975" start="4654" end="4665" title="Bobby Eaton" label="Bobby Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597748" start="4670" end="4679" title="Stan Lane" label="Stan Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948217" start="4689" end="4728" title="NWA/WCW United States Tag Team Championship" label="NWA United States Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q746830" start="4746" end="4773" title="East Rutherford, New Jersey" label="East Rutherford, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="4823" end="4850" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968353" start="4975" end="4983" title="WarGames match" label="WarGames"/>
<link wikidata="Q25240812" start="4993" end="5008" title="WrestleWar 1991" label="WrestleWar 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173293" start="5055" end="5077" title="Dave Meltzer" label="The Wrestling Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="5103" end="5134" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655107" start="5240" end="5266" title="IWGP Tag Team Championship" label="IWGP Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136350" start="5272" end="5284" title="Hiroshi Hase" label="Hiroshi Hase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739023" start="5289" end="5303" title="Kensuke Sasaki" label="Kensuke Sasaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5311" end="5334" title="WCW/New Japan Supershow#I" label="WCW/New Japan Supershow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948216" start="5512" end="5522" title="WCW Power Hour" label="Power Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564650" start="5536" end="5550" title="WCW Saturday Night" label="Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564644" start="5568" end="5578" title="WCW Main Event" label="Main Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934975" start="5857" end="5868" title="Bobby Eaton" label="Bobby Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="5870" end="5879" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q690063" start="5884" end="5896" title="Arn Anderson" label="Arn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="5933" end="5967" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5997" end="6039" title="Clash of the Champions XIV: Dixie Dynamite" label="Clash of the Champions XIV: Dixie Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001910" start="6271" end="6285" title="Buff Bagwell" label="Marcus Bagwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="6294" end="6306" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912923" start="6311" end="6324" title="Brian Pillman" label="Brian Pillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923560" start="6366" end="6379" title="WCW WorldWide" label="WCW WorldWide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343090" start="6677" end="6710" title="WCW World Television Championship" label="WCW World Television Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="6807" end="6833" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134918" start="6914" end="6924" title="Bill Watts" label="Bill Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q720955" start="7004" end="7017" title="Pat Patterson (wrestler)" label="Pat Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978158" start="7022" end="7036" title="Bruce Prichard" label="Bruce Prichard"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="7093" end="7106" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16599022" start="7157" end="7169" title="Royal Rumble match" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q50855" start="7245" end="7260" title="WrestleMania IX" label="WrestleMania IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="7483" end="7488" title="Promo (professional wrestling)" label="promo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957247" start="7532" end="7552" title="WWF Prime Time Wrestling" label="Prime Time Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="7604" end="7607" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="7641" end="7653" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q36347" start="7687" end="7704" title="Royal Rumble (1993)" label="1993 Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899485" start="7726" end="7746" title="Beverly Brothers" label="The Beverly Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846702" start="7748" end="7753" title="Mike Enos" label="Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976049" start="7758" end="7762" title="Wayne Bloom" label="Beau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855723" start="7826" end="7843" title="The Samoan SWAT Team" label="The Headshrinkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728197" start="7845" end="7849" title="Samu (wrestler)" label="Samu"/>
<link wikidata="Q360518" start="7854" end="7858" title="Rikishi (wrestler)" label="Fatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899139" start="7915" end="7925" title="Money Inc." label="Money Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q344997" start="7927" end="7938" title="Ted DiBiase" label="Ted DiBiase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933507" start="7943" end="7960" title="Mike Rotunda" label="Irwin R. Schyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q80671" start="7966" end="7982" title="King of the Ring (1993)" label="King of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155806" start="8020" end="8042" title="The Smoking Gunns" label="The Smokin&amp;#x27; Gunns"/>
<link wikidata="Q708144" start="8044" end="8049" title="Billy Gunn" label="Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572767" start="8054" end="8058" title="Bart Gunn" label="Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="8154" end="8168" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="8272" end="8303" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140048" start="8352" end="8362" title="house show" label="house show"/>
<link wikidata="Q233892" start="8366" end="8384" title="Rockford, Illinois" label="Rockford, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="8465" end="8484" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583340" start="8535" end="8554" title="Heavenly Bodies (1990s tag team)" label="The Heavenly Bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114135" start="8556" end="8568" title="Tom Prichard" label="Tom Prichard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179031" start="8573" end="8586" title="Jimmy Del Ray" label="Jimmy Del Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q59294" start="8591" end="8601" title="SummerSlam (1993)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8747" end="8765" title="New York City" label="New York, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988899" start="8815" end="8828" title="The Quebecers" label="The Quebecers"/>
<link wikidata="Q659637" start="8830" end="8837" title="Jacques Rougeau" label="Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q454855" start="8842" end="8848" title="Pierre Carl Ouellet" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q721834" start="8983" end="8990" title="Manager (professional wrestling)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q452217" start="9009" end="9020" title="Raven (wrestler)" label="Johnny Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940083" start="9030" end="9042" title="hockey stick" label="hockey stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="9117" end="9131" title="foreign object (professional wrestling)" label="foreign object"/>
<link wikidata="Q80354" start="9346" end="9361" title="Survivor Series (1993)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q36366" start="9484" end="9496" title="Royal Rumble (1994)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="9539" end="9545" title="Kevin Nash" label="Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="9688" end="9711" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q927964" start="9888" end="9898" title="Keiji Muto" label="Keiji Muto"/>
<link wikidata="Q26848" start="9951" end="9964" title="Big Van Vader" label="Big Van Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q447661" start="9969" end="9984" title="Bam Bam Bigelow" label="Bam Bam Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295448" start="10022" end="10034" title="Scott Norton" label="Scott Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q648323" start="10039" end="10049" title="Tony Halme" label="Tony Halme"/>
<link wikidata="Q73002" start="10321" end="10351" title="Extreme Championship Wrestling" label="Extreme Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q304801" start="10395" end="10415" title="Middletown, Orange County, New York" label="Middletown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209452" start="10427" end="10444" title="D&amp;#x27;Von Dudley" label="D&amp;#x27;Von Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311342" start="10449" end="10464" title="Gangrel" label="Vampire Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025791" start="10549" end="10573" title="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania" label="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617337" start="10611" end="10625" title="2 Cold Scorpio" label="2 Cold Scorpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286639" start="10643" end="10652" title="2300 Arena" label="ECW Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637945" start="10675" end="10689" title="Wrestlepalooza (1995)" label="Wrestlepalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q44374" start="10704" end="10718" title="Eddie Guerrero" label="Eddie Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q729508" start="10739" end="10751" title="Dean Malenko" label="Dean Malenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="10757" end="10768" title="Mick Foley" label="Cactus Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="10859" end="10871" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215416" start="10941" end="10959" title="Dances with Dudley" label="Dances with Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181684" start="10995" end="11023" title="Kennett Square, Pennsylvania" label="Kennett Square, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520380" start="11028" end="11045" title="ECW Gangstas Paradise" label="Gangstas Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q470015" start="11080" end="11083" title="Taz (wrestler)" label="Taz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731804" start="11096" end="11111" title="The Eliminators" label="The Eliminators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034742" start="11113" end="11124" title="John Kronus" label="John Kronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q978662" start="11129" end="11141" title="Perry Saturn" label="Perry Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162881" start="11147" end="11152" title="Jason Knight (wrestler)" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q452217" start="11200" end="11205" title="Raven (wrestler)" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q657900" start="11210" end="11225" title="Stevie Richards" label="Stevie Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193741" start="11476" end="11488" title="WCW Monday Nitro" label="Monday Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q542396" start="11536" end="11547" title="Harlem Heat" label="Harlem Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="11648" end="11663" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q721658" start="11704" end="11717" title="The Outsiders (professional wrestling)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600416" start="11815" end="11825" title="Souled Out (1997)" label="Souled Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="11868" end="11881" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292062" start="11964" end="11978" title="Randy Anderson" label="Randy Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842747" start="12205" end="12214" title="Road Wild (1997)" label="Road Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="12246" end="12256" title="Scott Hall" label="Scott Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="12274" end="12284" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386316" start="12300" end="12312" title="Nick Patrick (referee)" label="Nick Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q178796" start="12447" end="12451" title="Sean Waltman" label="Syxx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12510" end="12523" title="Fabulous Freebirds#Freebird Rule" label="Wolfpac Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410374" start="12684" end="12690" title="mullet (haircut)" label="mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001910" start="12764" end="12776" title="Buff Bagwell" label="Buff Bagwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q45345464" start="13043" end="13058" title="SuperBrawl VIII" label="SuperBrawl VIII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13257" end="13264" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#G" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991639" start="13266" end="13272" title="Hair coloring" label="dyeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q202466" start="13292" end="13297" title="blond" label="blond"/>
<link wikidata="Q863115" start="13537" end="13571" title="Superstar Billy Graham" label="&amp;quot;Superstar&amp;quot; Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="13748" end="13758" title="Mail (armour)" label="chain mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="13991" end="14006" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hollywood Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028031" start="14263" end="14281" title="Fingerpoke of Doom" label="Fingerpoke of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="14298" end="14306" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q382078" start="14308" end="14327" title="Diamond Dallas Page" label="Diamond Dallas Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="14329" end="14337" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q202784" start="14343" end="14360" title="The Four Horsemen (professional wrestling)" label="The Four Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="14373" end="14411" title="WWE United States Championship" label="United States Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343090" start="14416" end="14445" title="WCW World Television Championship" label="World Television Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="14716" end="14721" title="Promo (professional wrestling)" label="promo"/>
<link wikidata="Q946865" start="14738" end="14748" title="retirement" label="retirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q703668" start="14894" end="14905" title="Sid Eudy" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="14932" end="14936" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090803" start="15104" end="15115" title="Vince Russo" label="Vince Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994241" start="15141" end="15150" title="The New Blood" label="New Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12327250" start="15178" end="15205" title="The Millionaire&amp;#x27;s Club" label="The Millionaire&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451339" start="15241" end="15256" title="Spring Stampede (2000)" label="Spring Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994217" start="15332" end="15340" title="Jerry Tuite" label="The Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q284536" start="15416" end="15425" title="chokeslam" label="chokeslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340386" start="15480" end="15492" title="Mike Awesome" label="Mike Awesome"/>
<link wikidata="Q196249" start="15536" end="15552" title="Camel clutch" label="Steiner Recliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="15616" end="15621" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354240" start="15700" end="15707" title="Vampiro" label="Vampiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q651586" start="15738" end="15749" title="Tank Abbott" label="Tank Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842744" start="15851" end="15868" title="Bash at the Beach (2000)" label="Bash at the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453363" start="16044" end="16050" title="Mayhem (2000)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="16089" end="16123" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317031" start="16136" end="16157" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)" label="Triple Crown Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731747" start="16242" end="16259" title="The Magnificent Seven (professional wrestling)" label="Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="16606" end="16621" title="WarnerMedia" label="AOL Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255530" start="16818" end="16843" title="World Wrestling All-Stars" label="World Wrestling All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841083" start="16893" end="16900" title="Midajah" label="Midajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="16947" end="16956" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60763057" start="17014" end="17026" title="WWA Eruption" label="The Eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q222878" start="17054" end="17069" title="Rod Laver Arena" label="Rod Laver Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="17073" end="17082" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q707158" start="17103" end="17115" title="Nathan Jones (wrestler)" label="Nathan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957106" start="17124" end="17158" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="WWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988900" start="17184" end="17200" title="Professional wrestling authority figures" label="WWA Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q703668" start="17201" end="17204" title="Sid Eudy" label="Sid"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="17477" end="17506" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189750" start="17581" end="17598" title="Hiroshi Tanahashi" label="Hiroshi Tanahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739023" start="17603" end="17617" title="Kensuke Sasaki" label="Kensuke Sasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="17637" end="17642" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80361" start="17889" end="17904" title="Survivor Series (2002)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="17908" end="17929" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q26621" start="17970" end="17980" title="Matt Hardy" label="Matt Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140002" start="17985" end="18005" title="Christopher Nowinski" label="Christopher Nowinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="18082" end="18086" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988900" start="18115" end="18131" title="Professional wrestling authority figures" label="General Managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q842633" start="18150" end="18167" title="Stephanie McMahon" label="Stephanie McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797029" start="18241" end="18244" title="Raw (WWE brand)" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797348" start="18248" end="18258" title="SmackDown (WWE brand)" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="18414" end="18440" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="18441" end="18449" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q36735" start="18594" end="18606" title="Royal Rumble (2003)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679544" start="18625" end="18635" title="No Way Out (2003)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="18881" end="18910" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="19057" end="19065" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="19101" end="19109" title="tag team" label="tag team"/>
<link wikidata="Q467402" start="19115" end="19119" title="Test (wrestler)" label="Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q238407" start="19126" end="19139" title="Stacy Keibler" label="Stacy Keibler"/>
<link wikidata="Q721834" start="19149" end="19156" title="Manager (professional wrestling)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q528182" start="19206" end="19219" title="La Résistance (professional wrestling)" label="La Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241595" start="19239" end="19251" title="Judgment Day (2003)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19288" end="19294" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#T" label="turned"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="19310" end="19326" title="Misogyny" label="misogynistically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620453" start="19442" end="19451" title="WWE Bad Blood (2003)" label="Bad Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884404" start="19540" end="19550" title="Unforgiven (2003)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q54128" start="19723" end="19733" title="Domestic worker" label="manservant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19957" end="19980" title="Suplex#Belly to belly suplex" label="belly to belly suplexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q80396" start="20118" end="20133" title="Survivor Series (2003)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="20327" end="20337" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="20351" end="20358" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912825" start="20419" end="20429" title="Armageddon (2003)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q721113" start="20553" end="20562" title="Evolution (professional wrestling)" label="Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="20564" end="20571" title="Dave Bautista" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="20576" end="20585" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16599022" start="20761" end="20779" title="Royal Rumble match" label="Royal Rumble match"/>
<link wikidata="Q36744" start="20787" end="20799" title="Royal Rumble (2004)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814234" start="21144" end="21154" title="Bone grafting" label="bone graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526584" start="21181" end="21185" title="Orthopedic cast" label="cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="21262" end="21287" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062492" start="21296" end="21307" title="Independent circuit" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336206" start="21308" end="21317" title="professional wrestling promotion" label="promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190195" start="21424" end="21437" title="Disco Inferno (wrestler)" label="Disco Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186276" start="21748" end="21761" title="Sinn Bodhi" label="Original Sinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="22009" end="22039" title="Impact Wrestling" label="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024676" start="22049" end="22062" title="Destination X (2006)" label="Destination X"/>
<link wikidata="Q64160" start="22106" end="22113" title="Impact! (TV series)" label="Impact!"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="22162" end="22174" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="22182" end="22191" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665318" start="22278" end="22286" title="TNA Lockdown (2006)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q467577" start="22322" end="22348" title="America&amp;#x27;s Most Wanted (professional wrestling)" label="America&amp;#x27;s Most Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q83816" start="22364" end="22375" title="AJ Styles" label="A.J. Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q310690" start="22377" end="22389" title="R-Truth" label="Ron Killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q471865" start="22395" end="22400" title="Rhyno" label="Rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776363" start="22406" end="22427" title="Lethal Lockdown match" label="Lethal Lockdown match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="22465" end="22470" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901396" start="22517" end="22526" title="TNA Sacrifice (2006)" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="22594" end="22603" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q381825" start="22638" end="22647" title="Samoa Joe" label="Samoa Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601350" start="22749" end="22775" title="King of the Mountain match" label="King of the Mountain match"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538609" start="22806" end="22819" title="Slammiversary (2006)" label="Slammiversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901415" start="22835" end="22847" title="Victory Road (2006)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="22885" end="22899" title="Christian Cage" label="Christian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="22973" end="23007" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q64160" start="23148" end="23154" title="Impact! (TV series)" label="Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901351" start="23197" end="23209" title="Hard Justice (2006)" label="Hard Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="23406" end="23416" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316834" start="23420" end="23436" title="TNA Against All Odds" label="Against All Odds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109236" start="23501" end="23527" title="Christian&amp;#x27;s Coalition" label="Christian&amp;#x27;s Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918770" start="23631" end="23644" title="Destination X (2007)" label="Destination X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257738" start="23661" end="23669" title="Lockdown (2007)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461003" start="23839" end="23848" title="Sacrifice (2007)" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190952" start="23922" end="23929" title="Dudley Boyz" label="Team 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486525" start="23962" end="23975" title="Slammiversary (2007)" label="Slammiversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q725403" start="24014" end="24033" title="Road Warrior Animal" label="Road Warrior Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901411" start="24106" end="24118" title="Victory Road (2007)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q969537" start="24128" end="24139" title="Bubba Ray Dudley" label="Brother Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924043" start="24152" end="24167" title="Bound for Glory (2007)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532772" start="24254" end="24261" title="Genesis (2007)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856022" start="24359" end="24372" title="Turning Point (2007 wrestling)" label="Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057466" start="24501" end="24535" title="Impact World Championship" label="TNA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553022" start="24602" end="24616" title="Petey Williams" label="Petey Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q536050" start="24618" end="24628" title="Road Dogg" label="B.G. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q464152" start="24634" end="24653" title="Christopher Daniels" label="Christopher Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q520572" start="24676" end="24688" title="Jim Cornette" label="Jim Cornette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="24701" end="24702" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057840" start="24819" end="24835" title="Impact X Division Championship" label="X Division Title"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691015" start="24925" end="24941" title="Against All Odds (2008)" label="Against All Odds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538445" start="25076" end="25086" title="Rhaka Khan" label="Rhaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="25258" end="25265" title="Mentorship" label="protégé"/>
<link wikidata="Q952803" start="25414" end="25424" title="Jay Lethal" label="Jay Lethal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397352" start="25482" end="25491" title="Sacrifice (2008)" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109889" start="26124" end="26144" title="The Main Event Mafia" label="The Main Event Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296670" start="26438" end="26445" title="Genesis (2009)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209452" start="26495" end="26508" title="D-Von Dudley" label="Brother Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q708144" start="26541" end="26549" title="Billy Gunn" label="Cute Kip"/>
<link wikidata="Q721118" start="26584" end="26604" title="Double arm DDT" label="double underhook DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744391" start="26612" end="26623" title="Folding chair" label="steel chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316834" start="26628" end="26644" title="TNA Against All Odds" label="Against All Odds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26698" end="26717" title="Piledriver (professional wrestling)#Vertical suplex piledriver" label="Steiner Screwdriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131634" start="26792" end="26804" title="Victory Road (2009)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q474932" start="26831" end="26847" title="Beer Money, Inc." label="Beer Money, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q718389" start="26849" end="26860" title="James Storm" label="James Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q322969" start="26865" end="26877" title="Bobby Roode" label="Robert Roode"/>
<link wikidata="Q722801" start="26887" end="26914" title="TNA World Tag Team Championship" label="World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922182" start="26919" end="26934" title="Bound for Glory (2009)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429110" start="26974" end="26994" title="The British Invasion (professional wrestling)" label="The British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="27000" end="27008" title="Triple Threat match" label="four way"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27009" end="27041" title="Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match#Total Nonstop Action Wrestling" label="Full Metal Mayhem Tag Team match"/>
<link wikidata="Q317370" start="27252" end="27265" title="Bobby Lashley" label="Bobby Lashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065208" start="27316" end="27329" title="Turning Point (2009 wrestling)" label="Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072376" start="27365" end="27381" title="Final Resolution (2009)" label="Final Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="27428" end="27451" title="Last Man Standing match" label="Last Man Standing match"/>
<link wikidata="Q202556" start="27683" end="27706" title="World Wrestling Council" label="World Wrestling Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577958" start="27767" end="27797" title="WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship" label="Universal Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297536" start="27798" end="27810" title="Ray González" label="Ray González"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132536" start="28206" end="28220" title="Ricky Banderas" label="Ricky Banderas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28932" start="28441" end="28452" title="Matt Morgan" label="Matt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128835" start="28458" end="28465" title="Anthony Mayweather" label="Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049677" start="28471" end="28478" title="Fortune (professional wrestling)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186696" start="28483" end="28491" title="Immortal (professional wrestling)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316834" start="28610" end="28626" title="TNA Against All Odds" label="Against All Odds"/>
<link wikidata="Q725567" start="28692" end="28701" title="Rob Terry" label="Rob Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135100" start="28703" end="28709" title="Jaxson Ryker" label="Gunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q865121" start="28714" end="28720" title="Mikael Judas" label="Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111097809" start="28777" end="28791" title="Frankensteiner" label="Frankensteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049606" start="29100" end="29108" title="Ink Inc." label="Ink Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1135213" start="29110" end="29120" title="Jesse Neal" label="Jesse Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q438647" start="29125" end="29138" title="Shannon Moore" label="Shannon Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130799" start="29277" end="29285" title="Lockdown (2011)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="29354" end="29364" title="cage match" label="cage match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981409" start="29889" end="29905" title="Slammiversary IX" label="Slammiversary IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067629" start="30062" end="30078" title="Hardcore Justice (2011)" label="Hardcore Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q165350" start="30111" end="30116" title="Abyss (wrestler)" label="Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q959989" start="30184" end="30192" title="Frankie Kazarian" label="Kazarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133149" start="30198" end="30211" title="Turning Point (2011 wrestling)" label="Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q969537" start="30240" end="30249" title="Bubba Ray Dudley" label="Bully Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q297240" start="30286" end="30298" title="Ken Anderson (wrestler)" label="Mr. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q371049" start="30495" end="30510" title="Brutus Beefcake" label="Brutus Beefcake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282865" start="31042" end="31056" title="Eddie Kingston" label="Eddie Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094174" start="31061" end="31069" title="Homicide (wrestler)" label="Homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141354" start="31077" end="31096" title="House of Hardcore" label="House of Hardcore 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q44628" start="31144" end="31155" title="Rob Van Dam" label="Rob Van Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072882" start="31159" end="31169" title="Citi Field" label="Citi Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q946637" start="31227" end="31238" title="Doc Gallows" label="Doc Gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="31263" end="31276" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Bill Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="31444" end="31460" title="Impact Wrestling" label="Impact Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q595737" start="31485" end="31497" title="Josh Mathews" label="Josh Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582669" start="31519" end="31535" title="Slammiversary XV" label="Slammiversary XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q165350" start="31611" end="31622" title="Abyss (wrestler)" label="Joseph Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807953" start="31627" end="31640" title="Jeremy Borash" label="Jeremy Borash"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056381" start="31710" end="31719" title="LA Knight" label="Eli Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q722801" start="31743" end="31777" title="Impact World Tag Team Championship" label="Impact World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827473" start="31792" end="31818" title="Latin American Xchange" label="The Latin American Xchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q47446646" start="31822" end="31832" title="Impact Wrestling Redemption" label="Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q22959085" start="32129" end="32143" title="Andrew Everett" label="Andrew Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q84075" start="32148" end="32151" title="Joaquin Wilde" label="DJZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561651" start="32428" end="32445" title="Scarlett Bordeaux" label="Scarlett Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516433" start="32486" end="32500" title="Desi Hit Squad" label="Desi Hit Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811890" start="32525" end="32536" title="Impact Wrestling Unbreakable (2019)" label="Unbreakable"/>
<link wikidata="Q60444867" start="32581" end="32595" title="Jordynne Grace" label="Jordynne Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q27734272" start="32618" end="32634" title="Gentleman Jervis" label="Gentleman Jervis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384577" start="32639" end="32650" title="Ryan Taylor (wrestler)" label="Ryan Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q69523823" start="32808" end="32819" title="NWA Powerrr" label="NWA Powerrr"/>
<link wikidata="Q137983" start="32911" end="32921" title="Nick Aldis" label="Nick Aldis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332139" start="33021" end="33027" title="Ricky Morton" label="Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q635126" start="33048" end="33060" title="Aron Stevens" label="Aron Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869693" start="33069" end="33094" title="NWA National Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA National Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915124" start="33102" end="33112" title="NWA Hard Times" label="Hard Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q111174390" start="33306" end="33322" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2022)" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q111097809" start="33577" end="33588" title="Huracánrana" label="Huracánrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397352" start="34090" end="34099" title="Sacrifice (2008)" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q162371" start="34489" end="34496" title="Charmed" label="Charmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822950" start="34573" end="34583" title="The Jersey" label="The Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822950" start="34591" end="34609" title="List of The Jersey episodes" label="The Sadie Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="34620" end="34628" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955507" start="34698" end="34716" title="1 Chor 2 Mastikhor" label="1 Chor 2 Mastikhor"/>
<link wikidata="Q108695977" start="34769" end="34787" title="Judge Steve Harvey" label="Judge Steve Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500392" start="34930" end="34943" title="Shoney&amp;#x27;s" label="Shoney&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q344933" start="34958" end="34974" title="Acworth, Georgia" label="Acworth, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934614" start="35135" end="35148" title="Virginia Tech Hokies men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q105490865" start="35188" end="35207" title="Bron Breakker" label="Bronson Rechsteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385817" start="35422" end="35435" title="Ergogenic use of anabolic steroids" label="steroid abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="35563" end="35571" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q486664" start="35673" end="35697" title="Cherokee County, Georgia" label="Cherokee County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q944993" start="35722" end="35758" title="Georgia Department of Transportation" label="Georgia Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428650" start="35842" end="35856" title="Interstate 575" label="Interstate 575"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146685" start="35906" end="35916" title="Ford F-Series" label="Ford F-250"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="36044" end="36062" title="Assault" label="aggravated assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="36113" end="36121" title="Felony" label="felonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454723" start="36276" end="36286" title="Acquittal" label="not guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="36469" end="36478" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="36499" end="36500" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043121" start="36580" end="36597" title="community service" label="community service"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="36631" end="36640" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001910" start="36646" end="36658" title="Buff Bagwell" label="Buff Bagwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="36691" end="36702" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="36706" end="36714" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="37228" end="37235" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="37250" end="37260" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="37265" end="37278" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="37682" end="37692" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="37857" end="37873" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="37941" end="37949" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140048" start="38156" end="38166" title="house show" label="house show"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="38170" end="38178" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552295" start="38250" end="38255" title="Germán Figueroa" label="Apolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q647099" start="38272" end="38289" title="Hemoptysis" label="coughing up blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="38367" end="38374" title="Vertebrate trachea" label="trachea"/>
<link wikidata="Q933408" start="38422" end="38434" title="induced coma" label="induced coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778213" start="38524" end="38538" title="Thoracentesis" label="draining fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="38654" end="38665" title="Pneumothorax" label="to collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="39120" end="39160" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q107041182" start="39395" end="39413" title="Big Time Wrestling (Boston)" label="Big Time Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128866" start="39670" end="39703" title="Continental Wrestling Association" label="Continental Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q550072" start="39707" end="39732" title="CWA Tag Team Championship" label="CWA Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39734" end="39741" title="CWA Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913395" start="39750" end="39762" title="Billy Travis" label="Billy Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740765" start="39891" end="39950" title="George Tragos/Lou Thesz Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame" label="George Tragos/Lou Thesz Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931754" start="39970" end="39993" title="Jim Crockett Promotions" label="Jim Crockett Promotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="39996" end="40024" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="40028" end="40062" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="40064" end="40070" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343090" start="40075" end="40108" title="WCW World Television Championship" label="WCW World Television Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603661" start="40110" end="40117" title="List of WCW World Television Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="40122" end="40164" title="WWE United States Championship" label="WCW United States Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944330" start="40166" end="40173" title="List of WWE United States Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948217" start="40178" end="40221" title="WCW United States Tag Team Championship" label="NWA/WCW United States Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40223" end="40229" title="WCW United States Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="40238" end="40250" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="40254" end="40285" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603664" start="40287" end="40294" title="List of WCW World Tag Team Champions" label="7 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143859" start="40319" end="40336" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Connor (wrestler)" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40396" end="40444" title="WCW tournaments#WCW United States Championship Tournament (1999)" label="WCW United States Championship Tournament (1999)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40447" end="40501" title="WCW tournaments#WCW United States Championship Tournament (April 2000)" label="WCW United States Championship Tournament (April 2000)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40504" end="40545" title="WCW tournaments#London Lethal Lottery Tag Team Tournament (2000)" label="London Lethal Lottery Tag Team Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="40553" end="40558" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40569" end="40594" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)#List of WCW Triple Crown winners" label="WCW Triple Crown Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815899" start="40596" end="40626" title="Memphis Wrestling Hall of Fame" label="Memphis Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="40645" end="40680" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955822" start="40724" end="40765" title="NWA Mid-Atlantic Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA Mid-Atlantic Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40767" end="40773" title="NWA Mid-Atlantic Heavyweight Championship#title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869694" start="40778" end="40816" title="NWA Mid-Atlantic Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Mid-Atlantic Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40818" end="40824" title="NWA Mid-Atlantic Tag Team Championship#title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="40848" end="40871" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655107" start="40874" end="40900" title="IWGP Tag Team Championship" label="IWGP Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355139" start="40902" end="40909" title="List of IWGP Tag Team Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="40918" end="40930" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q21502394" start="40933" end="40955" title="Preston City Wrestling" label="Preston City Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40959" end="40984" title="Preston City Wrestling#PCW Tag Team Championship" label="PCW Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246775" start="41016" end="41037" title="Pro Wrestling America" label="Pro Wrestling America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121166" start="41041" end="41066" title="PWA Tag Team Championship (Minnesota)" label="PWA Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41068" end="41074" title="PWA Tag Team Championship (Minnesota)#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="41098" end="41123" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="41127" end="41144" title="PWI Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41156" end="41176" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Tag Team of the Year" label="Tag Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="41194" end="41228" title="Most Improved Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Improved Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="41312" end="41319" title="PWI 500" label="PWI 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189424" start="41625" end="41637" title="Ring Ka King" label="Ring Ka King"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41641" end="41666" title="Ring Ka King#RKK Tag Team Championship" label="RKK Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41668" end="41674" title="Ring Ka King Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q165350" start="41683" end="41688" title="Abyss (wrestler)" label="Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q137983" start="41739" end="41756" title="Nick Aldis" label="Sir Brutus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066801" start="41758" end="41770" title="Saurav Gurjar" label="Deadly Danda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381660" start="41776" end="41787" title="Sonjay Dutt" label="Sonjay Dutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="41875" end="41924" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling" label="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling / Impact Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q722801" start="41928" end="41966" title="TNA World Tag Team Championship" label="TNA/Impact World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598935" start="41968" end="41975" title="List of TNA World Tag Team Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="41984" end="41992" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056381" start="42001" end="42010" title="Eli Drake" label="Eli Drake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42018" end="42032" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling tournaments#Feast or Fired" label="Feast or Fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856022" start="42034" end="42038" title="Turning Point (2007 wrestling)" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42041" end="42073" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling tournaments#Feast or Fired#Results" label="X Division Championship contract"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42079" end="42093" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling tournaments#Feast or Fired" label="Feast or Fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856022" start="42095" end="42099" title="Turning Point (2007 wrestling)" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42102" end="42141" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling tournaments#Feast or Fired#Results" label="World Heavyweight Championship contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658847" start="42343" end="42365" title="World League Wrestling" label="World League Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952577" start="42368" end="42393" title="WLW Tag Team Championship" label="WLW Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255530" start="42425" end="42450" title="World Wrestling All-Stars" label="World Wrestling All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957106" start="42454" end="42488" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="WWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42490" end="42496" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036530" start="42500" end="42542" title="World Wrestling Association (Indianapolis)" label="World Wrestling Association (Indianapolis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957107" start="42546" end="42580" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship (Indianapolis version)" label="WWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42582" end="42588" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship (Indianapolis version)#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957111" start="42593" end="42624" title="WWA World Tag Team Championship" label="WWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42626" end="42632" title="WWA World Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q202556" start="42660" end="42683" title="World Wrestling Council" label="World Wrestling Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577958" start="42687" end="42725" title="WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship" label="WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42727" end="42733" title="WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="42737" end="42767" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation/WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="42771" end="42802" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823152" start="42804" end="42811" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="42820" end="42832" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="42835" end="42851" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405303" start="42885" end="42905" title="The Steiner Brothers" label="The Steiner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="42985" end="43014" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43018" end="43041" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Best Wrestling Maneuver" label="Best Wrestling Maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43059" end="43076" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43088" end="43108" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Tag Team of the Year" label="Tag Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43120" end="43150" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Worked Match of the Year" label="Worst Worked Match of the Year"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584946" wikidata="Q20379" url="?curid=584946" title="Toronto subway">
<text>The Toronto subway is a rapid transit system serving Toronto and the neighbouring city of Vaughan in Ontario, Canada, operated by the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC). The subway system is a rail network consisting of three heavy-capacity rail lines operating predominantly underground. three new lines are under construction: two light rail lines (one running mostly underground, the other running mostly at-grade) and one heavy rail line (running both underground and on elevated guideways).

In 1954, the TTC opened Canada&#x27;s first underground rail line, then known as the &quot;Yonge subway&quot;, under Yonge Street between Union Station and Eglinton Avenue with 12 stations. As of 2024, the network encompasses 70 stations and of route. In , the system had a ridership of , or about per weekday as of , making it the busiest rapid transit system in Canada in terms of daily ridership. There are 60 stations under construction as part of three new lines, two light rail lines and one subway line, and two extensions to existing lines.

==Overview==
There are three operating rapid transit lines in Toronto:

* Line 1 Yonge–University is the longest and busiest rapid transit line in the system. It opened as the Yonge subway in 1954 with a length of , and since then has grown to a length of . The modern line is U-shaped, having two northern terminalsat Vaughan Metropolitan Centre and Finchand its southern end at Union station in downtown Toronto.
* Line 2 Bloor–Danforth, opened in 1966, runs parallel to Bloor Street and Danforth Avenue between Kipling station in Etobicoke and Kennedy station in Scarborough. Construction has started on a three-stop extension of Line 2 northeastward from Kennedy station to Sheppard Avenue and McCowan via Scarborough City Centre.
* Line 4 Sheppard opened in 2002 running under Sheppard Avenue East eastwards from Sheppard–Yonge station on Line 1 to Don Mills station; it is the shortest rapid transit line in Toronto at a length of and the only one without any open sections.

 three new lines are under construction, two light rail lines and one subway line.
* Line 5 Eglinton (also known as the Eglinton Crosstown LRT) is an under-construction light rail line along Eglinton Avenue, planned to run from Kennedy station in the east to Mount Dennis station in the west. The line will have 25 stations, 15 of which will be underground, while the remaining ten will be at-grade stops located in at the road&#x27;s median. Construction began in 2011. The line was expected to be completed in 2024 at a cost of approximately $12billion, though it has since been delayed.
** An extension of Line 5 westwards for to Renforth station is also under construction. The extension will have seven stations, four of which will be underground and two of which will be elevated. Construction began in 2022 and is scheduled for completion in the 2030s.
* Line 6 Finch West (also known as the Finch West LRT) is an under-construction , 18-stop light rail line travelling from Finch West station on Line 1 Yonge–University to the North Campus of Humber Polytechnic, located mainly in the median of Finch Avenue. Construction on Line 6 began in 2019. It was scheduled for completion within the first half of 2024, with an estimated cost of $1.2billion, though it has since been delayed.
* Ontario Line is an under-construction subway line from Exhibition station to Science Centre station, providing a second rapid transit line through the Financial District and downtown core. The project evolved from the long-planned Downtown Relief Line, first proposed in the mid-1980s. The line is scheduled for completion in 2031 at a cost of $17 to $19 billion.&lt;ref name=&quot;TheStar-2022/11/23&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Upon opening, the plan is to reassign the &quot;Line 3&quot; moniker formerly used by Line 3 Scarborough to the Ontario Line.

Until July 2023, the TTC operated an elevated light metro service:
* Line 3 Scarborough, originally known as the Scarborough RT, was an elevated medium-capacity (light metro) rail line serving the city&#x27;s eponymous suburban district. It opened in 1985, running from Kennedy station to McCowan station via . It was the only rapid transit line in Toronto to use Intermediate Capacity Transit System (ICTS) technology. Because of maintenance difficulties (along with the Line 2 subway extension into Scarborough), Line 3 was to be decommissioned on November 19, 2023. However, it was decommissioned approximately four months early due to a derailment on July 24, 2023. Bus service replaced Line 3 and is scheduled to continue until the extension of Line 2 to Scarborough City Centre opens in 2030.

==History==
===Timeline of openings and closings===
===Line 1 Yonge–University===

Canada&#x27;s first subway, the Yonge subway, opened in 1954 with a length of . The line ran under or parallel to Yonge Street between Eglinton Avenue and Union station. It replaced the Yonge streetcar line, Canada&#x27;s first streetcar line. In 1963, the line was extended northwards from Union station under University Avenue to Bloor Street, where it would later connect with the Bloor–Danforth subway (opened in 1966) at the double-deck St. George station. In 1974, the Yonge Street portion of the line was extended from Eglinton station north to Finch station. The Spadina segment of the line was constructed north from St. George station initially to Wilson station in 1978, and in 1996 to Downsview station, renamed Sheppard West in 2017. Part of the Spadina segment runs in the median of Allen Road – an expressway formerly known as the Spadina Expressway – and crosses over Highway 401 on overpasses. Six decades of extensions gave the line a U-shaped route running from its two northern terminals (Finch and Vaughan Metropolitan Centre stations) and looping on its southern end at Union station. The latest extension from Sheppard West to opened on December 17, 2017, making the line long, over five times its original length.

===Line 2 Bloor–Danforth===
Opened in 1966, the Bloor–Danforth subway runs east–west under or near Bloor Street and Danforth Avenue. It replaced the Bloor streetcar line (which also served Danforth Avenue). Initially, the subway line ran between Keele station and Woodbine station. In 1968, the line was extended west to Islington station and east to Warden station, and in 1980, it was further extended west to Kipling station and east to Kennedy station.

===Line 3 Scarborough===

Opened in 1985, Line 3 (originally the Scarborough RT) was a light metro line running from Kennedy station to McCowan station. The TTC started to construct the line to use Canadian Light Rail Vehicles. However, the TTC was forced to convert to the Intermediate Capacity Transit System technology because the provincial government threatened to cut funding to the TTC if it did not. This line was never extended, and in July 2023, the line was shut down pending its dismantling due to a derailment that resulted in injuries. It is set to be replaced with an extension of Line 2 to Sheppard Avenue and McCowan Road via Scarborough Town Centre.

===Line 4 Sheppard===
Opened in 2002, the Sheppard subway runs under Sheppard Avenue from Sheppard–Yonge station to Don Mills station. The line was under construction when a change in provincial government threatened to terminate the project, but Mel Lastman, the last mayor of the former City of North York (today part of Toronto), used his influence to save the project. Despite the construction of many high-rise residential buildings along the line since its opening, ridership remains low resulting in a subsidy of $10 per ride. The line was intended to be extended to Scarborough Centre station, but because of the low ridership and the cost of tunnelling, there was a plan to extend rapid transit eastwards from Don Mills station via a surface light rail line, the Sheppard East LRT. However, in April 2019, Premier Doug Ford announced that the provincial government would extend Line 4 Sheppard to McCowan Road at some unspecified time in the future, thus replacing the proposed Sheppard East LRT. Line 4 Sheppard is also the only subway line in Toronto not to have any open sections.

===Line 5 Eglinton===
Metrolinx is funding the Line 5 Eglinton, a light rail line along Eglinton Avenue. From Mount Dennis in the west to Brentcliffe Road (east of Laird Drive), the line will run almost entirely underground where Eglinton Avenue is generally four to five lanes wide. From east of Brentcliffe Road to Kennedy station, the line will operate on the surface in a reserved median in the middle of Eglinton Avenue, where the street is at least six lanes wide. Building on the surface instead of tunnelling reduces the cost of construction on the eastern end of the line. The average speed of the line is expected to be ; as a comparison, the average speed of the heavy-rail Line 2 Bloor–Danforth is . The Eglinton line originated from Transit City, a plan sponsored by then–Toronto mayor David Miller, to expedite transit improvement by building several light rail lines through the lower density parts of the city. Of the light rail lines proposed, only the Eglinton and Finch West lines are under construction . Line 5 was expected to be completed in 2024, though it has since been delayed.

=== Line 6 Finch West ===
Line 6 Finch West, also known as the &quot;Finch West LRT&quot;, is an under-construction line being built by Mosaic Transit Group along Finch Avenue. It is to be operated by the Toronto Transit Commission and was also part of the Transit City proposal announced on March 16, 2007. The , 18-stop line is to extend from Finch West station on Line 1 Yonge–University to the north campus of Humber Polytechnic (formerly Humber College). The line is forecast to carry about 14.6million rides a year or 40,000 a day by 2031. Construction on this line began in 2019. It was scheduled for completion in the first half of 2024, with an estimated cost of $1.2billion, though it has since been delayed.

=== Ontario Line ===

Ontario Line is an under-construction subway line from Exhibition station to Science Centre station, providing a second rapid transit line through the Financial District and downtown core. Although a subway line along Queen Street was first proposed in the early 1900s, the Downtown Relief Line was first proposed in the mid-1980s. The Ontario Line project extends further west and north than previous proposals to serve more of the city. The line is scheduled for completion in 2031 at a cost of $17 to $19 billion. Upon opening, the plan is for the line is take the &quot;Line 3&quot; moniker formerly used by Line 3 Scarborough.

===Major incidents===

On March 27, 1963, there was an electrical short in a subway car&#x27;s motor. The driver decided to continue operating the train, despite visible smoke in the affected car, until the train reached Union station. This decision resulted in the destruction of six subway cars and extensive damage to the tunnel and signal lines west of Union station. Following this incident, safety procedures involving electrical malfunctions and/or fire in subway trains, were revised to improve safety and reduce the likelihood of a similar incident occurring.

On October 14, 1976, arson caused the destruction of four subway cars and damage to Christie station, resulting in the closure of part of the Bloor–Danforth line for three days, and the bypassing of Christie station for some time afterwards for repairs.

On August 11, 1995, the TTC suffered the deadliest subway accident in Canadian history, known as the Russell Hill accident, on the Yonge–University line south of St. Clair West station. Halfway between St. Clair West and Dupont stations, a southbound Line 1 subway train hit the rear of a stationary train ahead of it. Three people died and 100 other people were injured, some of them seriously. This led to a major reorganization at the TTC, with more focus on maintaining a &quot;state of good repair&quot; (i.e., an increased emphasis on safety and maintenance of existing TTC capital/services) and less on expansion.
On July 24, 2023, the last car of a train on Line 3 Scarborough derailed south of Ellesmere station. There were 45 people on board, with five injuries reported. The TTC closed the line while the cause of the accident, which was not immediately apparent, was investigated. Though the TTC planned to close Line 3 in November 2023, it announced on August 24 that the line would not reopen.

==Operations and procedures==
===Terminal station reversals and short turns===

 The heavy-rail subway lines were built in multiple segments with multiple crossovers. These are typically used for reversals at terminal stations, and allow arriving and departing trains to cross to and from the station&#x27;s farside platform. They are also used for short turning trains at some through stations in order to accommodate emergency and planned service suspensions. Planned service suspensions generally occur on weekends for planned maintenance activities that are impractical to perform overnight. There is only one regular short turn service that occurs during the morning rush hour on Line 1 Yonge–University when some northbound trains short turn at Glencairn station.

On Line 3 Scarborough, light metro trains were not able to switch direction except at the ends of the line as there were no intermediate crossovers between the two termini. Thus, no short turns on Line 3 were possible.

===Door operation===
The heavy-rail subway lines use either a one- or two-person crew. With two-person train operation, an on-board train guard at the rear of the train is responsible for opening and closing the subway car doors and making sure no one is trapped in a door as the train leaves a station. From the subway&#x27;s inception in 1954 to 1991, the train guard notified patrons that the subway car doors were closing with two short blasts from a whistle. With one-person train operation (OPTO), one person operates the train as well as the doors. The TTC notes that modern technology now allows one person to safely operate the train and close the doors, and that OPTO is in use in many major cities with large subway systems such as the London Underground, the Paris Metro, the Chicago &quot;L&quot; and the Montreal Metro.

Initially, all the heavy-rail subway lines (1, 2 and 4) used two-person train operation. On October 9, 2016, Line 4 Sheppard was converted to OPTO. On August 1, 2021, the TTC tested OPTO on a portion of Line 1 on Sundays only. Effective November 21, 2021, the TTC introduced OPTO seven days per week on Line 1 between Vaughan Metropolitan Centre and St. George stations. Between St. George and Finch stations, the TTC continued using two-person train operation until the full conversion of the line to OPTO on November 20, 2022. From its opening in 1985 to its close in 2023, trains on Line 3 Scarborough were operated by one person.

According to a 2020 survey conducted by the Amalgamated Transit Union Local 113, two-thirds of Torontonians surveyed opposed the TTC&#x27;s plan to eliminate the train guard on Line 1, and three-quarters of Torontonians disapproved of the fact that the public was not consulted when train guards were removed from Line 4&#x27;s daily operations in 2016, citing safety concerns, among other issues, as key reasons motivating their response.&lt;ref name=&quot;680 News 2020/02/26&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

In 1991, as a result of lawsuits, electronic chimes, in the form of a descending arpeggiated major triad and a flashing pair of orange lights above the doorway, added for the hearing impaired, were tested and gradually introduced system-wide during the 1990s. The Toronto Rocket trains use the same door chimes and flashing orange lights as the older trains do, and also plays the additional voice announcement, &quot;Please stand clear of the doors&quot;. Those chimes have become synonymous with the TTC and Toronto in general to the point that the CBC Radio One local afternoon show, &quot;Here and Now&quot;, includes them in its theme music.

=== Entering a station ===
There are several basic procedures that need to be completed once a train has entered a station. On TTC&#x27;s Line 2, several symbols of different colours are installed on the station wall for the crew to use as a reference in positioning the train in the platform. A red circle, located at the train exit end of the platform, should be directly in front of the train operator&#x27;s cab window when the train is aligned properly. A green triangle, located at the opposite end of the platform, is provided as a reference to the train guard that shows that the train is correctly aligned. Before opening the train doors, the guard lowers the cab window and points their finger out the window toward the green triangle when the cab is lined up with the triangle. If the train is not lined up properly, the guard is not permitted to open the doors.

To operate the doors, the guard is first required to insert and turn a key. This action provides system control to the door control panel. The doors are then opened by pushing buttons. After the doors are opened, the guard is required to stick their head out the cab window to observe passengers boarding and exiting. The train doors remain open for at least 15 seconds.

When the guard determines that boarding is complete, the doors are closed. Electronic chimes and flashing lights are turned on, then the automated announcement &quot;please stand clear of the doors&quot; is played over the train&#x27;s public address system, and finally the doors are closed. The chimes provide a clear notification and warning to passengers that the doors are closing and are played before the automated announcement is played, because such announcements may not be heard when the station is crowded.

After the doors are closed, the guard provides a signal to the train operator that the train can proceed. The signal is in the form of a green light that turns on inside the operating cab. When the doors are closed, a light turns on in the operating cab. The guard is instructed to visually observe the platform while the train departs the station. The distance for this visual inspection is typically three car lengths. An orange triangle installed on the station wall indicates the location where the guard may stop observing the platform and pull their head back into the cab. This is done to ensure that no passengers are being dragged along by the train.

===Platform markers===
All staffed subway operations must verify that the train is properly berthed before the doors are opened. At each subway platform, a set of three platform markers are affixed onto the platform wall. The train operator and guard use them to position the train.

The current platform markers used for Lines 1, 2, and 4 are as follows:
* Circular red disk (Lines 1, 2, and 4)—This marker is typically mounted on the station platform wall to assist the train operator in positioning the train in the station. When the operator&#x27;s window is aligned with the red disk, the train is properly berthed in the station.
* Green triangle (Lines 1 and 2)—This marker is typically mounted on the station platform wall to indicate to the guard, who is positioned in the trailing car, that it is safe to open the doors. When the guard&#x27;s window is aligned with this marker, the guard must confirm the stop position by physically pointing to the green triangle. If the guard cannot see the green triangle, they are not permitted to open the train doors.
* Orange triangle (Lines 1 and 2)—This marker is typically mounted on the station platform wall to assist the guard, who is positioned in the trailing car, to observe the platform for the required distance as the train is moving to exit the station. When the guard sees this triangle, they can cease observations. The distance between the green and orange triangles is typically the length of three rail cars.

Prior to 2017, when subway guards operated the doors from the fifth car instead of the trailing car in the T1 trains on Line 2, different platform markers were used. The following markers have now fallen into disuse as a result of a March 2017 policy change that required all guards to work from the trailing car on Line 2:
* Circular green disk (Line 2)—This marker was mounted on the station platform wall in front of the guard&#x27;s window in the fifth car from the lead unit. It indicated to the guard that the train was properly berthed. The guard was required to point to the circle before opening the doors to confirm the stop position.
* Circular orange disk (Line 2)—This marker was mounted on the station platform wall to indicate to the guard when they could cease train departure platform observations. At this point, the guard closed the cab window.

===Service frequency===

During rush hour, up to 65 trains are on Line 1 simultaneously, 45 trains on Line 2, and 4 trains on Line 4. During non-rush hour periods, there are 30–46 trains on Line 1 at any one time.

On weekdays and Saturdays, subway service runs from approximately 6:00am to 1:30am; Sunday service begins at 8:00am. Start times on holidays may vary.

===Station announcements===

On January 8, 1995, train operators began to announce each stop over the train&#x27;s speaker system as a result of pressure from advocacy groups for the visually impaired, but announcements were sporadic until the TTC began to enforce the policy circa 2005. Later, automated announcements were implemented under further pressure from the advocacy groups. All Toronto subway trains use an automated system to announce each station, which is played twice over the speaker system: when the train departs a station (e.g. &quot;The next station is: Dufferin, Dufferin station&quot;) and when it arrives at the following station (e.g. &quot;Arriving at: Dufferin, Dufferin station&quot;). In addition, the TTC&#x27;s Toronto Rocket subway trains provide visible and audible automatic stop announcements. Unlike the other trains, the Toronto Rocket trains also announce connections to other TTC subway lines, such as &quot;Change for Line 2&quot;, and terminus stations, &quot;This is a terminal station&quot; where applicable. , they also announce, except at terminus stations, which side the train doors will open on at each stop based on the direction of train travel.

===Winter operations===
Switches and power rails are vulnerable to malfunction under extreme winter conditions such as heavy snow or freezing rain. During such events, the TTC runs &quot;storm trains&quot; overnight along subway lines to keep power rails clear of ice. The TTC also has trains to apply an anti-freeze to the power rail once freezing rain starts.

These precautions were also used on Line 3 Scarborough, which used two power rails. After reviewing operations during the winter of 2018–2019, the TTC decided to change its procedures for Line 3. Thus, about two hours before an expected storm, the TTC would decide whether to shut down Line 3 and replace it with bus service. Just before the storm of February 2, 2022, the TTC replaced all Line 3 trains with 25 buses.

To keep switches in the yards from freezing, crews use switch heaters and manually monitor them to ensure they stay in working order during winter storms. Workcars are run as storm trains within the yards to prevent ice from building up on the power rails. The TTC stores subway trains in tunnels along main lines rather than in exterior yards.&lt;ref name=&quot;TheStar-2022/02/02&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==Stations==
The Toronto subway has 70 stations across three lines. Most stations are named for the nearest major arterial road crossed by the line in question. A few are named for major landmarks, such as shopping centres or transportation hubs, served by the station. The stations along the University Avenue section of Line 1 Yonge–University, in particular, are named entirely for landmarks and public institutions (, , and ) and major churches ( and ). All trains, except for short turns, stop at every station along their route and run the entire length of their line from terminus to terminus. Nearly all stations outside the central business district have terminals for local TTC bus routes and streetcar routes situated within their fare-paid areas. All regular TTC bus and streetcar routes permit free transfers both to and from connecting subway lines.

By December 23, 2016, Presto card readers had been installed in at least one priority subway station entrance across the TTC network. Throughout 2017 and into mid-2018, the remaining subway station entrances that still use legacy turnstiles (which were retrofitted with Presto readers between 2010 and 2015) and the &quot;floor-to-ceiling&quot; revolving turnstiles (found in automatic/secondary entrances, which do not have Presto readers on them) were replaced by the new Presto-equipped &quot;glass-paddle&quot; fare gates.

===Accessibility===
Most of the Toronto subway system was built before wheelchair access was a requirement under the Ontarians with Disabilities Act (ODA). However, all subway stations built since 1996 are equipped with elevators, and seventy percent (56 of 75) of Toronto&#x27;s subway stations are now accessible following upgrade works to add elevators, wide fare gates, and access doors to the station. The figures include the stations on the closed Line 3 Scarborough.

In 2021, the TTC planned to make all of its stations accessible by 2025. By comparison, the Montreal Metro plans for all stations to be accessible by 2038, the Chicago &quot;L&quot; plans for all stations to be accessible in the 2030s, and the New York City Subway plans for 95 percent of stations to be accessible by 2055.

All TTC trains offer level boarding for customers with wheelchairs and other accessibility needs, with priority seating and dedicated wheelchair areas onboard each train.

===Cleanliness===
The May 2010 TTC cleanliness audit of subway stations found that none of them meets the transit agency&#x27;s highest standard for cleanliness and general state of repair. Only 21 stations scored in the 70- to 80-percent range in the TTC&#x27;s cleanliness scale, a range described as &quot;Ordinary Tidiness&quot;, while 45 fell in the 60- to 70-percent range achieving what the commission describes as &quot;Casual Inattentiveness&quot;. The May audit was the third in a series of comprehensive assessments that began in 2009. The commission announced a &quot;Cleaning Blitz&quot; that would add 30 new temporary cleaners for the latter part of 2010 to address major issues and has other action plans that include more full-time cleaners, and new and more effective ways at addressing station cleanliness.
The TTC implemented stricter cleanliness protocols during the COVID-19 pandemic.

===Design and public art===
According to a 1991 CBC report, &quot;aesthetics weren&#x27;t really a priority&quot; on Toronto&#x27;s subway system, describing stations as &quot;a series of bathrooms without plumbing&quot;. Since that time, Toronto&#x27;s subway system has had over 40 pieces installed in various subway stations. More art appeared as new stations were built and older ones were renovated.

In 2004, &quot;USA Today&quot; said of the Sheppard subway line: &quot;Despite the remarkable engineering feats of this metro, known as Sheppard Subway, [it is] the art covering walls, ceilings, and platforms of all five stations that stands out. Each station is &#x27;a total art experience where artists have created imaginative environments, uniquely expressing themes of community, location, and heritage&#x27; through panoramic landscapes and ceramic wall murals.&quot;

===Internet and mobile phone access===
====Wireless service implementation====
In 2012, the TTC awarded a contract to BAI Communications Canada to design, build and maintain a celular and Wi-Fi system along Toronto subway lines. BAI agreed to pay $25million to the TTC over a 20-year period for the exclusive rights to provide the service. BAI in turn would sell access to the cellular system to other carriers.

On December 13, 2013, Wi-Fi Internet access was launched at and St. George stations. The ad-supported service (branded as &quot;TConnect&quot;) was provided by BAI Canada. The TTC and BAI Canada planned to offer TConnect at all underground stations. Commuters had to view a video advertisement to gain access to the Internet. It was expected that all of the 70 subway stations would have service by 2017, as well as the six stations along the Line 1 extension to Vaughan. From early December 2015 to late January 2016, users of TConnect were required to authenticate using a Twitter account, with Twitter&#x27;s Canadian operations sponsoring the TConnect Wi-Fi network. Users of the network could sign in to enable an automatic Wi-Fi connection for 30 days. This arrangement was resumed on an optional basis from July 2016 to early December 2016. By August 2017, Wi-Fi was available at all existing stations and would be available in all future stations.

On June 17, 2015, the TTC announced that Wind Mobile (later rebranded Freedom Mobile) customers would be able to access cellular connectivity at some TTC subway stations. Service was initially between Bloor–Yonge and St. George stations on Line 1, and between Bloor–Yonge and Spadina stations on Line 2. Other carriers declined to use the BAI cellular system because of the price BAI was asking for access.

In April 2023, Rogers Communications took over BAI Communications and honoured existing access to Freedom Mobile customers. In August 2023, Rogers implemented 5G wireless service at all the TTC&#x27;s downtown stations and within the tunnels between them. In September 2023, the federal government imposed new licence conditions requiring that cellphone and data services be available on the entire subway network by the end of 2026 and that all carriers, including Telus and Bell, were to have access to it. On October 2, 2023, Bell and Telus offered its cellular customers access to the subway&#x27;s 5G system.

By November 2023, wireless service had been expanded to all TTC stations and to the tunnels between Sheppard West and Vaughan Metropolitan Centre stations, but only for Rogers and Freedom customers. Bell and Telus customers continued to have wireless service at a limited number of stations. In December 2023, Telus and Bell reached a deal with Rogers to provide their customers the same subway wireless services as Rogers and Freedom customers.
Rogers and the TTC decided to end TConnect, the free public Wi-Fi service, on December 27, 2024, due to low usage and the cost of upgrading it.

====Current wireless services====
, Rogers 5G wireless service is available in all subway stations for customers of Rogers, Freedom Mobile, Telus and Bell, but service access between stations is limited. 5G wireless service is available in open sections, as well as between Bloor–Yonge and Dupont stations on Line 1, and between and Keele stations on Line 2. 5G service is also available in the tunnels between Sheppard West and Vaughan Metropolitan Centre stations. Wireless service is available to customers of Rogers, Freedom Mobile, Bell and Telus (including flanker brands of these companies such as Koodo and Virgin Plus). This wireless service is not free, and users require a subscription from one of the four aforementioned carriers, given the lack of subsidized wireless plans in Ontario.

===Naming===

The TTC considers multiple different factors when they name stations and stops for subway and LRT stations. They consider local landmarks, the cross streets of the station, distinct communities of the past and present in the vicinity of the station, names of other stations in the system, and the grade of the station.

Metrolinx uses five criteria for naming stations and stops. These are:
# Simplicity
# Names must be logical and relevant to the area the station is built in
# Names should be relevant for the life of the station
# Names should help passengers locate themselves within the region
# Uniqueness

Metrolinx will use the word &quot;stop&quot; in place of &quot;station&quot; at 10 of the 25 stations along the first phase of Line 5, particularly those that are not grade-separated.

==Rolling stock==

The following table shows the vehicle type by line:
===Heavy rail stock===

Line 1 Yonge–University and Line 4 Sheppard operate using the newest version of Toronto&#x27;s subway cars, the Toronto Rocket, while Line 2 Bloor–Danforth uses the older T1 subway trains.

The TTC&#x27;s original G-series cars were manufactured by the Gloucester Railway Carriage and Wagon Company. All subsequent heavy-rail subway cars were manufactured by Bombardier Transportation or one of its predecessors (Montreal Locomotive Works, Hawker Siddeley, and UTDC). All cars starting with the Hawker Siddeley H series in 1965 have been built in Bombardier&#x27;s Thunder Bay, Ontario, plant. The final H4 subway cars were retired on January 27, 2012. This was followed by the retirement of the H5 subway cars, which had their final in-service trip on June 14, 2013, and the H6 retirement, which followed one year later with a final run on June 20, 2014.

Following the introduction of the Toronto Rocket trains on Lines 1 and 4, all the T1 trains were moved to Line 2. The T1s were expected to last until 2026. By the end of 2019, the TTC had proposed an overhaul to extend the T1 fleet&#x27;s life by 10 years at an estimated cost of $100 million. By mid-2020, the TTC had started the design phase for a new generation of subway trains to replace the T1 fleet on Line 2 Bloor–Danforth. In late 2021, the TTC expected that the new trains would be introduced between 2026 and 2030, at an estimated cost of $1.6 billion. On October 13, 2022, the TTC issued a request for proposals to construct 480 new subway cars (80 six-car train sets) of a design different from the T1 and Toronto Rocket fleet for delivery between 2027 and 2033. , the TTC plans to overhaul the T1 fleet if newer trains cannot be delivered in time.

The Ontario Line will use smaller train sets and a smaller gauge than those used on the Toronto subway system. By using driverless trains with automatic train control (ATC), Metrolinx expects the line to be as frequent as the existing subway lines despite using smaller, lighter trains. In conjunction with ATC, stations will have platform-edge doors for safety, also allowing riders to exit and enter trains more quickly.&lt;ref name=&quot;Metrolinx-2019/09/172&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The trains will be manufactured by Hitachi Rail, similar to trains in Copenhagen or Rome.

===Light metro stock===

Line 3 Scarborough used 28 S-series trains built by the Urban Transportation Development Corporation (UTDC) in Millhaven, Ontario. These Intermediate Capacity Transit System (ICTS) trains were Mark I models, similar in design to the original trains found on the Vancouver SkyTrain and the Detroit People Mover. These were the original vehicles on the line and were in service from the line&#x27;s opening in 1985 to its closure in 2023. Because of the trains&#x27; age, they were refurbished for operation and initially intended to last until the extension of Line 2 Bloor–Danforth was built. In February 2021, the TTC announced plans to accelerate the retirement of Line 3, intending to close it in 2023. This was due to delays in planning and construction of the Line 2 extension (which was then projected to open in 2030 at the earliest) along with the increasing difficulty of performing critical maintenance work on the trains. Following an initial temporary closure owing to a derailment in July 2023, the TTC decided in August 2023 not to reopen the line. The TTC proposed selling some of these trains to the Detroit People Mover, which uses a similar technology.

===Light rail stock===

Metrolinx plans to use 76 Bombardier Flexity Freedom low-floor, light-rail vehicles for Line 5 Eglinton; however, 44 Alstom Citadis Spirit vehicles may be used if Bombardier is unable to deliver the Flexity Freedom on time. Such a substitution would require modifications to Line 5, especially the maintenance facility, as the Citadis Spirit is longer than the Flexity Freedom. Metrolinx intends to use 17 Citadis Spirit vehicles on Line 6 Finch West instead of the Flexity Freedom.
==Technology==
The heavy rail and light metro lines have some characteristics in common: Such lines are fully isolated from road traffic and pedestrians; the station platforms are covered, and the trains are boarded through many doors from high platforms within a fare-paid zone separated by faregates.

In contrast, the surface portions of the light rail lines (Lines 5 and 6) will fit into the street environment. Light-rail tracks will be laid on the surface within reserved lanes in the middle of the street, and cross street intersections at grade. Surface stations will have simple, low-level platforms. However, like heavy rail and light metro, passengers will be able to board and alight the light rail trains by multiple doors.

Line 3 Scarborough, a light metro, used a more complex technology than heavy rail, which a TTC document describes as follows:
:Track is the 5 rail system on direct fixation and car is powered by an induction or &quot;reaction rail&quot; situated between the running rails at the same top of rail elevation. There are two side contacting power rails +300V and −300V respectively situated a distance of about 14 in. from the closest gauge line of one running rail.

==Signals==
===Heavy rail===
Fixed-block signalling was originally used on the Toronto subway since the opening of Toronto&#x27;s first subway in 1954 and was the first signalling system used on Lines 2 and 4. As of 2022, Lines 2 and 4 use fixed-block signalling but Line 1 no longer does. Fixed-block signalling uses automatic signalling to prevent rear-end train collisions, while interlocking signals are used to prevent collisions from conflicting movements on track crossovers.

, automatic train control (ATC) has been implemented along the entire length of Line 1. In 2009, the TTC awarded a contract to Alstom to upgrade the signalling system of the existing section of Line 1, as well as equip its extension into Vaughan, with moving block–based communications-based train control (CBTC) by 2012. The estimated cost to implement ATC on Line 1 was $562million, $424million of which was funded by Metrolinx. The first section of the &quot;Urbalis 400&quot; ATC system on Line 1 entered revenue service on December 17, 2017, between Sheppard West and Vaughan stations, in conjunction with the opening of the Toronto–York Spadina subway extension (TYSSE) project.

The benefits of ATC on Line 1 are:
* a reduced headway between trains from 2.5 minutes to 2 minutes during rush hours, allowing a 25 percent increase in the number of trains that can operate
* fewer signal-related delays relative to the old fixed-block system
* more efficient use of electricity, thus reducing operational costs
* allowing single-track, bidirectional operation for trains in passenger service, albeit with reduced frequency, to allow for off-hour maintenance of the opposite track

The TTC has plans to convert Line 2 to ATC by 2030, subject to the availability of funding.

===Light metro===
Line 3 Scarborough was equipped with automatic train control from the outset, using the same SelTrac IS system as Vancouver&#x27;s SkyTrain, meaning it could be operated autonomously. However, the TTC opted to equip each S-series train with an operator on board for door monitoring.

The future Ontario Line will use automatic train control with driverless trains. Its stations will be equipped with platform screen doors.&lt;ref name=&quot;Metrolinx-2019/09/17&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

===Light rail===
When completed, Line 5 Eglinton will use Bombardier Transportation&#x27;s Cityflo 650 CBTC automatic train control on the underground section of the line between Laird station and Mount Dennis station, along with the Eglinton Maintenance and Storage Facility adjacent to Mount Dennis station.

==Track==
Lines 1, 2 and 4the heavy-rail linesrun on tracks built to the Toronto gauge of , the same gauge used on the Toronto streetcar system. According to rail historians John F. Bromley and Jack May, the reason that the Yonge subway was built to the streetcar gauge was that between 1954 and 1965, subway bogies were maintained at the Hillcrest Complex, where the streetcar gauge was used for shop tracks. The Davisville Carhouse was not equipped to perform such heavy maintenance, and the bogies would be loaded onto a specially built track trailer for shipment between Davisville and Hillcrest. This practice ceased with the opening of the shops at the Greenwood Yard in 1965.

Line 3 Scarborough used standard-gauge tracks, as the ICTS design for the line did not allow for the interchange of rail equipment between the traditional subway system and Line 3. When its ICTS vehicles needed anything more than basic service (which could be carried out at the McCowan Yard), they were carried by truck to the Greenwood Subway Yard.

The Line 5 Eglinton and Line 6 Finch West LRT lines will be constructed with standard-gauge tracks. The projects are receiving a large part of their funding from the Ontario provincial transit authority Metrolinx and, to ensure a better price for purchasing vehicles, it wanted to have a degree of commonality with other similar projects within Ontario. The Ontario Line subway will similarly be built to standard gauge.

==Facilities==
The subway system has the following yards to provide storage, maintenance and cleaning for rolling stock. All yards are located above ground.
In the second quarter of 2018, the City of Toronto moved to expropriate Canadian Pacific Railway&#x27;s disused Obico Yard at 30 Newbridge Road / 36 North Queen Street in Etobicoke for use as a potential future yard at the western end of Line 2 Bloor–Danforth. The yard is situated immediately to the southwest of Kipling station, the western terminus of Line 2.

==Safety==

There are several safety systems for use by passengers in emergencies:

* Emergency alarms (formerly &quot;Passenger assistance alarms&quot;): Located throughout all subway trainsWhen the yellow strip is pressed, an audible alarm is activated within the car, a notification is sent to the train crew and the Transit Control Centre, which in turn dispatches a tiered response. An orange light is activated on the outside of the car with the alarm for emergency personnel to see where the problem is.
* Emergency power cut devices: Marked by a blue light, located at both ends of each subway platformFor use to cut DC traction power in the event a person falls or is observed at track level or any emergency where train movement into the station would be dangerous. These devices cut power in both directions for approximately one station each way.
* Emergency stopping mechanisms (PGEV: passenger/guard emergency valve): Located at each end of each subway car (with exception of the Toronto Rocket trains)Will activate the emergency brakes of the vehicle stopping it in its current location (for use in extreme emergencies, such as persons trapped in doors as train departs station, doors opening in the tunnel, derailments etc.)
* Passenger intercoms: Located on subway platforms and near/in elevators in stationsFor use to inform station collector of security/life safety issues
* Automated external defibrillators (AEDs): Located in several subway stations near collector boothsFor use in the event someone suffers cardiac arrest
* Public telephones: Located in various locations in all stations, and at the Designated Waiting Area&#x27;s on each subway platform. Emergency calls can be made to 911 toll free. Phones located at the DWAs also include a &quot;Crisis Link&quot; button that connect callers, free of charge, to a 24-hour crisis line in the event that they are contemplating self-harm.

Stations with high platforms have a crawl space under the platform edge which the TTC recommends that a person who has fallen onto the track use to avoid an oncoming train. Lying flat between the two rails is not recommended due to shallow clearances. The platform edge has a yellow strip behind which passengers should wait to avoid a fall.&lt;ref name=&quot;TheStar-2022/04/18&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Stations do not have platform screen doors, a feature which for Lines 1, 2 and 4 would require station modification, automatic train control (ATC) and a $1.35-billion investment which is not funded . ATC is needed to stop trains at a precise position along the platform to line up train doors with platform doors. , ATC has been activated along the entire length of Line 1; thus, it would be possible to install platform screen doors along Line 1. The future Ontario Line will be built to operate with ATC and will feature platform doors from its opening. The benefits of platform doors would be:
* Blocking those attempting suicide or trespassers from the tracks: it takes 70 to 90 minutes to resume operations each time there is a personal injury at track level
* Eliminating fires from debris falling on the tracks and the third rail
* Allowing trains to enter crowded stations at speed, thus speeding up service along the line

The light-rail Line 5 Eglinton will use a guideway intrusion detection system (GIDS) to detect trespassers on the tracks on the underground sections of the line. When GIDS detects a trespasser on the tracks, it will issue an audio warning to the trespasser, provide live CCTV video to central control, and automatically stop the train without driver intervention. Each station will be equipped with multiple GIDS scanners along the station platform. There will also be GIDS scanners at each tunnel portal. In addition, there will be scanners within the yellow tactile strips along the platform edge to issue an audio warning if a person steps on it before the train has arrived.&lt;ref name=&quot;Metrolinx-2022/05/31&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

A trial program began in 2008 with Toronto EMS and has been expanded and made permanent, with paramedics on hand at several stations during peak hours: Spadina and Bloor–Yonge (morning peak: 7am–10am) and Union and Eglinton (evening peak: 2pm–6pm).

By September 2023, the TTC was making naloxone available at each subway station so that designated trained TTC staff could attempt to rescue anyone having a drug overdose. Kits containing naloxone nasal spray would be stored at station collector booths. TTC special constables would carry naloxone.

==Training==
Subway operators begin their training at Hillcrest with a virtual reality mockup of a Toronto Rocket car. The simulator consists of the operator cab with full functions, a door and partial interior of a subway car. The simulator is housed in a simulated subway tunnel. Construction of a new subway training centre is underway at the Wilson Complex, as part of the Toronto Rocket subway car program.

==Expansion plans==
===Provincially supported projects===

On April 10, 2019, Ontario premier Doug Ford announced rapid transit–related projects that the Province of Ontario would support with either committed or future financing. One such project is the Ontario Line, a proposed rapid transit line that has succeeded the Relief Line proposal. Initially, the project was projected to be completed in 2027, but this was later pushed back to 2030. A groundbreaking ceremony for the Ontario Line was held on March 27, 2022.

The Line 5 West Extension to Pearson Airport is a proposal to extend Line 5 Eglinton from its terminus at Mount Dennis station west along Eglinton Avenue West to the proposed Pearson Transit Hub in Mississauga. In April 2019, Ford said that he would commit funds for this proposal.

The Yonge North Subway Extension (YNSE) is a proposal to extend Line 1 Yonge–University north along Yonge Street from Finch station, the existing terminus of Line 1, to near Highway 7 in Richmond Hill. There would be new stations at Steeles Avenue, Clark Avenue, between Highway 7 and Highway 407 near Langstaff GO Station and Richmond Hill Centre Terminal (dubbed &quot;Bridge station&quot;), and High Tech Road. The extension was proposed in the province&#x27;s 2007 MoveOntario 2020 plan. A major problem with this proposal was that Line 1 was at capacity, and the TTC said in 2016 that the proposed Relief Line and SmartTrack would both need to be in service before opening the YNSE. In 2020, a preliminary agreement was signed between the Ontario provincial government and York Region that anticipated the completion of the extension by approximately 2030.

The Scarborough Subway Extension (SSE) is a proposal to replace Line 3 Scarborough with an eastward extension of Line 2 Bloor–Danforth. On October 8, 2013, Toronto City Council conducted a debate on whether to replace Line 3 with a light rail line or a subway extension. In 2014, the city council voted to extend Line 2 to Scarborough City Centre, which would result in the closure of Line 3. The SSE would be long and add one new station to Line 2 at Scarborough Town Centre. TTC and city staff finalized the precise route of the SSE in early 2017. In 2019, the Government of Ontario proposed a modified version of the proposal now known as the Line 2 East Extension (L2EE). The L2EE is long and adds three new stations, rather than one. The proposed completion deadline for the project is between 2029 and 2030.

The Line 4 East Extension to McCowan is a proposal to extend Line 4 Sheppard east along Sheppard Avenue East to McCowan Road, where it will connect with the Scarborough Subway Extension. Doug Ford said in April 2019 that he would commit funds related to this proposal.

===Other active proposals===

The Eglinton East LRT is a City of Toronto proposal to construct an LRT line (separate from Line 5 Eglinton) from Kennedy station east to Malvern. This proposal was originally part of the cancelled Scarborough–Malvern LRT in Transit City. It would have stations at Eglinton GO and Guildwood GO, as well as the University of Toronto Scarborough campus.

=== Inactive proposals ===

The Jane LRT is a proposed LRT line that would begin at Jane station on Line 2 and proceed north to Pioneer Village station on Line 1. While initially part of the cancelled Transit City plan, the Jane LRT is part of the &quot;2018–2022 TTC Corporate Plan&quot; and tentatively referred to as Line 8.

The Line 4 West Extension to Sheppard West station is a proposal that would extend Line 4 Sheppard west along Sheppard Avenue West to Sheppard West station, where it would link to Line 1 Yonge–University. It is currently listed as an &quot;unfunded future rapid transportation project&quot; in the City of Toronto&#x27;s 2013 &quot;Feeling Congested?&quot; report.

The Line 6 East Extension to Finch station is a proposal that would extend Line 6 Finch West east along Finch Avenue West to Finch station, where it would link up with Line 1 Yonge–University. In March 2010, the Ontario government eliminated the proposed section of line between Finch West station and Finch station because of budget constraints. This section of the line was part of the original Transit City proposal. In 2013, this plan was revived as an &quot;unfunded future rapid transit project&quot; in the City of Toronto&#x27;s &quot;Feeling Congested?&quot; report, meaning this extension may be constructed sometime in the future. The extension was later shown in the &quot;2018–2022 TTC Corporate Plan&quot; with no timeline for completion.

Along with a proposal to extend Line 6 to Finch station, there was another proposal that would have extended the line farther to Don Mills station, where it would have provided a connection to Line 4 Sheppard. In May 2009, Metrolinx proposed that the line be extended from Finch station along Finch Avenue East and Don Mills Road into Don Mills station to connect with the Sheppard East LRT and create a seamless crosstown LRT line in northern Toronto to parallel the Eglinton Crosstown LRT (later designated Line 5 Eglinton) in central Toronto. The TTC said that a planning study would have commenced in 2010.

The Line 6 West Extension to Pearson Airport is a proposal that would extend Line 6 Finch West west to Pearson Airport, where it would provide a link to Line 5 Eglinton. In 2009, the TTC studied the feasibility of potential routings for a future westward extension of the Etobicoke–Finch West LRT to the vicinity of the Woodbine Live development, Woodbine Centre, and Pearson International Airport. This extension was later reclassified as a future transit project as described in the 2013 &quot;Feeling Congested?&quot; report by the City of Toronto. Metrolinx revealed in January 2020 that they would study a possible connection to the Pearson Transit Hub at Pearson Airport.

===Abandoned plans===
The Queen subway line was a subway line first proposed in 1911. When Line 1 was first built, a roughed-in station was included under Queen station, with the intention that the Queen subway would be the city&#x27;s second subway line. The route of the Queen subway line is included in the routes for both the Relief Line and the Ontario Line proposals.

The Eglinton West line was a proposed subway line in the late 1980s on which construction began in the early 1990s. It was cancelled after the election of Mike Harris as premier of Ontario. Much of its planned route is included in Line 5 Eglinton.

One proposed expansion of Line 2 Bloor–Danforth into Mississauga included eight potential stations stretching west from Kipling station to Mississauga City Centre, retrofitting some existing GO Transit stations. The plan was for the subway stations to open in 2011. Mississauga mayor Hazel McCallion and the Regional Municipality of Peel did not support the project.

The Relief Line was a proposed heavy-rail subway line running from Pape station south to Queen Street East and then west to the vicinity of Toronto City Hall. The proposal included intermediate stations at Sherbourne Street, Sumach Street, Broadview Avenue, and another near Gerrard Square. In January 2016, alignment options and possible stations were still being studied, and the project was unfunded. Construction was expected to take about ten years to complete. As early as 2008, Metrolinx chair Rob MacIsaac expressed the intent to construct the Relief Line to prevent overcrowding along Line 1. Toronto City Council also expressed support for this plan. In April 2019, the Government of Ontario under Doug Ford announced that the Ontario Line would be built instead of the Relief Line. As a result, TTC and City of Toronto staff suspended further planning work on the Relief Line in June 2019.

====Transit City====
The Sheppard East LRT was a proposed light rail line running east from Don Mills station to Morningside Avenue in Scarborough. The line was to be long with 25 surface stations and one underground connection at Don Mills station on Line 4 Sheppard. Construction of the Sheppard East LRT was to start upon completion of Line 6 Finch West. However, in July 2016, the &quot;Toronto Star&quot; reported the Sheppard LRT had been deferred indefinitely. In April 2019, Premier Doug Ford announced that the provincial government would extend Line 4 Sheppard to McCowan Road at some unspecified time in the future, replacing the proposed Sheppard East LRT.

The Don Mills LRT was a proposed LRT line that would have headed north from Pape station along Don Mills to Don Mills station. Its route was later incorporated into the Relief Line and Ontario Line proposals.

==See also==

* List of metro systems
* Mind the gap
* Toronto Subway (typeface)
* Transportation in Toronto
==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* &quot;Welcome Aboard – Tomorrow&#x27;s Transit Today – UTDC 1985&quot;
* 

==External links==
* Official TTC site
* Webpage by subway line:
** Line 1 Yonge–University
** Line 2 Bloor–Danforth
** Line 4 Sheppard
** Line 5 Eglinton
** Line 6 Finch West
* Official TTC Subway Map 
* News, history and discussion
* CBC Digital Archives: Going Underground: Toronto&#x27;s Subway and Montreal&#x27;s Metro
* The TTC&#x27;s Official Subway Travel Time Chart (archived version using the way back machine)
* Vivanext Subways – Yonge extension projects
* &quot;The Subway Comes to the Archives&quot;, online exhibit on Archives of Ontario website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20379" start="4" end="18" title="Toronto subway" label="Toronto subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="24" end="37" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="53" end="60" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q44013" start="90" end="97" title="Vaughan" label="Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="101" end="108" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17978" start="134" end="160" title="Toronto Transit Commission" label="Toronto Transit Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="224" end="243" title="Passenger rail terminology#Heavy rail" label="heavy-capacity rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="331" end="341" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="424" end="434" title="Rapid transit" label="heavy rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725" start="612" end="624" title="Yonge Street" label="Yonge Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q511316" start="633" end="646" title="Union Station (Toronto)" label="Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348068" start="651" end="666" title="Eglinton Avenue" label="Eglinton Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q772080" start="721" end="732" title="List of Toronto subway stations" label="70 stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592400" start="827" end="855" title="List of North American rapid transit systems by ridership" label="busiest rapid transit system"/>
<link wikidata="Q54369" start="1119" end="1142" title="Line 1 Yonge–University" label="Line 1 Yonge–University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555074" start="1364" end="1391" title="Vaughan Metropolitan Centre station" label="Vaughan Metropolitan Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041196" start="1396" end="1401" title="Finch station" label="Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q850811" start="1425" end="1438" title="Union station (TTC)" label="Union station"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="1462" end="1483" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth" label="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q885416" start="1518" end="1530" title="Bloor Street" label="Bloor Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013471" start="1535" end="1550" title="Danforth Avenue" label="Danforth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041596" start="1559" end="1574" title="Kipling station" label="Kipling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020159" start="1578" end="1587" title="Etobicoke" label="Etobicoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042126" start="1592" end="1607" title="Kennedy station" label="Kennedy station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025401" start="1611" end="1622" title="Scarborough, Ontario" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430271" start="1755" end="1778" title="Scarborough City Centre" label="Scarborough City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q54373" start="1782" end="1797" title="Line 4 Sheppard" label="Line 4 Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494532" start="1827" end="1842" title="Sheppard Avenue" label="Sheppard Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041444" start="1863" end="1885" title="Sheppard–Yonge station" label="Sheppard–Yonge station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042199" start="1899" end="1916" title="Don Mills station" label="Don Mills station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="2072" end="2082" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="2097" end="2103" title="Rapid transit" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239105" start="2112" end="2127" title="Line 5 Eglinton" label="Line 5 Eglinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="2196" end="2206" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348068" start="2218" end="2233" title="Eglinton Avenue" label="Eglinton Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895448" start="2286" end="2306" title="Mount Dennis station" label="Mount Dennis station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18563395" start="2660" end="2676" title="Renforth station" label="Renforth station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019227" start="2889" end="2906" title="Line 6 Finch West" label="Line 6 Finch West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132860" start="3009" end="3027" title="Finch West station" label="Finch West station"/>
<link wikidata="Q54369" start="3031" end="3054" title="Line 1 Yonge–University" label="Line 1 Yonge–University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939790" start="3078" end="3096" title="Humber Polytechnic" label="Humber Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q63563637" start="3320" end="3332" title="Ontario Line" label="Ontario Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="3358" end="3364" title="Rapid transit" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061930" start="3375" end="3393" title="Exhibition GO Station" label="Exhibition station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150154" start="3397" end="3419" title="Science Centre station" label="Science Centre station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002871" start="3471" end="3489" title="Financial District, Toronto" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303557" start="3551" end="3571" title="Relief Line (Toronto)" label="Downtown Relief Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="3829" end="3847" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q207842" start="3916" end="3927" title="light metro" label="light metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="3939" end="3957" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042459" start="4159" end="4174" title="McCowan station" label="McCowan station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940487" start="4234" end="4270" title="Intermediate Capacity Transit System" label="Intermediate Capacity Transit System"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725" start="4867" end="4879" title="Yonge Street" label="Yonge Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q16032431" start="4939" end="4959" title="Yonge streetcar line" label="Yonge streetcar line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551335" start="5064" end="5081" title="University Avenue (Toronto)" label="University Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040713" start="5195" end="5213" title="St. George station" label="St. George station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041488" start="5411" end="5425" title="Wilson station (Toronto)" label="Wilson station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120061" start="5550" end="5560" title="Allen Road" label="Allen Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q449996" start="5637" end="5648" title="Ontario Highway 401" label="Highway 401"/>
<link wikidata="Q850811" start="5845" end="5858" title="Union station (TTC)" label="Union station"/>
<link wikidata="Q885416" start="6091" end="6103" title="Bloor Street" label="Bloor Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013471" start="6108" end="6123" title="Danforth Avenue" label="Danforth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952329" start="6141" end="6161" title="Bloor streetcar line" label="Bloor streetcar line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041869" start="6238" end="6251" title="Keele station" label="Keele station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042190" start="6256" end="6272" title="Woodbine station" label="Woodbine station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041874" start="6313" end="6330" title="Islington station (Toronto)" label="Islington station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042170" start="6343" end="6357" title="Warden station" label="Warden station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041596" start="6404" end="6419" title="Kipling station" label="Kipling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042126" start="6432" end="6447" title="Kennedy station" label="Kennedy station"/>
<link wikidata="Q207842" start="6537" end="6548" title="Medium-capacity rail system" label="light metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042459" start="6586" end="6601" title="McCowan station" label="McCowan station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865749" start="6648" end="6675" title="Canadian Light Rail Vehicle" label="Canadian Light Rail Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940487" start="6724" end="6760" title="Innovia Metro" label="Intermediate Capacity Transit System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535124" start="7093" end="7116" title="Scarborough Town Centre" label="Scarborough Town Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494532" start="7188" end="7203" title="Sheppard Avenue" label="Sheppard Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249752" start="7366" end="7377" title="Mel Lastman" label="Mel Lastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586510" start="7408" end="7426" title="North York" label="City of North York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042639" start="7693" end="7719" title="Scarborough Centre station" label="Scarborough Centre station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494533" start="7891" end="7908" title="Sheppard East LRT" label="Sheppard East LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300478" start="7942" end="7951" title="Doug Ford" label="Doug Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307451" start="8235" end="8244" title="Metrolinx" label="Metrolinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="8279" end="8289" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348068" start="8301" end="8316" title="Eglinton Avenue" label="Eglinton Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875320" start="8323" end="8335" title="Mount Dennis" label="Mount Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="8898" end="8919" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth" label="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834341" start="8959" end="8971" title="Transit City" label="Transit City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175688" start="9012" end="9024" title="David Miller (Canadian politician)" label="David Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019227" start="9344" end="9361" title="Line 6 Finch West" label="Line 6 Finch West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449816" start="9481" end="9493" title="Finch Avenue" label="Finch Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17978" start="9523" end="9549" title="Toronto Transit Commission" label="Toronto Transit Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132860" start="9663" end="9681" title="Finch West station" label="Finch West station"/>
<link wikidata="Q54369" start="9685" end="9708" title="Line 1 Yonge–University" label="Line 1 Yonge–University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939790" start="9732" end="9750" title="Humber Polytechnic" label="Humber Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="10098" end="10104" title="Rapid transit" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061930" start="10115" end="10133" title="Exhibition GO Station" label="Exhibition station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150154" start="10137" end="10159" title="Science Centre station" label="Science Centre station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002871" start="10211" end="10229" title="Financial District, Toronto" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270567" start="10295" end="10328" title="Queen subway line" label="first proposed in the early 1900s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303557" start="10334" end="10354" title="Relief Line (Toronto)" label="Downtown Relief Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="10672" end="10690" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q367503" start="11347" end="11363" title="Christie station" label="Christie station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312430" start="11619" end="11640" title="1995 Russell Hill subway accident" label="Russell Hill accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041505" start="11680" end="11702" title="St. Clair West station" label="St. Clair West station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041606" start="11739" end="11753" title="Dupont station" label="Dupont station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042102" start="12221" end="12238" title="Ellesmere station" label="Ellesmere station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12682" end="12692" title="Toronto subway trackage#Crossovers" label="crossovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502119" start="12876" end="12886" title="short turn" label="short turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q54369" start="13212" end="13235" title="Line 1 Yonge–University" label="Line 1 Yonge–University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041497" start="13278" end="13295" title="Glencairn station" label="Glencairn station"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="13301" end="13319" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q228422" start="13650" end="13661" title="train guard" label="train guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q204917" start="13973" end="13980" title="whistle" label="whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092326" start="13987" end="14013" title="One-person operation" label="one-person train operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="14265" end="14283" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="14289" end="14300" title="Paris Métro" label="Paris Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q820880" start="14306" end="14327" title="Chicago &amp;quot;L&amp;quot;" label="Chicago &amp;quot;L&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q392377" start="14336" end="14350" title="Montreal Metro" label="Montreal Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826550" start="15032" end="15067" title="Amalgamated Transit Union Local 113" label="Amalgamated Transit Union Local 113"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372455" start="15582" end="15593" title="Major chord" label="major triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009037" start="16040" end="16053" title="CBC Radio One" label="CBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737632" start="16082" end="16094" title="Here and Now (Toronto)" label="Here and Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193470" start="16123" end="16134" title="theme music" label="theme music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="17620" end="17641" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566741" start="18791" end="18805" title="Motorman (rail transportation)" label="train operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q228422" start="18810" end="18815" title="Conductor (rail)" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041803" start="21860" end="21876" title="Dufferin station" label="Dufferin station"/>
<link wikidata="Q777398" start="22017" end="22031" title="Toronto Rocket" label="Toronto Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749213" start="22953" end="22976" title="2018–19 North American winter" label="the winter of 2018–2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q110832781" start="23173" end="23202" title="February 2022 North American winter storm" label="the storm of February 2, 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612865" start="24338" end="24358" title="Toronto Transit Commission bus system" label="local TTC bus routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q249404" start="24363" end="24379" title="Toronto streetcar system" label="streetcar routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940471" start="24547" end="24558" title="Presto card" label="Presto card"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="25124" end="25134" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672486" start="25170" end="25201" title="Ontarians with Disabilities Act" label="Ontarians with Disabilities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q392377" start="25620" end="25634" title="Montreal Metro" label="Montreal Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q820880" start="25688" end="25709" title="Chicago &amp;quot;L&amp;quot;" label="Chicago &amp;quot;L&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="25772" end="25792" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10889457" start="25956" end="25972" title="priority seating" label="priority seating"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="26913" end="26930" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="26981" end="26984" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q28971241" start="27214" end="27223" title="Toronto subway public art" label="40 pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="27354" end="27363" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q54373" start="27382" end="27402" title="Line 4 Sheppard" label="Sheppard subway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="28003" end="28008" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q624902" start="28317" end="28329" title="Online advertising" label="ad-supported"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="28803" end="28810" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023931" start="29255" end="29269" title="Freedom Mobile" label="Freedom Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q165684" start="29608" end="29629" title="Rogers Communications" label="Rogers Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q165858" start="30059" end="30064" title="Telus" label="Telus"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="30069" end="30073" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041606" start="31089" end="31103" title="Dupont station" label="Dupont station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041869" start="31132" end="31145" title="Keele station" label="Keele station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447850" start="31362" end="31376" title="Fighter brand" label="flanker brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430529" start="31404" end="31409" title="Koodo Mobile" label="Koodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560641" start="31414" end="31425" title="Virgin Plus" label="Virgin Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54369" start="32506" end="32529" title="Line 1 Yonge–University" label="Line 1 Yonge–University"/>
<link wikidata="Q54373" start="32534" end="32549" title="Line 4 Sheppard" label="Line 4 Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q777398" start="32618" end="32632" title="Toronto Rocket" label="Toronto Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="32640" end="32661" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth" label="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667928" start="32677" end="32693" title="T series (Toronto subway)" label="T1 subway trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511956" start="32720" end="32728" title="G series (Toronto subway)" label="G-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572075" start="32759" end="32804" title="Gloucester Railway Carriage and Wagon Company" label="Gloucester Railway Carriage and Wagon Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="32865" end="32890" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076679" start="32919" end="32944" title="Montreal Locomotive Works" label="Montreal Locomotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684984" start="32946" end="32961" title="Hawker Siddeley Canada" label="Hawker Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552199" start="32967" end="32971" title="Urban Transportation Development Corporation" label="UTDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627865" start="33001" end="33025" title="H series (Toronto subway)" label="Hawker Siddeley H series"/>
<link wikidata="Q34116" start="33071" end="33082" title="Thunder Bay" label="Thunder Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q63563637" start="34230" end="34242" title="Ontario Line" label="Ontario Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q433719" start="34369" end="34392" title="automatic train control" label="automatic train control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621110" start="34746" end="34758" title="Hitachi Rail" label="Hitachi Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q212741" start="34781" end="34791" title="Copenhagen Metro" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261550" start="34795" end="34799" title="Line C (Rome Metro)" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="34827" end="34845" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969768" start="34854" end="34862" title="S series (Toronto subway)" label="S-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552199" start="34883" end="34927" title="Urban Transportation Development Corporation" label="Urban Transportation Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q470638" start="34938" end="34956" title="Loyalist, Ontario" label="Millhaven, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940487" start="34964" end="35000" title="Bombardier Innovia Metro" label="Intermediate Capacity Transit System"/>
<link wikidata="Q876780" start="35089" end="35107" title="SkyTrain (Vancouver)" label="Vancouver SkyTrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201543" start="35116" end="35136" title="Detroit People Mover" label="Detroit People Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="35387" end="35408" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth" label="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563765" start="36049" end="36075" title="Bombardier Flexity Freedom" label="Bombardier Flexity Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239105" start="36111" end="36126" title="Line 5 Eglinton" label="Line 5 Eglinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q432757" start="36140" end="36161" title="Alstom Citadis" label="Alstom Citadis Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="36851" end="36861" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37737" end="37748" title="Railway signalling#Fixed block" label="Fixed-block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779202" start="38026" end="38046" title="Automatic block signaling" label="automatic signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q630950" start="38091" end="38111" title="interlocking" label="interlocking signals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38173" end="38189" title="Railroad switch#Crossover" label="track crossovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="38319" end="38325" title="Alstom" label="Alstom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38415" end="38437" title="Line 1 Yonge–University#TYSSE" label="extension into Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936849" start="38444" end="38456" title="moving block" label="moving block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120452" start="38463" end="38497" title="communications-based train control" label="communications-based train control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307451" start="38612" end="38621" title="Metrolinx" label="Metrolinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="39488" end="39506" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447372" start="39581" end="39588" title="SelTrac" label="SelTrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q876780" start="39619" end="39627" title="SkyTrain (Vancouver)" label="SkyTrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969768" start="39709" end="39717" title="S series (Toronto subway)" label="S-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q63563637" start="39783" end="39795" title="Ontario Line" label="Ontario Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q570730" start="39888" end="39909" title="platform screen doors" label="platform screen doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239105" start="40006" end="40021" title="Line 5 Eglinton" label="Line 5 Eglinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124058" start="40064" end="40080" title="Cityflo 650 CBTC" label="Cityflo 650 CBTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165801" start="40152" end="40165" title="Laird station" label="Laird station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895448" start="40170" end="40190" title="Mount Dennis station" label="Mount Dennis station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018671" start="40207" end="40248" title="Eglinton Maintenance and Storage Facility" label="Eglinton Maintenance and Storage Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q19750831" start="40357" end="40370" title="Toronto gauge" label="Toronto gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q249404" start="40403" end="40427" title="Toronto streetcar system" label="Toronto streetcar system"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190772" start="40623" end="40640" title="Hillcrest Complex" label="Hillcrest Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242032" start="40698" end="40717" title="Davisville Yard" label="Davisville Carhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605073" start="40943" end="40957" title="Greenwood Yard" label="Greenwood Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="40968" end="40986" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q30625694" start="41247" end="41259" title="McCowan Yard" label="McCowan Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307451" start="41523" end="41532" title="Metrolinx" label="Metrolinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q63563637" start="41678" end="41690" title="Ontario Line" label="Ontario Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="41971" end="41995" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42011" end="42021" title="Kipling station#Kipling Yard" label="Obico Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020159" start="42070" end="42079" title="Etobicoke" label="Etobicoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="42137" end="42158" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth" label="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041596" start="42213" end="42228" title="Kipling station" label="Kipling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q787407" start="43657" end="43689" title="Automated external defibrillator" label="Automated external defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44035" end="44046" title="Toronto Transit Commission#Crisis Link" label="Crisis Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q570730" start="44599" end="44620" title="platform screen doors" label="platform screen doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q433719" start="44695" end="44718" title="automatic train control" label="automatic train control"/>
<link wikidata="Q63563637" start="45037" end="45049" title="Ontario Line" label="Ontario Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444351" start="46286" end="46297" title="Toronto Paramedic Services" label="Toronto EMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q282902" start="46539" end="46547" title="naloxone" label="naloxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="46872" end="46887" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q777398" start="46900" end="46914" title="Toronto Rocket" label="Toronto Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022996" start="47147" end="47161" title="Wilson Yard" label="Wilson Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300478" start="47308" end="47317" title="Doug Ford" label="Doug Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q63563637" start="47469" end="47481" title="Ontario Line" label="Ontario Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303557" start="47536" end="47547" title="Relief Line (Toronto)" label="Relief Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239105" start="47740" end="47780" title="Eglinton West LRT" label="Line 5 West Extension to Pearson Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48023" end="48051" title="Line 1 Yonge–University#Yonge North Subway Extension" label="Yonge North Subway Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725" start="48119" end="48131" title="Yonge Street" label="Yonge Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232445" start="48193" end="48202" title="List of numbered roads in York Region" label="Highway 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q52998" start="48206" end="48219" title="Richmond Hill, Ontario" label="Richmond Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246412" start="48252" end="48266" title="Steeles Avenue" label="Steeles Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872859" start="48304" end="48315" title="Ontario Highway 407" label="Highway 407"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268452" start="48321" end="48341" title="Langstaff GO Station" label="Langstaff GO Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330869" start="48346" end="48375" title="Richmond Hill Centre Terminal" label="Richmond Hill Centre Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982300" start="48488" end="48504" title="MoveOntario 2020" label="MoveOntario 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303557" start="48622" end="48633" title="Relief Line (Toronto)" label="Relief Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710710" start="48638" end="48648" title="SmartTrack" label="SmartTrack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48886" end="48914" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth#Scarborough Subway Extension" label="Scarborough Subway Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="48946" end="48964" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="48995" end="49016" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth" label="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49114" end="49151" title="Line 3 Scarborough#Replacement with alternate transit" label="light rail line or a subway extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430271" start="49205" end="49228" title="Scarborough City Centre" label="Scarborough City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535124" start="49334" end="49357" title="Scarborough Town Centre" label="Scarborough Town Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589283" start="49445" end="49466" title="Government of Ontario" label="Government of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430301" start="50001" end="50018" title="Eglinton East LRT" label="Eglinton East LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834341" start="50222" end="50234" title="Transit City" label="Transit City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348074" start="50262" end="50273" title="Eglinton GO Station" label="Eglinton GO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096598" start="50278" end="50290" title="Guildwood GO Station" label="Guildwood GO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137221" start="50307" end="50340" title="University of Toronto Scarborough" label="University of Toronto Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152454" start="50382" end="50390" title="Jane LRT" label="Jane LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041807" start="50434" end="50446" title="Jane station" label="Jane station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132835" start="50478" end="50501" title="Pioneer Village station" label="Pioneer Village station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032368" start="52758" end="52773" title="Woodbine Centre" label="Woodbine Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270567" start="53116" end="53133" title="Queen subway line" label="Queen subway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q289280" start="53205" end="53225" title="Lower Queen station" label="a roughed-in station"/>
<link wikidata="Q918410" start="53469" end="53487" title="Eglinton West line" label="Eglinton West line"/>
<link wikidata="Q598964" start="53620" end="53631" title="Mike Harris" label="Mike Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="53767" end="53778" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q107108562" start="53853" end="53876" title="Mississauga City Centre" label="Mississauga City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357727" start="53905" end="53915" title="GO Transit" label="GO Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q455643" start="53998" end="54013" title="Hazel McCallion" label="Hazel McCallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q50811" start="54022" end="54051" title="Regional Municipality of Peel" label="Regional Municipality of Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303557" start="54086" end="54097" title="Relief Line (Toronto)" label="Relief Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042388" start="54149" end="54161" title="Pape station" label="Pape station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093941" start="54222" end="54239" title="Toronto City Hall" label="Toronto City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307451" start="54567" end="54576" title="Metrolinx" label="Metrolinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589283" start="54762" end="54783" title="Government of Ontario" label="Government of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494533" start="55009" end="55026" title="Sheppard East LRT" label="Sheppard East LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="55042" end="55052" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912977" start="55097" end="55115" title="Morningside Avenue (Toronto)" label="Morningside Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q54373" start="55236" end="55251" title="Line 4 Sheppard" label="Line 4 Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="55375" end="55387" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293159" start="55658" end="55671" title="Don Mills LRT" label="Don Mills LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q206974" start="55880" end="55901" title="List of metro systems" label="List of metro systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378362" start="55904" end="55916" title="Mind the gap" label="Mind the gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826527" start="55919" end="55944" title="Toronto Subway (typeface)" label="Toronto Subway (typeface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835273" start="55947" end="55972" title="Transportation in Toronto" label="Transportation in Toronto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584956" wikidata="Q151968" url="?curid=584956" title="Leopard 2">
<text>The Leopard 2 is a third generation German main battle tank (MBT). Developed by Krauss-Maffei in the 1970s, the tank entered service in 1979 and replaced the earlier Leopard 1 as the main battle tank of the West German army. Various iterations of the Leopard 2 continue to be operated by the armed forces of Germany, as well as 13 other European countries, and several non-European countries, including Canada, Chile, Indonesia, and Singapore. Some operating countries have licensed the Leopard 2 design for local production and domestic development.

There are two main development tranches of the Leopard 2. The first encompasses tanks produced up to the Leopard 2A4 standard and are characterised by their vertically faced turret armour. The second tranche, from Leopard 2A5 onwards, has an angled, arrow-shaped, turret appliqué armour, together with other improvements. The main armament of all Leopard 2 tanks is a smoothbore 120 mm cannon made by Rheinmetall. This is operated with a digital fire control system, laser rangefinder, and advanced night vision and sighting equipment. The tank is powered by a V12 twin-turbo diesel engine made by MTU Friedrichshafen.

In the 1990s, the Leopard 2 was used by the German Army on peacekeeping operations in Kosovo. In the 2000s, Dutch, Danish and Canadian forces deployed their Leopard 2 tanks in the War in Afghanistan as part of their contribution to the International Security Assistance Force. In the 2010s, Turkish Leopard 2 tanks saw action in Syria. Since 2023, Ukrainian Leopard 2 tanks are seeing action in the Russo-Ukrainian war.

==History==
===Development===
Even as the Leopard 1 was entering service, the West German military was interested in producing an improved tank in the next decade. This resulted in the start of the MBT-70 development in cooperation with the United States beginning in 1963. By 1967 it had become questionable whether the MBT-70 would enter service at any time in the foreseeable future. Therefore, the West German government issued the order to research future upgrade options for the Leopard 1 to the German company Porsche in 1967.

This study was named &quot;vergoldeter Leopard&quot; (Gilded Leopard) and focused on incorporating advanced technology into the Leopard design. The projected upgrades added an autoloader, a coaxial autocannon and an independent commander&#x27;s periscope. The anti-air machine gun could be operated from inside the vehicle and a TV surveillance camera was mounted on an extendable mast. The shape of the turret and hull was optimised using cast steel armour, while the suspension, transmission, and engine exhaust vents were improved.

====Prototype development====


Following the end of the Gilded Leopard study in 1967, the West German government decided to focus on the &quot;Experimentalentwicklung&quot; (experimental development) in a feasibility study and to develop new components for upgrading the Leopard 1 and for use on a future main battle tank programme. At first 25 million DM were invested, but after the industry came to the conclusion that with such a low budget the development of the two projected testbeds was not possible, a total of 30 to 32 million DM was invested. The experimental development was contracted to the company Krauss-Maffei, but with the obligation to cooperate with Porsche for the development of the chassis and with Wegmann for the development of the turret.

Two prototypes with different components were built with the aim of improving the Leopard 1 to match the firepower requirements of the MBT-70. A high first-hit probability at ranges of and the ability to accurately engage targets on the move using a computerised fire control system were the main goals of the experimental development. The resulting vehicles were nicknamed &quot;Keiler&quot; (&quot;tusker&quot;). Two prototypes (ET 01 and ET 02) of the Keiler were built in 1969 and 1970, both of them being powered by the MB 872 engine.

The MBT-70 was a revolutionary design, but after large cost overruns and technological problems, Germany withdrew from the project in 1969. After unsuccessful attempts at saving the MBT-70 by conceptual changes in order to eliminate the biggest issue—the driver being seated in the turret—it became clear in late 1969 that Germany would stop the bi-national development. The assistant secretary of the military procurement division of the German Ministry of Defence suggested reusing as many technologies developed for the MBT-70 as possible in a further programme, which was nicknamed &quot;Eber&quot; (&quot;boar&quot;) due to his being named Eberhardt. The &quot;Eber&quot; used a modified MBT-70 turret and hull, with the driver being seated in the hull. Only a wooden mock-up was made.

One year later, a choice was made to continue the development based on the earlier &quot;Keiler&quot; project of the late 1960s, instead of finishing the development of the &quot;Eber&quot;. In 1971, the name of the design was determined as &quot;Leopard 2&quot; with the original Leopard retroactively becoming the Leopard 1, and Paul-Werner Krapke became the project officer of the Leopard 2 program. Originally two versions were projected: the gun-armed Leopard 2K and the Leopard 2FK, which would be armed with the XM150 gun/launcher weapon of the MBT-70.

In 1971, 17 prototypes were ordered but only 16 hulls were built as the production of hull PT12 was cancelled. Ten were ordered initially before another seven were ordered. The 17 turrets were designated T1 to T17, and the hulls were designated PT1 to PT11 and PT13 to PT17. To test a larger number of components and concepts, each prototype was fitted with components not found on the other prototypes. Ten of the turrets were equipped with smoothbore guns and the other seven prototypes were equipped with a smoothbore gun.

Hulls PT11 and PT17 were fitted with a hydropneumatic suspension based on the MBT-70 design. The running gears of these two hulls had only six road wheels. Different types of auxiliary power units (APUs) were mounted in the prototypes. All turrets were equipped with a machine gun for air defence, except the turret mounted on PT11, where a remotely operated autocannon was mounted. With the exception of hulls PT07, PT09, PT15, and PT17, all prototypes used the MB 873 engine. The road wheels were taken from the MBT-70 and the return rollers from the Leopard 1. The prototypes were designed with a projected weight of MLC50, which equals approximately . The welded turret utilised spaced armour formed by two steel plates. The prototypes were equipped with an EMES-12 optical rangefinder and fire control system, which later was adopted on the Leopard 1A4.

In mid-1973 a new turret was designed by Wegmann saving in weight. It was nicknamed the &quot;Spitzmaus-Turm&quot; (shrew turret) due to the highly sloped front. This design was only possible with the new EMES-13 optical rangefinder, which required a base length of only instead of the previous . Based on experiences in the Yom Kippur War, a higher level of protection than the prototypes&#x27; heavily sloped spaced armour was demanded in late 1973 and the Spitzmaus-Turm was never produced.

The weight limit was increased from MLC50 to MLC60, which equals approximately . The T14 turret was modified to test a new armour configuration, taking on a blockier-looking appearance as a result of using vertical modules of spaced multilayer armour. It was also used to test the new EMES-13 optical rangefinder. The modified T14 turret was designated &quot;T14 mod&quot;. and was fitted with a fully electric turret drive and stabilization system, which was developed jointly by General Electric and AEG Telefunken.

==== American evaluation of Leopard 2AV and XM1 Abrams ====
In July 1973 German Federal Minister of Defence Georg Leber and his US counterpart James R. Schlesinger agreed upon a higher degree of standardisation in main battle tanks being favourable to NATO. By integrating components already fully developed by German companies for the Leopard 2, the costs of the XM1 Abrams, U.S. prototype tank developed after the MBT-70, could be reduced. A German commission was sent to the US to evaluate the harmonisation of components between the XM1 and Leopard 2. However, under American law it was not possible for a public bidder to interfere in a procurement tender after a contract with intention of profits and deadline was awarded to private sector companies.

As a result, the modification of the Leopard 2 prototypes in order to meet the US Army requirements was investigated. Following a number of further talks, a memorandum of understanding (MoU) was signed on December 11, 1974, between Germany and the US, which declared that a modified version of the Leopard 2 should be trialed by the US against their XM1 prototypes, after the Americans had bought and investigated prototype PT07 in 1973. The MoU obliged the Federal Republic of Germany to send a complete prototype, a hull, a vehicle for ballistic tests and a number of special ballistic parts to the US, where they would be put through US testing procedures for no additional costs.

The Leopard 2AV (&quot;austere version&quot;) was based on the experiences of the previous Leopard 2 development. It was created in order to meet the US requirements and the latest protection requirements of the German MoD. The T14 mod turret was used as the base for the Leopard 2AV&#x27;s turret, but meeting the required level of protection for the hull required several attempts until the final ballistic trials on 23 to 26 June 1976. Following the US&#x27; preference of laser rangefinders, the turret of prototype PT19 was fitted with a laser rangefinder developed together with the American company Hughes.

In comparison with the earlier Leopard 2 prototypes, the fire control system was simplified by replacing the EMES-12 optical rangefinder and removing the crosswind sensor, the air pressure and temperature sensors, the powder temperature sensor, the PERI R12 commander sight with IR searchlight, the short-range grenade launcher for use against infantry, the retractable searchlight, the spotlight, the retractable passive night vision sight, the APU and the mechanical loading assistant.

Due to the design and production of the Leopard 2AV taking more time than expected, the shipment to the US and the US evaluation was delayed. It was not possible to test the Leopard 2AV before 1 September 1976. Despite the German wish that the Leopard 2AV and the XM1 prototypes would be evaluated at the same time, the US Army decided not to wait for the Leopard 2AV and tested the XM1 prototypes from Chrysler and General Motors beforehand.

Two new prototype hulls and three turrets were shipped to the US: PT20 mounting a rifled L7 gun and a Hughes fire control system, PT19 with the same fire control system but able to swap out the gun for the Rheinmetall smoothbore gun, and the PT21 fitted with the Krupp Atlas Elektronik EMES-13 fire control system and the Rheinmetall gun. The Leopard 2AV fully met the US requirements. A study made by the American FMC Corporation showed that it was possible to produce the Leopard 2AV under licence in America without exceeding the cost limits set by the US Army. Before the trials were finished, it was decided that instead of the US Army possibly adopting the Leopard 2AV, the focus was shifted to the possibilities of common components between the two tanks. FMC, after having acquired the licenses for the production of the Leopard 2AV, decided not to submit a technical proposal, as they saw little to no chance for the US Army adopting a vehicle not developed in the US.

The US Army evaluation showed that on the XM1 a larger portion of the tank&#x27;s surface was covered by special armour (composite armour arrays) than on the Leopard 2AV. Differences in armour protection were attributed to the different perceptions of the expected threats and the haste in which the Leopard 2AV was designed to accommodate special armour. On mobility trials the Leopard 2AV performed equal to better than the XM1 prototypes. The AGT-1500 turbine engine proved to consume about 50% more fuel and the Diehl tracks had a higher endurance, while the tracks used on the XM1 prototypes failed to meet the Army&#x27;s requirements. The heat signature of the MTU diesel engine was much lower. The fire control system and the sights of the Leopard 2 were considered to be better and the gun proved to be superior. The projected production costs for one XM1 tank were US$728,000 in 1976, and the costs for one Leopard 2AV were US$56,000 higher.

After the American evaluation of the Leopard 2AV and the US Army&#x27;s decision to opt for the XM1 Abrams, both American and German sources blamed the other side. US Army test officials discovered that the PT19 Leopard 2AV prototype used for mobility trials did not contain special armour.

In Germany, the test conditions were criticised for being unrealistic and favouring the XM1. Instead of using actual performance data, the calculated hypothetical acceleration was used. The XM1 was found to have a slightly higher rate of fire despite having internal layouts similar to the Leopard 2AV because the XM1 prototypes were manned by professional crews, while the Leopard 2AV had to be manned by conscripts in order to prove that the Leopard 2AV was not too complicated. Firing on the move was demonstrated on flat tracks, which nullified the better stabilization systems of the Leopard 2AV.

Germany later withdrew its tank from consideration.

====Series production====
The decision to put the Leopard 2 tank in production for the German army was made after a study was undertaken, which showed that adopting the Leopard 2 model would result in a greater combat potential of the German army than producing more Leopard 1A4 tanks or developing an improved version of the Leopard 1A4 with 105/120 mm smoothbore gun, improved armour protection, a new fire control system and a or engine. Various changes were applied to the Leopard 2 design before the series production started in 1979. The engine, transmission, and suspension were slightly modified and improved. The ballistic protection of the turret and hull was improved and weak spots were eliminated.

The turret bustle containing the ready ammunition racks and the hydraulic system was separated from the crew compartment and fitted with blowout panels. The development of several new components was introduced to the Leopard 2 during the Leopard 2AV development and after the US testing was completed. For the series version, the Hughes-designed laser rangefinder made with US Common Modules was chosen over the passive EMES-13 rangefinder. The EMES-13 system was considered to be the superior solution, but the Hughes system was cheaper and fully developed.

The German company Krupp-Atlas-Elektronik acquired the licence of the Hughes design and modified it to meet the needs of the German army. The modified rangefinder received the designation EMES-15. The installation of the US AGT-1500 turbine engine in the Leopard 2 was tested by MaK. The AGT-1500 was from the United States and required deep modifications to the Leopard 2&#x27;s chassis. However, driving tests at the WTD 41 revealed a number of drawbacks such as high fuel consumption and the poor performance of the transmission including the brakes. This project was thus terminated.

In January 1977 Germany ordered a small pre-series of three hulls and two turrets which were delivered in 1978. These vehicles had increased armour protection on the front of the hull. One of the hulls was fitted with the earlier T21 turret and was used by the German army school in Munster for troop trials until 1979. In September 1977, 1,800 Leopard 2 tanks were ordered, to be produced in five batches. The main contractor was Krauss-Maffei, but Maschinenbau Kiel (MaK) was awarded a contract for producing 45% of the tanks. The first batch consisted of 380 tanks. The delivery of six tanks was scheduled for 1979, 114 for 1980, 180 for 1981, and 300 tanks each following year.

The first series-production tank was delivered on 25 October 1979. By 1982, all of the first batch of 380 Leopard 2 tanks had been completed. 209 were built by Krauss-Maffei (chassis no. 10001 to 10210) and 171 by MaK (chassis no. 20001 to 20172). The first production tanks were fitted with the PzB-200 image intensifier due to production shortages of the new thermal night-sight system, which was later retrofitted to the earlier models. After the original five batches, three further batches of Leopard 2 tanks were ordered, increasing the number of Leopard 2 tanks ordered by Germany to a total of 2125. The sixth batch was ordered in June 1987 and consisted of 150 tanks, which were produced between January 1988 and May 1989. The seventh batch of 100 tanks was produced between May 1988 and April 1990. The last batch for the German army totalling 75 tanks was produced from January 1991 to March 1992.

During its production run during the Cold War, 16 Leopard 2 tanks were being produced per month. The vehicles were produced at a slower rate in the following decades, however KMW still retained the capacity to return to such manufacturing levels should they need to be made again at a higher rate and supply chains are able to deliver sufficient materials.

==== Further improvements ====
While previous models only varied in detail, the Leopard 2A4 introduced a digital ballistic computer and an improved fire extinguishing system. Starting with the sixth batch, tanks were fitted with an improved armour array and new side skirts. In 1984, the German military procurement agency stated a number of requirements for a future Leopard 2 upgrade. In 1989, the &quot;Kampfwertsteigerung&quot; (combat potential improvement) programme was initiated in Germany with the delivery of first prototypes. The official military requirements were published in March 1990.

The KWS programme was projected to consist of three stages. The first stage replaced the Rheinmetall 120 mm L/44 gun barrel and the corresponding gun mount with a longer barrelled and more lethal L/55 version. This stage was adopted in the form of 225 Leopard 2A6 tanks, starting in 2001 and lasting until 2005. Stage 2 focused on improvements of armour protection and survivability: it was adopted in the form of the Leopard 2A5, starting in 1995. The base armour of the tank was exchanged and additional armour modules were installed at the turret. The first batch of 225 Leopard 2 tanks was upgraded to Leopard 2A5 configuration between 1995 and 1998; a second batch of 125 followed from 1999 to 2002.


The third stage was the planned replacement of the Leopard 2 turret by a new turret fitted with a NPzK tank gun, an autoloader, and the IFIS battlefield management system. The ballistic protection at the hull was to be improved. Originally a total requirement for 650 Leopard 2 tanks with KWS 3 was projected. It was never finalised, but the NPzK tank gun was tested on an older prototype. In 1995, it was decided to cancel due to changes in the political environment. The funds were redirected to the Neue Gepanzerte Plattformen (New Armoured Platforms) project of the German army. The Leopard 2A6M was developed with a kit providing enhanced protection against mines that can detonate below the hull (like mines with bending wire triggers) and explosively formed penetrator mines. The weight of the Leopard 2A6M is .

The latest version of the tank is the Leopard 2A7, which entered service in an initial batch of 20 tanks in 2014. Already before the first Leopard 2A7 tank was handed over to the German Army, plans for upgrades were made. At this time an &quot;extensive&quot; increase in combat value, while retaining the original mobility of the Leopard 2, was planned. The optics of the tank will also be improved.

In April 2015, &quot;Welt am Sonntag&quot; claimed that tungsten (wolfram) rounds used in Leopard 2 cannot penetrate the Russian T-90 or the modernized version of the T-80. They also stated that the German military will develop a new improved round, but it will be exclusively developed for the Leopard 2A7.

In 2015 Rheinmetall disclosed that it was developing a new smoothbore gun for the Leopard 2 tank and its successor. This gun will offer a 50% increase in performance and penetration. Marketing for the new gun was slated to begin in 2016.

==== Replacement ====
The Leopard 2 first entered service in 1979, and its service life is anticipated to end around 2030. In May 2015, the German Ministry of Defence announced plans to develop a tank jointly with France as a successor to both the Leopard 2 and Leclerc tanks. Technologies and concepts will be investigated to determine what capabilities are needed in a future tank. Deployment of the new tank, titled Main Ground Combat System (MGCS), will be preceded by incremental upgrades to the Leopard 2, including a new digital turret core system and situational awareness system and an active protection system (APS).

A short-term lethality increase will come from a higher pressure gun firing new ammunition, expected to deliver 20 percent better performance than the L/55. Mid-term efforts will focus on a Rheinmetall cannon concept offering 50 percent better armour penetration. With the Russian T-14 Armata being equipped with the Afghanit, an active protection system designed to mitigate the effectiveness of ATGM, more importance is being placed on direct-fire weapons.

==Design==
===Protection===


The Leopard 2 uses spaced multilayer armour throughout the design. The armour consists of a combination of steel plates of different hardness, elastic materials, and other non-metallic materials. Steel plates with high hardness and high ductility are used. The armour is a result of extensive research about the formation and penetration mechanism of shaped charge jets. The Leopard 2&#x27;s armour might be based on the British Burlington armour, which had already been demonstrated to West Germany in 1970.

Later, in the mid-1970s, full details about Burlington were handed over to the West German government. The frontal arc of the Leopard 2&#x27;s armour is designed to withstand large caliber kinetic energy penetrators and shaped charge projectiles. During the 1980s, it was estimated that the Leopard 2&#x27;s front would resist armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) rounds fired from a distance of .

The Leopard 2A4&#x27;s armour has a maximum physical thickness of based on unofficial measurements and estimates made by former conscripts and professional soldiers of the German army. On the Leopard 2A5 and subsequent models, the thickness is increased by the wedge-shaped armour module to .

The side and the rear of the tank protect against heavy machine guns, medium caliber rounds, and older types of tank ammunition. The side of the hull is covered by armour skirts to increase protection against projectiles and rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs). The frontal third of the hull sides is covered by heavy ballistic skirts, while the rest of the hull sides is covered by steel-reinforced rubber skirts. For increased protection against mines, the sides of the hull floor are sloped by 45° and the floor is reinforced with corrugations.

====Secondary protection====

The Leopard 2&#x27;s design follows the concept of compartmentation. Possible sources of fire or explosions have been moved away from the crew. In the turret, the ammunition and the hydraulics are located in compartments separated from the crew. In case of a detonation, the blow-off panels on the compartment roofs will direct the explosion and fire away from the crew. The crew is also protected against nuclear, biological and chemical (NBC) threats, as the Leopard 2 is equipped with a Dräger NBC overpressurization system, which provides up to 4 hPA over-pressure inside the vehicle.

Two groups of four Wegmann smoke mortars are mounted on either side of the turret and can be electrically fired either as single rounds or in salvos of four. They are mounted on most Leopard 2 models, with the exception of Dutch Leopard 2s, which are equipped instead with a Dutch-designed smoke mortar system with six barrels on each side. Swedish Stridsvagn 122 utilises French GALIX smoke dispensers, similar to the system found on the French Leclerc.

The Leopard 2 is equipped with a fire protection system. Four halon fire extinguisher bottles are installed on the right behind the driver&#x27;s station. The bottles are connected to pipes and hoses and are activated automatically by the fire detection system when temperatures rise above inside the fighting compartment, or manually via a control panel in the driver&#x27;s compartment. An extra halon fire extinguisher is stored on the floor beneath the main gun.

====Armour upgrades====

Following Leopard 2&#x27;s introduction into service in 1979, the armour has been gradually improved over the years. A modified version of spaced multilayer armour was introduced beginning with the 97th vehicle of the 6th production batch. The same batch also introduced an improved type of heavy ballistic skirts.

The Leopard 2A5 upgrade focused on increased armour protection. While upgrading a Leopard 2 tank to the Leopard 2A5 configuration, the roof covering the armour modules is cut open and new armour modules are inserted. New additional armour modules made of laminated armour cover the frontal arc of the turret. They have a distinctive arrowhead shape and improve protection against both kinetic penetrators and shaped charges. The side skirts also incorporate improved armour protection. A thick spall liner reduces the danger of crew injuries in case of armour penetration.

The Leopard 2A7 features the latest generation of passive armour and belly armour providing protection against mines and IEDs. The Leopard 2A7 is fitted with adapters for mounting additional armour modules or protection systems against RPGs.

For urban combat, the Leopard 2 can be fitted with different packages of modular armour. The Leopard 2A4M CAN, Leopard 2 PSO (Peace Support Operations) and the Leopard 2A7 can mount thick modules of composite armour along the flanks of the turret and hull, while slat armour can be adapted at the vehicle&#x27;s rear. The armour modules provide protection against the RPG-7, which depending on the warhead can penetrate between and of steel armour. The Leopard 2A6M CAN increases protection against rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) by including additional slat armour.

Additional armour packages have been developed by a number of different companies. IBD Deisenroth has developed upgrades with MEXAS and Advanced Modular Armour Protection (AMAP) composite armour, the latter is being used on Singaporean and Indonesian Leopard 2 tanks. RUAG has developed an armour upgrade utilizing their SidePRO-ATR composite armour. This upgrade was first presented on the IAV 2013.

The Leopard 2A4M and 2A6M add an additional mine protection plate for the belly, which increases protection against mines and IEDs.

On 22 February 2021, the German Defence Ministry agreed to acquire Trophy, an active protection system of Israeli design. 17 German Army tanks will be fitted with the system, with integration planned to be completed in 2023. Due to logistical and technical challenges, the Bundeswehr adjusted its initial plans for integrating Trophy into 17 Leopard 2 A7A1 tanks. Testing of the first tanks is now expected to conclude by mid-2024, with operational deployment set for early 2025. These 17 units, equipped with Trophy APS, will serve as a test platform for future configurations. Insights gained from this implementation will optimize production of the Leopard 2 A8, which will integrate Trophy APS into all 123 planned units, enhancing Germany&#x27;s armored capabilities.

====Armour protection estimates====
Estimated levels of protection for the Leopard 2 range from RHAe on the turret, RHAe on the glacis and lower front hull on the Leopard 2A4, to RHAe on the turret, RHAe on the glacis and lower front hull on the Leopard 2A6 against kinetic projectiles.

According to a description page hosted by the Federation of American Scientists, the armour of the Leopard 2A4 is believed to provide protection equivalent to armour steel (RHA) against kinetic energy penetrators and RHA against shaped charge warheads.

===Armament===
====Primary====
The primary armament for production versions of the Leopard 2 is the Rheinmetall smoothbore gun—the same gun later adapted for use on the M1 Abrams—in either the L/44 variant (found on all production Leopard 2s until the A5), or the L/55 variant (as found on the Leopard 2A6 and subsequent models).

Ammunition for the gun comprises 27 rounds stored in a special magazine in the forward section of the hull, to the left of the driver&#x27;s station, with an additional 15 rounds stored in the left side of the turret bustle, which is separated from the fighting compartment by an electrically operated door. If the turret&#x27;s ammunition storage area is hit, a blow-off panel in the turret roof would direct an explosion upwards away from the crew compartment. However, the 27 other rounds stored in the forward section of the hull, to the left of the driver&#x27;s station, do not have this protection and would cause catastrophic secondary explosions if the hull were hit. This is a weakness of the Leopard 2&#x27;s design.

The gun is fully stabilised, and can fire a variety of types of rounds, such as the German DM43 APFSDS-T anti-tank round, which is said to be able to penetrate of steel armour at a range of , and the German DM12 high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT).

For the L/55 gun, a newer APFSDS-T round was introduced to take advantage of the longer barrel, the DM-53, which is said to be able to penetrate up to of RHAe armour at a range of . The bore evacuator and the gun&#x27;s thermal sleeve of the A4 and A5, designed to regulate the temperature of the barrel, are fabricated from glass-reinforced plastic. The barrel has a chrome lining to increase barrel life. The main gun is capable of power elevating from +20° to −9°.

Rheinmetall has developed an upgrade for Leopard 2 tanks to give them the ability to fire the Israeli LAHAT anti-tank guided missile through the main gun. The missile can engage targets out to a range of .

====Secondary====
The Leopard 2 is equipped with two machine guns, one mounted co-axially, the other an anti-aircraft mount. German models use the MG 3 machine gun; Dutch and Singaporean models use FN MAG machine guns; Swiss models use Swiss MG 87 machine guns. 4,750 rounds of machine gun ammunition are carried on board the Leopard 2, of which 2,000 rounds are carried for the coaxial machine gun. More recent variants such as the Leopard 2A7+ are capable of mounting a Remotely-Controlled Weapons Station fitted with a Browning M2HB Heavy Machine Gun, near the commander&#x27;s hatch.

====Fire control====
The standard fire control system found on the Leopard 2 is the German EMES 15 fire control system with a dual magnification stabilised primary sight. The primary sight has an integrated neodymium yttrium aluminium garnet rangefinder and a 120 element mercury cadmium telluride, HgCdTe (also known as CMT) Zeiss thermographic camera, both of which are linked to the tank&#x27;s fire control computer. A backup 8x auxiliary telescope FERO-Z18 is mounted coaxially for the gunner.

The commander has an independent periscope, the Rheinmetall/Zeiss PERI R17 A2. This is a stabilised panoramic periscope sight designed for day/night observation and target identification. It provides an all round view with a traverse of 360°. The thermal image from the commander&#x27;s periscope is displayed on a monitor inside the tank. Initial production tanks were not equipped with a thermal sight, due to the sight not being ready, and instead temporarily substituted the PZB 200 low light TV system (LLLTV).

The fire control suite is capable of providing up to three range values in four seconds. The range data is transmitted to the fire control computer and is used to calculate the firing solution. Because the laser rangefinder is integrated into the gunner&#x27;s primary sight, the gunner is able to read the digital range measurement directly. The maximum range of the laser rangefinder is up to with a measuring accuracy within at this range. The combined system allows the Leopard 2 to engage moving targets at ranges of up to whilst itself being on the move over rough terrain.

===Propulsion===

The Leopard 2 is propelled by the MTU MB 873 Ka-501 engine. It provides at 2,600 RPM and of torque at 1,600–1,700 RPM. The MTU MB 873 Ka-501 is a four-stroke, 47.7 litre, 90° V-block 12-cylinder, twin-turbocharged and intercooled, liquid-cooled diesel engine (with multi-fuel capability). It has an estimated fuel consumption rate of around 300 litres per 100 km on roads and 500 litres per 100 km across the country, and is coupled to the Renk HSWL 354 gear and brake system.

The Renk HSWL 354 transmission has four forward and two reverse gears, with a torque converter and is completely automatic, with the driver selecting the range. The Leopard 2 has four fuel tanks, which have a total capacity of approximately , giving a maximum road range of about . The propulsion pack is capable of driving the tank to a top road speed of (limited to during peacetime by law), and a top reverse speed of . The power pack can be changed in the field in 35 minutes. The engine and transmission are separated from the crew compartment through a fireproof bulkhead. An enhanced version of the EuroPowerPack, with a MTU MT883 engine has been trialled by the Leopard 2.

The Leopard 2 has a torsion bar suspension and has advanced friction dampers. The running gear consists of seven dual rubber-tired road wheels and four return rollers per side, with the idler wheel at the front and drive sprocket at the rear. The tracks are Diehl 570F tracks, with rubber-bushed end connectors, which have removable rubber pads and use 82 links on each track. For use in icy ground, up to 18 rubber pads can be replaced by the same number of grousers, which are stored in the vehicle&#x27;s bow when not in use. The upper part of the tracks are covered with side skirts.

The Leopard 2 can drive through water deep using a snorkel or without any preparation. It can climb vertical obstacles over one metre high.

The German Army has prioritised mobility in the Leopard 2, which has made it one of the fastest MBTs in the world.

Ukrainian forces have said that the Leopard 2 tank is only slightly louder than a diesel van. This lack of noise, they claim, gives them a tactical advantage during an ambush. One Ukrainian commander estimated that Russian forces only heard the Leopard 2 from , during an ambush, compared to for their older Soviet era tanks.

==Exports==
Germany has fielded about 2,125 Leopard 2 main battle tanks in various versions, but many were sold following German reunification. The Leopard 2 became very popular in the 1990s, when the shrinking German army offered many of its redundant Leopard 2s at a reduced price. It became successful enough in Europe that the manufacturer started calling it the &quot;Euro Leopard&quot;, despite France, Britain, and Italy all operating their own MBTs. With further non-European orders, the name &quot;Global-Leopard&quot; is now used instead. Leopard 2 tanks have also been resold by original export customers, although reexport has always been conditional on consent from the German government who control the platform&#x27;s export licence. Other countries have bought newly manufactured vehicles or have produced them locally under licence.

===Europe===
The Netherlands ordered 445 Leopard 2 tanks on 2 March 1979, after examining the results of the Leopard 2AV in the United States. It became the first export customer of the Leopard 2 and the vehicles were delivered between July 1981 and July 1986. Dutch Leopard 2 tanks have been subsequently exported to Austria, Canada, Norway, and Portugal. In 2011 the last Dutch tank division was disbanded and their last Leopard 2 tanks were sold. Then in 2015, because of rising tensions with Russia because of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 and the Russian occupation of Crimea, the Dutch army announced that they would start leasing 18 Leopard 2A6 tanks from Germany. These tanks are operated in joint German-Dutch division. In September 2024 the Dutch army announced that they would order 46 Leopard 2A8 with 6 options. These will not be replacing the leased Leopard 2A6&#x27;s from Germany. It is currently unknown if they will be operated in a join German-Dutch division.

The Swiss Army decided to purchase Leopard 2 tanks over the M1A1 Abrams after trialling both tanks between August 1981 and June 1982. The Swiss decision was made in August 1983 and the funding was approved by the government in 1984. Thirty-five of the tanks were delivered by Kraus-Maffei by June 1987. Eidgenössische Konstruktionswerkstätte Thun started license production of 345 additional vehicles in December 1987.
After investigating the option of a locally developed replacement for the strv 103 tank, Sweden decided to buy a foreign tank model. The Leopard 2 Improved (Leopard 2A5 prototype) won the competition against the M1A2 Abrams and the French Leclerc. The Swedish military also evaluated the Soviet T-80U tank, but separately from the other tanks. After intensive tests from January to June 1994, the Swedish military opted for the Leopard 2. The Swedish military found that the Leopard 2 Improved met their military demands by 90%. The M1A2 met the Swedish requirements by 86%, whereas the Leclerc met 63%. In June 1994, Sweden ordered the production of 120 modified Leopard 2A5, to be known as stridsvagn 122 (strv 122) in Swedish service. The strv 122 features Swedish-developed appliqué armour, a new command system, and improved electronics. Of the 120 Strv 122, 29 were manufactured in Germany by Krauss-Maffei Wegmann while the other 91 were manufactured by the Swedish firms Bofors and Hägglunds. The first Stridsvagn 122 was delivered in December 1996. These remain in Swedish service and have received periodic upgrades.
Sweden also leased a total of 160 Leopard 2A4 tanks in 1994 and 1995, known in Swedish service as Stridsvagn 121 (Strv 121), as a stopgap measure while the strv 122 were being delivered. The first Strv 121 was delivered in February 1994. The Strv 121 fleet was removed from active service in 2002 as a result of the Defence Act of 2000 and mothballed by 2006. While most of the strv 121 tanks were returned to Germany, 18 were kept by Sweden as training aids; six have since been converted into AEV 3 Kodiak armoured engineering vehicles, and a further six have been converted into armoured bridgelayers.

In January 2025 Sweden orderd a new batch of 44 Leopard 2 A8 from Germany and announched that the remaining Leopard 2 (Stridsvagn 122) would be modernised and upgraded.

Denmark bought 51 ex-German Leopard 2A4 tanks after the Danish military school, the Hærens Kampskole, recommended basing the adoption of a new tank on the Swedish army trials. The first tanks were delivered in 1998, but the upgrade to Leopard 2A5 level was already decided the next year. In 2004–2006, the Danish army bought another 18 ex-German Leopard 2 tanks, six of which were upgraded to Leopard 2A5.
In 1998, Greece held a competition to determine the main battle tank for the Hellenic Army. The Leopard 2 Improved managed to outperform the Challenger 2E, Leclerc, M1A2 Abrams, T-80U, and T-84 and was chosen by the Greek officials. In March 2003, Greece ordered 170 Leopard 2 tanks, of which 140 were locally assembled. Greece also bought 183 Leopard 2A4 and 150 Leopard 1 tanks.

Spain initially leased 109 Leopard 2A4 tanks, after Krauss-Maffei withdrew from the Lince development, a special lighter version of the Leopard 2 developed together with Santa Bárbara Sistemas. Before the end of the Lince tank, Spain had already rejected the M1A1 Abrams and the Vickers Valiant. After deciding to purchase the leased tanks, Santa Bárbara Sistemas acquired the licence to locally produce 219 Leopard 2A6 tanks for the Spanish army.

Poland received 128 Leopard 2A4 tanks from German army stocks in 2002. In 2013 Poland ordered a further 119 ex-German Leopard 2s. Finland bought 124 used Leopard 2A4 tanks and six armoured bridge-layer Leopard 2L tanks from Germany in 2002 and 2003. The tanks served as replacements for the old Soviet-made T-55 and T-72M1. The Netherlands resold 114 of their tanks (and one turret) to Austria, 80 to Canada in 2007, 52 to Norway, 37 to Portugal and 100 to Finland.

In December 2018, Hungary placed an order for 44 Leopard 2A7+s and 12 secondhand 2A4s. The order coincided with the procurement of 24 Panzerhaubitze 2000, and was expected to replace Hungary&#x27;s current fleet of T-72 tanks &quot;no sooner than 2020&quot;.

In February 2023, the Norwegian Prime Minister, Jonas Gahr Stoere, announced that Norway would be ordering 54 new Leopard 2A7 tanks at a cost of with a further option for 18 vehicles to be delivered at a later date. The first Leopard 2A7s are due to be delivered by 2026, and operational by 2031. The Norwegian government had been weighing up either the Leopard 2A7 or the South Korean K2 Black Panther as a replacement for its aging Leopard 2A4 fleet. The tanks will be designated Leopard 2A8 NOR.

===Beyond Europe===
In 2005, Turkey ordered 298 Leopard 2 tanks from German army stocks. The Leopard 2 was chosen in 2001 after successfully competing one year earlier in the Turkish army trials against the T-84 Yatagan, Leclerc and a version of the M1A2 Abrams fitted with a German MTU diesel engine. Turkey wanted to buy 1,000 Leopard 2 tanks in 1999, but the German government rejected the deal.

Singapore bought 96 Leopard 2 tanks from Germany in 2006. Chile bought 172 ex-German Leopard 2A4 tanks and 273 Marder 1A3 IFVs in 2007.
Indonesia ordered 103 Leopard 2 tanks and 42 Marder 1A3 IFVs in 2013. At first, the export of heavy weapons to Indonesia was not allowed by the German government, due to the questionable human rights record of Indonesia. 61 of the 103 Leopard 2 tanks will be upgraded by Rheinmetall to the Leopard 2RI standard, based on Rheinmetall&#x27;s &quot;Revolution&quot; modular upgrade concept.

Qatar ordered 62 Leopard 2A7 tanks and 24 Panzerhaubitze 2000s in 2013. The delivery of the tanks started in late 2015 and the first tanks were displayed on a military parade in December 2015.

===Transfer to Ukraine===

On 2 July 2023, Ukraine had reportedly received 54 Leopard 2A4 from NATO-member countries.

====Political discussions====
Since April 2022, in the wake of the Russian invasion, the Ukrainian government has requested that their allies donate Western-made main battle tanks. Poland, Finland and others have all announced a willingness to contribute Leopard 2 tanks from their stocks, with around 100 tanks from various states ready to be transferred to Ukraine. However, when Germany exported the tanks to these countries, it had made reexport conditional on a German government permit, as based on the and . Until 22 January 2023, it was unclear whether such a consent would be provided with Germany determined to avoid any perception of escalating the conflict, and wary of being labelled an aggressor. Germany has also been keen to extract an American commitment to provide its own M1 Abrams tanks, before sending German-made Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine.

The matter was discussed at a conference of defence ministers from NATO members and allies, but no agreement was reached. The German position was heavily criticized by some of the other European governments with Poland threatening to unilaterally export their Leopards if permission from Berlin was not given. The Polish and Ukrainian governments then announced that Ukrainian soldiers would start training on Polish Leopard 2 tanks in Poland. The German government also faced domestic criticism for their stance. Many critics viewed the Leopard question as symptomatic of Germany&#x27;s mishandling of defence and security. In a statement that gained German media attention, political analyst Jessica Berlin referred to the then Federal Minister of Defence Christine Lambrecht as a “clueless sock puppet”.

On 22 January 2023, the German minister for foreign affairs, Annalena Baerbock, told French media that Germany &quot;would not stand in the way&quot; of any Polish decision to send Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine but noted that &quot;for the moment the question has not been asked.&quot; Two days later, Poland made an official request for permission to transfer Polish Leopards to Ukraine.

On 24 January &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; reported that the German Chancellor, Olaf Scholz, would the following day, officially announce the transfer of an undisclosed number of German Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine, beginning with 14 Leopard 2A6s from the active Bundeswehr inventory. The German government would also give permission to any country seeking to reexport Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine. These reports were formally confirmed by the German government on 25 January.

It was also reported that Boris Pistorius, the German defence minister, was encouraging Leopard-operating states to start training Ukrainian personnel in their use.

The German decision to provide and approve the provision of Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine came after U.S. President Joe Biden decided to provide Ukraine with M1 Abrams tanks, as Germany insisted on moving in coordination with its allies. The decision to provide M1 Abrams tanks had previously been opposed by the Pentagon.

On 15 February 2023, Pistorius expressed his frustration at Germany&#x27;s allies in their announcement of any donations of Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine, saying it had &quot;not been exactly breathtaking, to put it mildly.&quot; Since the change in German position on exports, only Poland had matched the German promise to provide 14 tanks - the two largest donations from a single country.

====Germany====
On 25 January 2023, the German government confirmed that it would make 14 Leopard 2A6 (a company-strength number) available for Ukraine and would give authorisation to European partners to reexport their vehicles. The goal is for European Leopard 2 operators to provide two battalions worth, or 88 tanks, to Ukraine.

According to the German government, the tanks will be delivered to Ukraine after training Ukrainian service personnel. This process would take up to three months. Some tanks are held by the Bundeswehr, others by the Leopard manufacturer Rheinmetall. The latter has said they could be ready to be dispatched by March 2023. However, they also warned that some vehicles held in long-term storage would require extensive refurbishment and updating before they could be considered suitable for combat in Ukraine. On 26 January, Pistorius, the German minister of defense, stated that the tanks would be delivered in late March or early April. On 24 February 2023, the German Department of Defence confirmed Germany would increase its Leopard 2A6 contribution from 14 to 18, thus providing 1 full tank battalion together with the contributions of Portugal and Sweden.

On 27 March 2023, Germany delivered 18 Leopard 2A6 tanks to Ukraine with two accompanying armoured recovery vehicles and necessary spare parts.

On 28 March 2023, the security board of the Swiss National Council recommended that 25 Leopard 2 in storage should be sold to the German manufacturer Krauss-Maffei-Wegmann so that Germany can replace some of its own tanks now serving in Ukraine. As of this day, Switzerland keeps 96 Leopard 2 in storage. As the tanks&#x27; sale requires decommissioning, the Bundeswehr waits for approval by the Swiss parliament.

On 27 September 2023, the Swiss parliament has voted to decommission 25 Leopard 2 tanks, allowing them to be sold back to Germany. Germany has given assurances that ex-Swiss tanks will not be sent to Ukraine.

====Poland====
Poland welcomed the German decision to allow the transfer of Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine, with the Polish government announcing on 25 January it would transfer 14 Leopards to Ukraine from a total Polish stock of 247, in addition to a further 50–60 Soviet-era tanks. On 24 February 2023, the first 4 Leopard 2A4 tanks from Polish stocks were delivered to Ukraine. These are the first Leopard 2 tanks to be operated by Ukraine.

====Canada====
On 26 January 2023, the Canadian Defence Minister, Anita Anand, announced that Canada would be sending four Leopard 2A4 tanks to Ukraine, with the potential for more to follow. These vehicles were reportedly &#x27;combat ready.&#x27; Canada will also provide appropriate training to Ukrainian forces who will go on to operate these tanks. The first Canadian Leopard 2 tanks had arrived in Poland on 5 February, to allow Ukrainian troops to begin training. On 24 February, the Canadian Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, announced that Canada would be sending a further four Leopard 2A4 tanks to Ukraine along with one armoured recovery vehicle (ARV) and 5,000 rounds of ammunition.

====Czech Republic====
On 20 January 2023, the Czech Defense Ministry issued a statement that the media reports indicating the Czech Republic and Slovakia were willing to give up their Leopard 2 tanks for Ukraine were false, and that rumors that the Czech Republic would receive American Abrams tanks in exchange for Leopards were also false. As of December 2022, both countries had only received one Leopard 2A4 each from Rheinmetall as part of Germany&#x27;s &quot;Ringtausch&quot; program in exchange for them delivering older Soviet equipment to Ukraine, while the remaining Leopard 2A4s are still being refurbished (expected to be delivered throughout 2023).

====Denmark====
While it was reported in the international press that Denmark had signalled that it could contribute a number of tanks, there was no official indication from the Danish Government that any Danish Leopard 2s would be sent to Ukraine. Of the Danish inventory of 44 tanks, 14 were deployed to Estonia as part of NATO EFP, with a further number receiving upgrades at the German manufacturers. Some Danish opposition politicians voiced support for a transfer of Danish tanks. Unlike those considered by other countries, the Danish Leopards are of the new 2A7 standard, which would represent some logistic and mechanical challenges compared to the other variants. Denmark instead announced on 7 February that it was jointly purchasing 100-178 Leopard 1A5 tanks with Germany and the Netherlands. Denmark also announced on 20 April 2023 that they would jointly finance with the Netherlands the purchase and refurbishing of 14 Leopard 2A4 for Ukraine from private industry stocks.

====Finland====
Finland had suggested before the German decision on reexport, that it could supply Ukraine with a limited number of Leopard 2 tanks. The Finnish President, Sauli Niinistö, warned that &quot;the number of tanks [to be sent to Ukraine] cannot be large, since Finland borders on Russia and is not part of NATO [yet].&quot; On 23 February Finland announced it will give three of its six Leopard 2R breaching tanks to Ukraine. The donation of the remaining three was announced a month later.

====Greece====
On 25 January 2023 it was reported that Greece was one of the countries that had indicated it would supply Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine. On 29 January 2023 it was erroneously reported that approximately 14 Leopard 2 tanks would be provided, though it was unclear if it would be the 2A4 or 2A6 HEL variant. However, on 31 January, Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis clarified that Greece would not supply any Leopard tanks to Ukraine, arguing &quot;they are absolutely necessary for our defense posture.&quot; Leaked Pentagon documents revealed that Greece was preparing to donate five of its Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine, though Greek defense minister Nikolaos Panayiotopoulos reiterated later in April his government&#x27;s opposition to tank deliveries to Ukraine, making confirmation of the delivery uncertain.

====Netherlands====
The Netherlands was considering Ukrainian requests for Leopard 2 tanks, with Prime Minister Mark Rutte suggesting that the Dutch government could purchase tanks from other countries and donate them. There were also some discussions about Netherlands purchasing the 18 Leopard 2A6 tanks they lease from Germany. No refusal was made from Germany to sell them as no formal request to buy them was made; both countries agreed that they were critical to the operations of the joint German-Dutch military unit. However, the Netherlands agreed to supply ammunition for Leopard tanks and announced it had not abandoned its intention to contribute to the tank initiative, while also noting it was helping to purchase Leopard 1A5 tanks with Denmark and Germany. The Netherlands later announced it was jointly financing with Denmark the purchase and refurbishing of 14 Leopard 2A4 for Ukraine from private industry stocks, with delivery expected in early 2024.

====Norway====
On 25 January 2023, Norway pledged to donate spare Leopards to Ukraine with reports speculating that between four and eight of its 36 Leopard 2A4 tanks would be sent. Norwegian defence minister Bjørn Arild Gram said in an interview with Norwegian public television NRK: &quot;Norway and the government support the donation of battle tanks to Ukraine. Norway will take part,&quot; but did not specify how many would be sent. On 14 February 2023, Gram announced that 8 Norwegian Leopard 2 tanks and 4 Leopard 1 derived &quot;special purpose vehicles&quot; would be handed over to Ukraine. The special purpose vehicles turned out to be a mix of 3 NM189 AEVs and 1 NM217 ARV. In February 2023, Norway ordered 54 Leopard 2A7 tanks (later changed to 2A8 variant) to be delivered from 2026, with a further option for 18 vehicles if necessary.

====Portugal====
When the German government changed its position on the reexport of Leopard 2 tanks, it was reported that the Portuguese government was preparing to send four of their Leopard 2A6 tanks to Ukraine. On 4 February, Prime Minister António Costa confirmed that Portugal would send Leopards to Ukraine, but did not confirm the number of vehicles set to be delivered. It is understood that Portugal is working with Germany to obtain the necessary parts to repair inoperable tanks in its inventory of 37 Leopard 2 tanks, but it has been widely reported by local media that most are inoperable. Costa expressed hopes that Portuguese tanks would be delivered by March 2023. On 14 February, it was reported that Portugal had earmarked three Leopard 2A6 tanks for donation to Ukraine. All three were confirmed donated on 27 March together with the 18 German Leopard 2A6.

====Slovakia====
On 25 January 2023, Slovakia announced it was not considering the transfer of any of its Leopard 2A4 tanks to Ukraine, but were willing to provide T-72 tanks if other allies replaced them with other tanks. The reason cited for this was that Slovakia had only received 1 of the 15 Leopard tanks it was promised as part of Germany&#x27;s &quot;Ringtaush&quot; program, which it was getting in exchange for supplying Ukraine with 30 Soviet-era infantry fighting vehicles.

====Spain====
On 4 June 2022 it was reported that Spain was considering providing 40 of its 53 retired Leopard 2A4 tanks stored in Zaragoza. On 8 June German Chancellor Olaf Scholz denied receiving any formal request from Spain for an export permit for Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine. However it was later confirmed on 10 June by the Spanish defense minister they were considering the transfer. On 12 June, anonymous government sources told Der Spiegel that the Scholz government blocked any transfer of Leopard tanks to Ukraine, arguing this &quot;would constitute a departure&quot; from an informal NATO decision not to provide Western tanks at that time. By 2 August, Spain officially backtracked on its decision, arguing the tanks at Zaragoza were in &quot;deplorable condition&quot; and that it could not send any.

The Spanish government was later reported to be considering to send an unconfirmed number of Spanish Leopard 2E tanks to Ukraine in January 2023 following a meeting of the Ukraine Defense Contact Group. On 14 February the Spanish defence minister Margarita Robles confirmed Spain was providing training to 55 Ukrainian tank crew members and technicians on the Leopard 2. On 22 February, Robles also confirmed that Spain was in the process of preparing six Leopard 2A4 tanks for delivery to Ukraine by late March or early April. On 5 February 2023, it was reported that at least 11 of the 53 tanks stored at Zaragoza had been drawn out of storage to be refurbished and upgraded to have &quot;the same lethality&quot; as modern versions of the Leopard 2 before being sent to Ukraine. Five were sent to the Santa Bárbara Sistemas plant in Alcalá de Guadaira and six had already been moved to Seville for diagnostics and repairs. The Ministry of Defence had not published the contracts for the retrofits out of secrecy. It was unclear however if ammunition would be supplied with the tanks as Spain only has 9 rounds for each of its Leopard 2E tanks. On 23 February Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez confirmed during a visit to Kyiv that Spain was sending at least 10 Leopard 2 tanks to Ukraine.

====Sweden====
Sweden began considering Ukrainian requests for Leopard 2 tanks in January 2023 and did not rule out contributing its Strv 122 at a later stage. On 24 February, the Swedish minister of defence Pål Jonson announced that Sweden would be providing 10 Strv 122 tanks to Ukraine.

==Combat history==

===KFOR===

Starting on 12 June 1999, 28 Leopard 2A5 tanks were deployed to Kosovo by the German Army as part of the Kosovo Force (KFOR). The vehicles of Panzerbataillon 33 and 214 were sent from North Macedonia to Prizren. They were used for patrols, protecting checkpoints and bases as well as part of the show of force. On 13 June 1999, two members of the Serbian paramilitary started firing from inside a Fiat 125p car at one of the checkpoints in Prizren and both were killed by return fire. A Leopard 2A5 was located at the checkpoint, but it could not participate in the fighting as it was only partially crewed.

On 26 June 1999, a Leopard 2A5 fired four warning shots above the town of Orahovac. From late 2000 to early 2001, the tanks were replaced by the Leopard 2A4 model. Leopard 2A4s were deployed to North Macedonia in 2001 as part of the NATO intervention. The tanks served to protect Bundeswehr logistic sites in North Macedonia. Until their return in 2004, the Leopard 2 tanks were stationed at the Austrian-Swiss camp &quot;Casablanca&quot;.

===IFOR/SFOR===
The Dutch contingent in Bosnia-Herzegovina operated Leopard 2 tanks. Dutch Leopard 2A4s and Leopard 2A5s were stationed at the NLD bases at Bugojno, Novi Travnik, Sisava, Knezevo, Maslovare and Suica.

===ISAF/OEF===
In October 2003, Canada was planning to replace its Leopard C2s with wheeled Stryker Mobile Gun Systems. However, operational experience in Afghanistan and in particular during Operation Medusa, convinced the Canadian military of the usefulness of maintaining a tank fleet. Leopard C2s were deployed to Kandahar in December 2006, but they were by then almost 30 years old, and were nearing the end of their operational life. The Canadian government decided to borrow 20 Leopard 2A6s and three armoured recovery vehicles from Germany for rapid deployment to Afghanistan. In late August 2007, the first Leopard 2s were airlifted into Afghanistan to equip Lord Strathcona&#x27;s Horse (Royal Canadians).

In an assault on 2 November 2007, a Leopard 2A6M hit an improvised explosive device (IED) and survived without casualties: &quot;My crew stumbled upon an IED (improvised explosive device) and made history as the first (crew) to test the (Leopard 2A6) M-packet. It worked as it should&quot;, wrote a Canadian officer in an email to German defence officials. Canadian Chief of the Defence Staff General Rick Hillier denied reports that a Leopard 2 tank that was struck by an IED was a write-off, insisting that the tank has been repaired and is once again in use. &quot;The Taliban have been engaged with some of the new Leopard 2 tanks in several ambushes&quot; and that as a result the Taliban &quot;learned some very harsh lessons&quot; and lost the battle in question &quot;very quickly and very violently.&quot;

In October 2007, Denmark deployed Leopard 2A5 DKs in support of operations in southern Afghanistan. The Danish tank unit, drawn from the first battalion of the &quot;Jydske Dragonregiment&quot; (Jutland Dragoons Regiment), was equipped with three tanks and one M113 armoured personnel carrier, with an armoured recovery vehicle and another tank kept in reserve. The Danish version of the Leopard 2A5 is fitted with Swedish-made Barracuda camouflage mats that limit the absorption of solar heat, thus reducing infrared signature and interior temperature. It also has a conventional driver&#x27;s seat bolted on the floor of the tank, whereas in the Canadian 2A6M (as part of the mine-protection package) the driver&#x27;s seat has been replaced by a &quot;dynamic safety seat&quot;, which is a parachute-harness like arrangement that the driver wears around his hip. This way, the driver does not have any contact with the hull except on the pedals and is out of the shockwave area of exploding land mines or IEDs.

In January 2008, Danish tanks halted a flanking manoeuvre by Taliban forces near the Helmand River by providing gunfire in support of Danish and British infantry from elevated positions. On 26 February 2008, a Danish Leopard 2 was hit by an explosive device, damaging one track. No one was injured and the tank returned to camp on its own for repairs. The first fatality suffered by a crew operating a Leopard 2 happened on 25 July 2008. A Danish Leopard 2A5 hit an IED in Helmand Province. The vehicle was able to continue before it halted. Three members of the four-man crew were able to escape even though wounded, but the driver was stuck inside. Onsite treatment by Danish medics could not save him. The vehicle was towed to Forward Operating Base (FOB) Attal and then later to FOB Armadillo for investigation and possible redeployment. During the same contact with Taliban forces, a second tank was caught in an explosion but none of the crew were wounded.

Beginning on 7 December 2008, Leopard 2 tanks took part in Operation Red Dagger, firing 31 rounds in support of Coalition troops as they recaptured Nad Ali District. A press release from the British Ministry of Defence praised the tank&#x27;s fire accuracy and mobility, claiming the Leopard 2 was a decisive factor in the coalition&#x27;s success.

===Turkish intervention in Syria===
Turkey operates 354 Leopard 2A4 tanks. Initially using other tank types including upgraded M60s, in December 2016 Turkey deployed a number of Leopard 2A4s to the Syrian Civil War against Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) as part of Operation Euphrates Shield. Initially, three of the Turkish Leopard 2A4s operating in Syria were destroyed or damaged by ISIS using anti-tank missile systems (possibly Fagot or Konkurs anti-tank guided missiles obtained from Syrian or Iraqi Army captured stocks). In mid-December 2016, two 2A4 tanks were captured by ISIS near al-Bab city in Syria during Euphrates Shield operations. Amaq News Agency posted video of vehicles claimed to be captured Leopard 2A4s.

By late December 2016, ISIS had captured or incapacitated 10 Leopard 2A4s. These were damaged by anti-tank weapons, IEDs, or other unknown causes. Additional ISIS propaganda images and video depicting several completely destroyed Leopards, some with their turrets blown off, were published in January 2017. The &#x27;turret blown off&#x27; effect was potentially caused by a quirk of the Leopard&#x27;s design, with only 15 rounds being stored in blow-out panel compartments (27 other rounds stored in the forward section of the hull, to the left of the driver&#x27;s station, they were cause to catastrophic secondary explosions).

Tanks which suffered the worst damage may have been destroyed by airstrikes in order to prevent capture but sources generally state that the damage was caused solely with anti-tank missiles or car bombs driven by suicide bombers.

In January 2017, the German newspaper &quot;Die Welt&quot; reported that ISIL fighters used 9M133 Kornet anti-tank missiles to destroy six Leopard 2 tanks used by the Turkish military in Syria.

At least eight Leopard 2 MBT have been destroyed according to photographic reports.

Turkey also confirmed the use of Leopard 2A4 tanks during the Turkish military operation in Afrin to the German government. These tanks were designed during the Cold War to fight against Soviet tanks in Europe, not counterinsurgencies against guerrillas, where the primary risk is improvised explosive devices and anti-tank missiles. These tanks were retired from German usage when sold to Turkey.

There is a belief that the Turkish purchase of Leopard 2A4s from Germany was subject to the condition that they were not to be used against Kurdish separatists. Prior to 2016, the Leopard 2A4s were kept in northern Turkey. Once the German government discovered that the Leopard tanks were being used against Kurdish forces, planned upgrades to make them “less vulnerable to explosives” were halted. Ultimately Turkey was forced to upgrade the Leopard 2A4s with domestic components, including a possible replacement of the original turret with that of the Turkish Altay main battle tank.

===Russo-Ukrainian War===
In April 2023, during training of a Ukrainian crew a Leopard 2A4 was damaged with its turret being completely dislodged from the hull. The crew was reported as fine. In July 2023, a Leopard 2A4 was modified to carry Kontakt-1 ERA on the sides of the hull and the turret. It was also shown with rubber screens attached to the turret and gun mantel.

Beginning in June 2023, Ukraine deployed Leopard 2s during the Russo-Ukrainian War against Russia in preparation for their 2023 counteroffensive. During Ukrainian attacks in Zaporizhzhia Oblast on 8 June 2023, a Russian artillery strike on a Ukrainian vehicle column at Novopokrovka destroyed at least one Leopard 2A4 tank. Additionally, more Russian drone footage from the same day and days after showed four Leopard 2A6 tanks and three Leopard 2Rs damaged or destroyed south the road of Mala Tokmachka.

On 28 August 2023, Russia&#x27;s Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu claimed that Russian forces had destroyed or damaged all 16 Leopard 2A4 tanks supplied to Ukraine by Poland and Portugal.

On October 30, 2023, a video showed one Strv 122 tank being hit and penetrated by a 9M133 Kornet. The crew was seen escaping/abandoning a destroyed vehicle.

On 4 October 2023, according to Forbes, Ukrainian forces managed to recover at least one Strv 122 and send it for repair.

As of 7 July 2024, according to the Oryx blog, at least 21 Ukrainian Leopard 2s were destroyed according to photos and videos (six Leopard 2A6, one Strv 122, ten Leopard 2A4/2A4V, one Leopard 2R, three Bergepanzer-3); while another 24 Ukrainian Leopard 2s of various models were confirmed damaged to various degrees or abandoned by their crews: 11 Leopard 2A4/2A4V with 6 of them being abandoned, five Leopard 2A6 with two of them being abandoned, six Strv 122 with five of them being abandoned and two damaged Leopard 2R.

On 22 October 2024, Leopard 2A4 of the 33rd Mechanized Brigade reportedly engaged and destroyed two Russian Armoured Personnel Carriers according to social media footage in Kurakhove sector, Pokrovsk.

On 11 November 2024, at least one Leopard 2A4 of the 33rd Mechanized Brigade engaged a Russian armored column near Dalnje, just south of Kurakhove, allegedly destroying two Russian tanks, an armored personnel carrier and damaging several other vehicles. The Russian column was led by two “turtle tanks” fitted with bulky anti-drone armor.

==Variants==
===Leopard 2===

The baseline Leopard 2, sometimes informally called the &quot;A0&quot; to differentiate it from later versions, was the first series manufactured version. The vehicles were manufactured from October 1979 until March 1982, altogether 380 vehicles. 209 were built by Krauss Maffei and 171 by MaK. The basic equipment consisted of electrical-hydraulic stabiliser WNA-H22, a fire control computer, a laser rangefinder, a wind sensor, a general-purpose telescope EMES 15, a panorama periscope PERI R17, the gunner&#x27;s primary sight FERO Z18, on the turret roof as well as a computer-controlled tank testing set RPP 1–8. 200 of the vehicles had a low-light enhancer (PZB 200) instead of thermal imaging. Two chassis served as driver training vehicles.

===Leopard 2A1===
Minor modifications and the installation of the gunner&#x27;s thermal sight were worked into the second batch of 450 vehicles Leopard 2, designated the A1. Krauss-Maffei built 248 (Chassis Nr. 10211 to 10458) and MaK built 202 (Chassis Nr. 20173 to 20347). Deliveries of the &quot;2A1&quot; models started in March 1982 and ended in November 1983. The two most notable changes were the modification of the ammunition racks to be identical to those in the M1A1 Abrams, and redesigned fuel filters that reduce refuelling time.

A third batch of 300 Leopard 2, 165 by Krauss-Maffei (Chassis Nr. 10459 to 10623) and 135 by MaK (Chassis Nr. 20375 to 20509.), was built between November 1983 and November 1984. This batch included more minor changes that were later retrofitted to the earlier 2A1s.

===Leopard 2A2===
This designation was given to upgraded vehicles of the first batch of Leopard 2s, brought up to the standard of the second and third batches. This modernisation gradually replaced the original PZB 200 sights in the first batch with thermal sights for the EMES 15 as they became available. The upgrade included the fitting of filler openings and caps to the forward hull fuel tanks to allow separate refuelling. There was an addition of a deflector plate for the periscope and a large coverplate to protect the existing NBC protection system. The tank was given new five metre towing cables with a different position. The programme began in 1984 and ended in 1987. The third, fourth and fifth batches, which were produced during this period, had the same features. The modernised first batch can be recognised by the circular plate covering the hole where the crosswind sensor for the fire control system was removed.

===Leopard 2A3===
The fourth batch of 300 vehicles, 165 by Krauss-Maffei (Chassis Nr. 10624 to 10788) and 135 by MaK (Chassis Nr. 20510 to 20644), was delivered between December 1984 and December 1985. The main change was the addition of the SEM80/90 digital radio sets (also being fitted to the Leopard 1 at the same time), and the ammunition reloading hatches being welded shut. Even with these minor changes the new batch was known as the &quot;2A3&quot;.

===Leopard 2A4===

The most widespread version of the Leopard 2 family, the 2A4 models included more substantial changes, including an automated fire and explosion suppression system, an all-digital fire control system able to handle new ammunition types, and an improved turret with flat titanium/tungsten armour. The Leopard 2s were manufactured in eight batches between 1985 and 1992. All the older models were upgraded to 2A4 standard. Until 1994, Germany operated a total of 2,125 2A4s (695 newly built and the rest modified older versions), while the Netherlands had an additional 445 tanks. The 2A4 was licensed and manufactured in Switzerland as the Panzer 87 &quot;Leopard&quot; or Pz 87. This version included Swiss-built MG 87 machine guns and communications equipment and featured an improved NBC protection system. Switzerland operated 380 Pz 87 tanks.

After 2000, Germany and the Netherlands found themselves with large stocks of tanks that they had no need for after the Cold War. These tanks were sold to NATO or friendly armies around the world. Among these buyers of the surplus tanks were Turkey (purchasing 354 vehicles), Greece (183), Sweden (leased 160), Chile (140), Finland (139), Poland (128), Austria (114), Spain (108), Canada (107), Indonesia (103), Singapore (96), Norway (52), Denmark (51), and Portugal (37).
The &quot;Pz 87WE&quot; (&quot;WertErhaltung&quot;) is a planned Swiss modification and upgrade of the Pz 87. The modification significantly improves protection through the addition of the Leopard 2A6M&#x27;s mine protection kit, thicker armour on the front glacis, and a turret equipped with a Swiss-developed armour package using titanium alloy. The turret roof armour is improved and the smoke grenade launchers are redesigned. Further improvements enhance survivability and combat capabilities, such as a turret electric drive similar to the Leopard 2A5, a driver rearview camera, an independent weapons station for the loader, and enhanced command and control systems. The fire control system is upgraded, using the Carl Zeiss Optronics GmbH PERI-R17A2 fire control system. A remote weapons station containing a fully stabilised Mg 64 machine gun is fitted to the tank.

The Swiss company RUAG offered an upgrade package for Pz 87 main battle tanks to meet a possible requirement of the Swiss Army for improved protection. It is fitted with a new modular composite armour package. Armour modules can be tailored to provide enhanced protection against a specific threat. Damaged modules can be easily replaced in field conditions. Upgraded tanks are less vulnerable to direct hits, anti-tank missiles, RPG rounds, mines, and IEDs. The vehicle received new sensors such as a sniper detection sensor and a laser warning receiver. In 2021, the two prototypes with add-on armour were handed to the Militär- und Festungsmuseum Full-Reuenthal.
The Indonesian Army operates the &quot;Leopard 2 Republic Indonesia&quot; or &quot;Leopard 2RI&quot;, an upgraded variant based on Rheinmetall&#x27;s MBT Revolution upgrade for the Leopard 2A4 tank. The upgrade includes AMAP armour from IBD Deisenroth and Rheinmetall Chempro, improved fire control systems, and battlefield management and situational awareness systems.

The &quot;Pz 87–140&quot; is an experimental variant of the Swiss Pz 87 with a gun and additional armour, which was later used on the newer production variants.

The &quot;Leopard 2A4CHL&quot; is the upgraded Chilean version of the Leopard 2A4 ordered by Chile in 2007. Upgrades include new electronics, sighting, and information systems meant to elevate the Leopard 2A4&#x27;s networking capability to be equal to that of the Leopard 2A6, a new suspension system, and the upgrading of the tank main gun to the L/55 smoothbore cannon used on the Leopard 2A6. Other upgrades are remote weapon stations over the gunner and commander hatches fitted with the MG3 and HK GMG. The Leopard 2A4CHL has improved roof and side turret armour and can be uplinked with Chile&#x27;s battlefield control network.

The &quot;Leopard 2A4M CAN&quot; is the upgraded Canadian version of the Leopard 2A4 acquired from the Royal Netherlands Army surplus. The Leopard 2A4M CAN is specially designed for the war in Afghanistan, based on experience gained by Leopard 2 operators. The first 20 were delivered in October 2010. Five were deployed to Afghanistan at the end of 2010 and operated until July 2011, when combat operations stopped. Though originally planned to be up-gunned to the L/55 for consistency with the 2A6M CAN, the longer barrelled guns (optimised for tank-vs-tank warfare) were found to be less than ideal in Afghanistan, therefore it was decided to retain the L/44. Only small areas of slat armour were added, in contrast with the fully caged 2A6M CANs. The protection of the Leopard 2A4M CAN has been further augmented by the addition of applique armour resembling that found on the most recent Leopard 2A7+ variant, but modified to fit the turret configuration of the 2A4. Of the 2A4s acquired, 11 were converted for training use (nine A4s, two A4Ms). In February 2011, Canada bought 12 2A4s/Pz 87 from Switzerland for the &#x27;Force Mobility Enhancement&#x27; project which, along with the remaining unused ex-Dutch tanks, saw 18 converted to Armoured Engineering Vehicles and 4 converted to Armoured Recovery Vehicles. Canada has also purchased 15 2A4s from Germany as Logistic Stock Vehicles (for spare parts).

The &quot;Leopard 2NG&quot; (&quot;Next Generation&quot;) is a privately funded Turkish upgrade by ASELSAN that includes the application of AMAP, upgraded optics, completely overhauled turret mechanics, and a new fire control system on the work since 1995 and to be delivered by late 2011, which is intended to be used on the new Altay MBT. It was developed without an order from the Turkish Army, but might meet the requirements for the modernization of the Turkish Leopard 2A4s. The old powerpack and the L/44 gun barrel are kept, but the combat weight is increased to . According to Turkish news sources, Finland was interested in getting the Turkish upgrade package to modernise their fleet of Leopard 2A4s. However, in 2015, Finland purchased 120 2A6 vehicles from the Netherlands.

The Leopard 2 hull was used for the Vickers Mk 7 main battle tank, which featured a British-designed turret, where some of the innovations later were incorporated into the Challenger 2 design.

In December 2015, Bumar-Labedy signed an agreement with German Rheinmetall Landsysteme Gmbh concerning the technological support of the Polish modernization program for Leopard 2A4 tanks. The company will design, document, and execute six prototypes. The first upgraded Leopard 2PLs have arrived in Poland in June 2020, with all 142 tanks to be delivered by 2023. The upgrades include third generation night vision systems (production of the Warsaw PCO), new additional armour modules and anti-splash lining, removal of flammable components (turret drive system and main propulsion system), installation of the new fire protection system, modernization of the tank&#x27;s integrated monitoring and testing equipment, the possibility of using new types of ammunition (programmable DM-11 and DM-63), and an auxiliary generator set (APU). Construction of all 142 units will be completed by the end of 2020.

Turkey is planning to modernize its Leopard 2A4 MBTs as &quot;Leopard 2A4TR&quot; with the T1 Modernization Package. According to the Defense Industry Presidency, Leopard 2A4 tanks will be modernized with; Explosive Reactive Armour (ERA), T1 Reactive-Passive Armour, High Ballistic Strength Cage Armour, Hollow Modular Add-on Armour, Close Range Surveillance System (YAMGÖZ), Laser Warning Receiver System (LIAS), SARP Remote Controlled Weapon System (UKSS), PULAT Active Protection System (AKS), a new power distribution unit, ASELSAN Driver Surveillance System (ADİS) and voice alert system integrations. The modernization programme is to be completed in two batches. The programme will start with 84 Leopard 2A4 tanks in the first batch and the remaining tanks will be modernized within the 2nd batch. A total of 334 tanks (including prototypes) are planned to be upgraded with the T1 modernization programme. The new modernized Leopard 2A4 that was presented at the BMC factory was fitted with an Altay turret, which is armed with one 55 caliber smoothbore gun designed and manufactured by the Turkish Company MKE, based on a technology transfer from Hyundai Rotem of South Korea. A remote-controlled weapon station is mounted on the top of the turret which is armed with a caliber heavy machine gun.

====Leopard 2A4V====
On 1 September 2023, video on social media showed Ukrainian crews with 30 Leopard 2A4 upgraded with Kontakt ERA and T-80U style rubber screens, called &quot;Leopard 2A4V&quot; by observers. This followed previous sightings in Ukraine of a Canadian supplied Leopard 2A4 upgraded with Kontakt-1 ERA.

===Leopard 2 Marksman===

Finland has modernised its Marksman SPAAG vehicles by replacing the original T-55AM chassis with a newer Leopard 2A4 chassis. The upgraded Marksman vehicles were scheduled to enter service with the Finnish Army in 2016. The new Leopard 2 chassis greatly improves mobility compared to the older T-55AM chassis, both on- and off-road. The Leopard 2 chassis is larger, providing a more stable firing platform for the Marksman turret to operate from.

===Leopard 2 Imp===

&quot;Leopard 2 Improved&quot; was a series of three prototypes used to test possible further enhancements beyond the Leopard 2A4 model, developed beginning in 1988. After a concept phase, a component test bed (KVT, &quot;Komponentenversuchsträger&quot;) was built in 1989, followed by two troop trial vehicles (TVM, &quot;Truppenversuchsmuster&quot;). The Leopard 2 Improved was mostly focused on improving armour protection, introducing the wedge-shaped, spaced add-on armour at the turret front, as well as hull and roof add-on armour, greatly improving protection against hollow charge and kinetic energy threats. It does not form a shot-trap, since it does not deflect the penetrators outwards to hit the hull or turret ring. The gun mantlet was redesigned to accept the new armour. Aside of improved armour protection, these tanks also included improved optics, navigation systems and electronics.

Following the initial trials of the two TVM protoypes in Germany and an agreement of the Leopard 2 user states, the second TVM prototype was modified (becoming the TVM 2 mod.) by removing several parts such as the add-on hull and roof armour, becoming the basis for the Leopard 2A5 model. One Leopard 2 Improved (TVM 2) competed in Sweden against the Leclerc and M1A2 Abrams, leading to the adoption of the Stridsvagn 122.

===Leopard 2A5===
The Leopard 2 Improved was developed into the Leopard 2A5. Most of its improvements were focused on armour protection; it was enhanced by adding external add-on modules to the turret and replacing the turret&#x27;s internal armour modules with ones of newer, improved composition. The interior received spall liners to reduce fragments if the armour is penetrated. The commander&#x27;s sight was moved to a new position behind the hatch and it received an independent thermal channel. The gunner&#x27;s sight was moved to the turret roof as opposed to the cavity in the front armour in previous models. A heavier sliding driver&#x27;s hatch was fitted.

The hydraulic turret drives were replaced by an all-electric system, increasing reliability and crew safety, as well as weight savings. The gun braking system was improved to prepare for the later mounting of the new L/55 gun tube and to enable firing of more powerful ammunition, such as the DM53 APFSDS. The first A5s were handed over to the German army tank school in 1995 and started to enter regular service with Panzerbataillon 33 in December the same year.

The Leopard 2A5 DK is a variant of the Leopard 2A5 similar to the Leopard 2A6 with some small modifications, used by the Danish Army.

====Stridsvagn 122====

Stridsvagn 122 (also known as &quot;Leopard 2A5S&quot; and &quot;Leopard 2 &quot;Improved&quot; A5 SE&quot;
) is a Swedish Army tank based on the Leopard 2 Improved. 120 units were built, 91 of which were licence-produced in Sweden. The tank features increased armour on the turret top and front hull, and improved command-, control- and fire-control systems. Externally, it can be distinguished from the Leopard 2A5 by the French GALIX smoke dispensers, different storage bins, and the much thicker crew hatches. The Strv 122B+ Evolution, a variant equipped with modular AMAP composite armour from IBD Deisenroth, has increased 360° protection against threats like EFPs, RPGs and IEDs. The width of has been kept, while the weight increases by only .

===Leopard 2-140===
In the early 1990s, Rheinmetall began development of a smoothbore cannon for use in future tank designs. The new gun was intended to counter new Soviet tank developments, especially since the next generation of Soviet main battle tanks were rumoured to be armed with a or cannon. The new cannon was part of a modernisation programme for the Leopard 2 known as the KWS III. Test firing of the new cannon was conducted. Results showed that the gun had high penetration values, and had a muzzle velocity of around 2,000 metres a second, with potential to be increased further. However, the rounds were too heavy for the tank crew to handle effectively.

The KWS III upgrade was to feature a new turret. This new turret was equipped with the planned cannon and an autoloader. The introduction of an autoloader reduced the tank&#x27;s crew to three members, as a dedicated loader was no longer needed. The gun&#x27;s 32 rounds of ammunition were stored separate from the crew in a large compartment occupying the entire rear of the turret, in order to increase crew survivability in the event of a cook off. The turntable-style turret had the gun offset to the left side, due to the autoloader&#x27;s lateral feeding of ammunition into the cannon breech. The turret was powered by an electro-hydraulic drive and featured an IFIS battlefield management system. The crew was protected by an armoured capsule and ballistic protection for the hull was to be improved. The planned protection level of the KWS III upgrade was to be equal to or better than the Leopard 2A5.

A total of 650 Leopard 2 KWS III tanks were originally projected to be purchased. However, in 1995, the KWS III programme was cancelled due to 

Despite this, development continued on the cannon, with Rheinmetall coordinating with the British Royal Ordnance and French GIAT companies. The cannon was fitted to an old Leopard 2 prototype with the turret T19. Counterweights were added to the rear of the turret to balance the increased weight of the cannon. The modified Leopard 2 was not equipped with any other KWS III upgrades apart from the new gun. Live fire testing showed mixed results, where the cannon showed superior penetrating power compared to the existing cannon, but demonstrated poorer handling characteristics. The lack of the autoloader on the prototype further hampered performance.

===Leopard 2A6===
The Leopard 2A6 includes the addition of the Rheinmetall L/55 smoothbore gun and other changes. All German tank battalions of the &quot;crisis intervention forces&quot; are equipped with the A6. Canada purchased twenty Leopard 2A6s from the Netherlands. These were delivered in 2007. Portugal purchased 37 Leopard 2A6s from the Dutch in 2007, with delivery in 2008. In January 2014, Finland purchased 100 L2A6s, as well as munitions, simulators, and a ten-year supply of reserve parts from the Netherlands. The tanks were delivered in batches between 2015 and 2019.

The Leopard 2A6A1 is a command version of the Leopard 2A6, stemming from the KWS I programme. The vehicle includes additional radios (with the number depending on the level of command) to accommodate the communications for section, platoon, troop, company, squadron or battalion commanders. For section leaders, the vehicle is fitted with 1x SEM 80 and 1x SEM 90 VHF radios. For platoon or troop commanders, the vehicle is fitted with 1x SEM 80 and 1x SEM 90 VHF radios along with an 800m field telephone cable drum fitted at the rear of the vehicle. For company, squadron or battalion commanders the vehicle is fitted with 2x SEM 80 or 1x SEM 93 and 1x SEM 90 VHF radios along with an field telephone cable drum, for either fitted at the rear of the vehicle.

The Leopard 2A6M is a version of the 2A6 with enhanced mine protection under the chassis, and internal enhancements to improve crew survivability. In the summer of 2007, Canada borrowed 20 A6Ms from Germany for deployment to Afghanistan.
The Leopard 2 HEL (&quot;Hellenic&quot;) is a derivative of the 2A6 export variant, &quot;2A6EX&quot; with additional customization to meet the Greek needs. It has supplemental reinforcements on the upper glacis plate and crew hatches, as well as a full MEXAS package. Tactically and technically it is integrated with the NATO-interoperable INIOCHOS command and information system, as well as, a laser rangefinder and thermal imaging devices. It was ordered by the Greek Army in 2003 (in a package together with Leopard 1A5s) for 1.7 billion €, with 170 tanks delivered between 2006 and 2009. A total of 140 were built in Greece by ELBO, which delivered the first units in late 2006. They entered service with the Hellenic Army in 2008.

The Leopard 2A6M CAN is a Canadian variant of the Leopard 2A6M. Significant modifications include distinctive black boxes mounted on the rear of the turret bustle, and stand-off slat armour. The first tanks configured in this variant were 20 loaned from the German Bundeswehr in an effort to increase firepower and protection given to Canadian troops operating in the south of Afghanistan. The loaned tanks retain their German MG3 machine guns, the ex-Dutch tanks are also expected to retain their FN MAG machine guns due to commonality with Canadian stocks of C6 GPMG, itself a variant of the FN MAG.

Due to the loaned status of the first twenty tanks, the air conditioning unit originally could not be installed, as only minimal changes could be made. The crew wore cooling vests instead, and the turret&#x27;s electric drive generates less heat than the hydraulic drive of the older Leopard C2. The loaned German tanks will be kept by the Canadian Forces and may be further upgraded, while ex-Dutch Leopard 2A6s were modified to German Leopard 2A6M specifications and used as restitution for the loaned tanks. Canadian Leopard 2s in Afghanistan were later fitted with air conditioning units, a much-needed commodity in the scorching desert of Afghanistan, and Saab&#x27;s Barracuda camouflage mats, which reduce solar loading by 50 percent.

The Leopard 2A6TR was the Turkish variant during the Turkish Army tank procurement project in 2000. The version was based on 2A6EX. The project was dropped in favor of developing the indigenous Altay.

====Leopardo 2E====

The Leopard 2E is a derivative of the 2A6, with greater armour protection, developed under a programme of co-production between the defence industries of Spain and Germany. The programme was developed within the frame of collaboration decided in 1995 between the Defence Ministries of both countries, which also included the cession of use by period of five years of 108 Leopard 2A4 from the German Army to the Spanish Army. The session was extended up to 2016, and after that those tanks will be the sole property of the Spanish Army, as has been made public in January 2006, then having been paid a total of €15,124,014 in ten yearly installments, giving the Spanish co-ownership from 2006.

In 1998, the Spanish government agreed to locally build 219 tanks of the Leopard 2E line, 16 recovery tanks of Leopard 2ER (Buffalo), and 4 training vehicles. They chose Santa Bárbara Sistemas as the main contractor. The programme, with a budget of €1,939.4 million, includes integrated logistical support, training courses for crew instructors and maintenance engineers, and driving, turret, maintenance, aiming, and shooting simulators. Deliveries of the first batch began in 2004.

=== Leopard 2PL ===

The Leopard 2PL is a Polish modernized version of the Leopard 2A4, carried out in cooperation with Rheinmetall and the Polish Armaments Group (). The Leopard 2PL MBT is primarily tasked with assault, maintaining territory, and supporting mechanized and motorized subdivisions with its onboard weapon systems in all weather conditions during the day and night. The main upgrades when compared to the Leopard 2A4 include modernization of the commander&#x27;s and gunner&#x27;s sight, additional ballistic modules on the turret, replacement of the hydraulic stabilization system with a new electric system, and new fire extinguishing and fire suppression systems.

The upgrade included a new commander&#x27;s control and monitoring system, the installation of an auxiliary power unit (APU), a new turret stowage compartment for crew equipment, the modernization of its main gun to use new types of programmable ammunition, and the integration of day/night rear camera for drivers. Included are customized towing vehicles due to the increased weight of the upgraded tank. The upgraded 2PL version is in service with the Polish Land Forces. Of the Leopard 2A4s from the first (128) and the second (14) batches, 24 have been upgraded to Leopard 2PL standard. The rest will be upgraded to the 2PLM1 standard.

===Leopard 2 PSO===
The new Leopard 2 PSO (Peace Support Operations) variant is designed especially for urban warfare, which had been encountered in peacekeeping operations with increasing frequency. The Leopard 2 PSO is equipped with more effective all-around protection, a secondary weapons station, improved reconnaissance ability, an obstacle clearance blade (OCB), a shorter gun barrel for manoeuvring on urban streets at the expense of fire range, non-lethal armament, close-range surveillance ability through camera systems, a searchlight and further changes to improve its perseverance and mobility in built-up non-wide open areas. These features are similar to the Tank Urban Survival Kit for the American M1A2 Abrams.

The vehicle was purely a tech demonstrator, which eventually lead to the development of the Leopard 2A7+.

===Leopard 2A7===
The Leopard 2A7 vehicle is not intended to be optimized for combat in urban terrain, thus it is fundamentally different from the KMW variant, the: &quot;2A7+&quot; (see below). A total of 20 vehicles were provided for converting. It involves former Dutch A6NL models returned by Canada to Germany. The original upgrade to A6M has been extended in coordination with Canada and includes a crew-compartment cooling-system from the Leopard 2 A6M-HEL series, a new auxiliary power unit based on the Steyr Motors M12 TCA UI engine, the Saab Barracuda Mobile Camouflage System (MCS) with Heat-Transfer Reduction (HTR CoolCam) system, a field trial proven combat management and information system (IFIS: &quot;Integriertes Führungs- und Informationssystem&quot;), onboard network optimization with ultracapacitors in the chassis and turret, a SOTAS IP digital intercom system, a renewal of the fire suppression system in the crew compartment, and the retrofitting of Attica thermal imaging module in the commander optics.

The weapon system is adapted for firing HE ammunition. It is fitted for, but not with, additional passive side protection armour. The first Leopard 2A7 was handed over to the German Army in Munich in December 2014. 14 vehicles were produced for Tank Battalion 203, 4 went to the Armoured Corps Training Centre and one vehicle went to the Technical School for Land Systems and School for Technology of the Army. The last tank remains as a reference vehicle at KMW.

The Leopard 2A7V (The V stands for &quot;verbessert&quot; which is German for improved) is a variant of the Leopard 2A7 which is currently in-service the Bundeswehr. It features improved cameras for the commander and gunner. In addition, the rear view camera for the driver is added. The 120mm barrel has been hardened, allowing the ability to fire more modern extended-range ammunition, increasing effective range up to 5,000 metres. Another thing is the Battle Management System feature for digital electronics have been added, allowing better coordination with friendly forces. Next, the chassis have been additionally reinforced by an additional protection module at the front to counteract armour-piercing ammunition, to make up for the increase weight of the additional armour, it&#x27;s equipped with a improved/more powerful drive system and drive train.

The Danish Armed Forces received its first Leopard 2A7 main battle tanks upgraded in Germany from the Leopard 2A5DK version at the Dragoon Barracks in Holstebro. The Danish Army will receive a total of 44 Leopard 2A7 vehicles by 2022.

Siemon T. Wezeman, senior researcher at SIPRI&#x27;s arms transfers and military expenditure programme, stated that information from the UN Register of Conventional Arms 2016, indicated that some Leopard 2A7s were transferred to Singapore after 2014. SIPRI reported that the Singapore Army probably acquired a total of 45 Leopard 2A7s between 2016 and 2019, but the Singapore&#x27;s Ministry of Defence denied having acquired the 2A7 version, presumably to minimise anxiety among her neighbours.

In February 2023, Norway ordered 54 Leopard 2A7 tanks to be delivered from 2026, with a further option for 18 vehicles if necessary. This order was later changed into a newly specified 2A8 NOR subvariant of the 2A8.

===Leopard 2A7+===
The Leopard 2A7+ was first shown to the public during the Eurosatory 2010, featuring the label &quot;Developed by KMW – tested and qualified by the German Ministry of Defence&quot;. The Leopard 2A7+ has been tested by the Bundeswehr under the name &quot;UrbOp&quot; (urban operations).

The Leopard 2A7+ is designed to operate both in low-intensity and high-intensity conflicts. The tank&#x27;s protection has been increased by modular armour. The frontal protection has been improved with a dual kit on the turret and hull front, while 360° protection against RPGs and mine protection increase the survivability of the tank in urban operations. The modular armour&#x27;s system components were first used by Canada in Afghanistan. It can fire programmable High Explosive munitions. The turret-mounted MG3 has been replaced with a stabilised FLW 200 remotely controlled weapon station. Mobility, sustainability, and situational awareness have also been improved.

In December 2018, Hungary ordered forty-four 2A7+s (subvariant 2A7HU), making them the second operator of the improved version, after Qatar.

===Leopard 2A8===

The Leopard 2A8 will be based on the current Leopard 2A7HU production model but feature additional improvements; among them the integration of the Trophy active protection system and an all-round situational awareness system with sensor-fusion capability.

====Orders====
To replace the eighteen Leopard 2A6 tanks handed over to the Armed Forces of Ukraine, the German Ministry of Defence begun planning a purchase a batch of eighteen Leopard 2A8 tanks (with the option for a further 105) in May 2023. In July 2024, Germany&#x27;s budget committee approved a purchase of the remaining 105 tanks, in a contract worth 2.93 bln €. Deliveries are planned between 2027 and 2030 and some ordered tanks will be used by the 45th Panzer Brigade, which, at the time of purchase, was deployed in Lithuania.

The Czech Ministry of Defense started negotiations for the purchase of 70–77 Leopard 2A8 in May 2023, including domestic manufacturing rights for aspects of the tank production. Czech government approved the purchase in June 2024, with the final order being for 77 tanks delivered by 2030, for an estimated 52 billion Czech crowns.

In July 2023 Lithuanian MoD announced that the Leopard 2A8 proved to be the only tank to meet the requirements set by the ministry, leading to the rejection of bids of the M1 Abrams and K2 Black Panther tanks. In January 2024 Lithuanian State Defence Council agreed to purchase the tanks and associated support vehicles to equip a Tank Battalion, but the final cost and the number of vehicles remained a subject of negotiations. In December 2024 Lithuania signed a confirmation of 44 Leopard 2A8 tanks acquisition contract.

On 12 July 2023 Italian government confirmed during a Parliament audition that Italy intends to purchase up to 250 Leopard 2A8 tanks from 2023 to 2025. Procurement was completed on 21 February 2024, resulting in the final order of 132 Leopard 2A8 tanks and 130 other vehicles for a total of 8.5 billion € with the deliveries scheduled to be completed by 2037.

In August 2023 Dutch MoD begun planning a procurement of up to 52 Leopard 2A8 tanks in addition to their eighteen leased Leopard 2A6 tanks. This planned acquisition is part of the nation&#x27;s effort to rebuild their army after severe budget cuts of the 21st century. In February 2024 it came out that the Dutch budget for 2024 did not allocate any funding for the purchase. In early September 2024 the new government announced that an undefined number of Leopard 2A8 tanks would be ordered. This is now possible because of the new government allocated additional funding exceeding 2% of their GDP.

In December 2024, Lithuania signed a contract to acquire 44 Leopard 2A8 tanks from KNDS Germany for €950 million. This deal provides Lithuania’s newly established tank brigade—its first since regaining independence in 1991. The procurement was finalized alongside an agreement to station a German Army brigade within Lithuanian territory by 2027, aligning logistics and maintenance efforts with NATO standards in the Baltic region. The procured main battle tanks are confirmed to feature Trophy APS and next-generation digitalized systems.

In January 2025 it was announced that Sweden had signed a deal with KNDS Deutschland worth $1.97 billion for the purchase of 44 Leopard 2A8s and the upgrading of 66 Strv 122s.

====Leopard 2A8 NOR====
The Norwegian armed forces&#x27; order of fifty-four Leopard 2A7NOs was changed into a new 2A8 NOR variant by the middle of June 2023. A variety of Norwegian changes and alterations necessitated the renaming of the original 2A7NO into a unique new 2A8 NOR variant. This subvariant mainly differs from the German 2A8 by integrating a Norwegian-designed C4IS-solution that includes Kongsberg&#x27;s ICS/CORTEX-solution and Teleplan Globe&#x27;s FACNAV/norBMS battlefield management system.

===Leopard 2 A-RC 3.0===
Variant presented in June 2024 at the Eurosatory exhibition. It is equipped with an unmanned turret armed with a smoothbore gun fed by a modular linear autoloader, the gun can be exchanged for a or gun, the auto loader is capable of loading 3 rounds in 10 seconds. Its secondary armament consists of a RWCS armed with a 30x113mm cannon capable of countering drone threats and an anti-tank missile. The weapon suite can be configured for 3D line-of-sight (LOS) and non-line-of-sight (NLOS) engagement. For its protection, it has a proven active protection system and smoke grenade launcher. It weighs less than , measures , extending to with the barrel, wide and high to the roof of the turret. Its engine generates , allowing the tank to move at a speed of and its autonomy is . It has a crew of 3 men, commander, driver and gunner, all located inside the chassis.

===Engineering and driver training tanks===
Bergepanzer BPz3 Büffel (Gr. Buffalo): The BPz3 armoured recovery vehicle includes both a bulldozer and a crane with integral winch, allowing it to approach damaged vehicles, even over rough and fought-over terrain, and tow them to safety. It is equipped with a machine gun for local self-defence, a smoke grenade launcher, and NBC protection. Like the tank, it is powered by a diesel engine. It is in service with Germany (where it is also designated &quot;Büffel&quot; or &quot;Bergepanzer 3&quot; for Salvage Tank 3), the Netherlands with 25 vehicles (who co-developed it with Germany and calls it &quot;Buffel&quot;), Canada, Greece, Singapore (where it is called &quot;L2-ARV&quot; locally), Spain (where it is called &quot;Leopard 2ER Búfalo&quot;), Sweden (in modified form as the &quot;Bärgningsbandvagn 120; Bgbv 120&quot;) and Switzerland (&quot;BPz3&quot;).

Panzerschnellbrücke 2: This vehicle, created by MAN Mobile Bridges GmbH, is an armoured vehicle-launched bridge developed from the Leopard 2 tank chassis. It is designed to carry a folding mobile bridge, which it can &quot;launch&quot; across a river. Once emplaced, the bridge is sturdy enough to support most vehicles, even other Leopard tanks. When the crossing is complete, the bridge layer simply hooks up to the bridge and re-stows it.

Panzerschnellbrücke Leguan: This modular system combines a bridge module created by MAN Mobile Bridges GmbH with a tank chassis. The Bundeswehr is testing the on a Leopard 2 chassis.

AEV 3 Kodiak: The AEV 3 Kodiak is a combat engineering vehicle conversion of the Leopard 2 used by Germany, the Netherlands, Singapore, Sweden, and Switzerland. It is equipped with a bulldozer blade, excavator arm, and dual capstan winches. In lieu of a turret, a Remote Weapon Station or other armaments can be fitted. It is built on the Leopard 2 chassis with a built-up forward superstructure. The vehicle is used primarily for the clearance of obstacles, including minefields. The Dutch version has additional bomblet protection for the crew compartments. Spain may procure 24 examples for the Spanish Army from converted Leopard 2A4 hulls (one vehicle has been trialled in Spain) and the type will be offered to Germany. 

Driver Training Tank (Fahrschulpanzer): The Leopard 2 Driver Training Tank, as the name implies, is a non-combatant Leopard 2 for instructing soldiers in the finer points of handling the tank. The turret is supplanted by a weighted and fixed observation cab with forward and side-facing windows and a dummy gun. The instructor rides in this cab, with override controls for critical systems, and space is provided for two other students to observe.

Leopard 2R: A heavy breaching and de-mining vehicle developed by Patria for the Finnish Army, based on the Leopard 2A4. Six vehicles were converted. The vehicles are equipped with a mine plough or a dozer blade, and an automated marking system. All were donated to Ukraine in 2023.

Leopard 2L : An armoured vehicle-launched bridge developed by KMW and Patria for the Finnish Army. Ten Finnish 2A4 tanks were rebuilt to carry the LEGUAN bridge.

WISENT 2: A multi-purpose, Leopard 2–based Armoured Support Vehicle developed by Flensburger Fahrzeugbau. The vehicle&#x27;s modular design allows it to be converted quickly from an Armoured Recovery Vehicle (ARV) to an Armoured Engineer Vehicle (AEV) in less than five hours.

==Technical data==
==Operators==
===Current operators===


===Future operators===

* : Croatia is negotiating a purchase of 30+ Leopard 2A8 tanks (very likely 75+15 support tanks) in an initial deal worth around €1 billion. In the past former SPD government under the Milanović Government was negotiating the purchase of up to 50 tanks with spare parts and a support package including spare engines, tank transporters, and engineering vehicles valued at 875 million kunas. Negotiations with Germany over the purchase of stored Leopard 2A5 tanks were underway in 2014 and 2015. The purchase would have coincided with the purchase of PzH 2000 howitzers. Due to budget constraints, at least for the time being, the vehicles were not purchased. The Croatian Ministry of Defence is looking to replace its M-84A4 tanks currently in use. In 2023 the Croatian government announced it could donate its Yugoslav era M-84 tank fleet to Ukraine in exchange for Leopard 2 tanks from Germany. In October 2024. Croatian defense minister Ivan Anušić signed letter of intent with German defense minister Boris Pistorius for Croatia buying up to 50 Leopard 2A8.

=== Failed bids ===
* : The Australian Army evaluated ex-Swiss Army Leopard 2s as a replacement for its Leopard 1AS tanks in 2003, but selected the M1A1 AIM instead due to easier logistics. More modern versions of the Leopard 2 or M1 Abrams, such as the Leopard 2A6, were not considered due to their higher price.
* : The Bulgarian Ministry of Defence has been interested in purchasing a minimum of 24 units of the Leopard 2A6 variant. The deal has received support from a military budget increase to 2% of GDP by 2016 in the new Bulgarian budget, and a military pledge to spend €2.2 billion on new armaments for the Bulgarian military. As of 2023 no purchase has been made of the Leopard 2, and the Bulgarian government instead purchased 183 Stryker armoured vehicles from the United States as part of its efforts to modernize its army. 
* : In March 2023 it was reported that the Italian Army was considering the purchase of up to 250 Leopard 2A7 tanks for roughly €8 billion. In July of the same year, Italy&#x27;s Defence undersecretary Isabella Rauti said that her government is planning to buy no less than 125 Leopard 2A8 MBT and support variants, with initial funds worth 4 billion euros ($4.5 billion) from 2024 (inside the multi-year defence budget of 2023–2025) to purchase the new tanks and upgrade other military hardware. On 22 February 2024 the Italian Parliament&#x27;s Defence Committee approved the acquisition of 132 main battle tanks and up to 140 support variants. The variants include an armoured engineering vehicle, an armoured recovery vehicle Büffel, and an armoured vehicle-launched bridge. In the end, the agreement with KNDS didn&#x27;t go through, and Leonardo collaborated with Rheinmetall, and will purchase tanks based on the KF-51 Panther.
* : The Dutch Army offered its formerly operated Leopard 2A6s for comparative tests to be conducted by the Peruvian Army for possible acquisition.By September 2013, the Leopard 2A6 had been disqualified by Peru due to logistical complexities.
* : As part of a modernization program, since 2019 the Romanian Army has been considering the acquisition of Leopard 2 tanks. However, in March 2023 Romania&#x27;s Ministry of Defense announced they had opted to purchase around 54 M1 Abrams tanks from the United States.
* : The Saudi Arabian government sought to buy Leopard 2A7s (total of 600–800 desired). In early July 2011, the German press reported that the &quot;Bundessicherheitsrat&quot; () approved the sale by KMW of more than 200 units of the 2A7+ tanks to Saudi Arabia. This news was met with criticism both inside and outside of Germany, because of the autocratic nature of the Saudi Arabian state and its involvement in repressing popular protests in the neighbouring country of Bahrain. Criticism also came from within the Chancellor Angela Merkel&#x27;s government coalition, and later from within KMW. In June 2012, reports surfaced that Saudi Arabia had raised the number of tanks it was interested in to 600–800. A contract was never finalized, and the issue was debated both in the German public and in Germany&#x27;s federal parliament. In April 2014, a German newspaper reported that the deal for Leopard 2 tanks for Saudi Arabia was likely to be cancelled due to opposition from the Federal Economy Minister at that time, Social Democrat Sigmar Gabriel. In 2015, Germany blocked the sale of Leopard 2 tanks to Saudi Arabia. In 2016, the Saudi Arabian ambassador to Germany stated that Saudi Arabia was no longer interested in purchasing Leopard tanks and suggested that the issue was being exploited for internal political gain.
* : The Slovenian government had announced its intention to send its tank fleet of old Yugoslav M-84 and Soviet T-72 tanks to Ukraine in exchange for German Leopard 2 tanks and Marder Infantry Fighting Vehicles in 2022. But Slovenia then provided Ukraine with only older T-55 Soviet tanks prompting Germany to withhold its promised Leopard 2 tanks and giving only Marder Infantry Fighting Vehicles to Slovenia.
* : The Leopard 2 was tested by the United Kingdom. In 1989 the Leopard 2 was evaluated as a possible replacement for the Challenger 1 tank. Ultimately the British armed forces decided to adopt the locally made Challenger 2.

==See also==
* Leopard 1
* List of main battle tanks by generation
* Main Ground Combat System
* Panther KF51
* Tanks in the German Army

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
* 


==External links==
* Army Vehicles.DK Leopard 2A5
* Army Vehicles.DK Leopard 2A4
* Military Periscope – Leopard 2 main battle tank
* Fprado.com – Kampfpanzer Leopard 2
* Leopard 2A5 
* A Finnish Army Leopard 2A4 firing from a hull-down position
* A Finnish Leopard 2A4 firing, videoed from inside the turret
* Danish Leopard 2A5
* Singapore Leopard 2A4 MBT</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151968" start="4" end="13" title="Leopard 2" label="Leopard 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392043" start="19" end="35" title="List of main battle tanks by generation" label="third generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="43" end="59" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q646220" start="80" end="93" title="Krauss-Maffei Wegmann" label="Krauss-Maffei"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="166" end="175" title="Leopard 1" label="Leopard 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322507" start="207" end="223" title="German Army" label="West German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="292" end="315" title="Bundeswehr" label="armed forces of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="726" end="732" title="Gun turret#Combat vehicles" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="823" end="838" title="Vehicle armour#Appliqué" label="appliqué armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="920" end="930" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147948" start="931" end="944" title="Rheinmetall Rh-120" label="120 mm cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161544" start="953" end="964" title="Rheinmetall" label="Rheinmetall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="998" end="1017" title="Fire-control system" label="fire control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426632" start="1019" end="1036" title="laser rangefinder" label="laser rangefinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353651" start="1051" end="1063" title="night vision" label="night vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q245272" start="1113" end="1116" title="V12 engine" label="V12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657116" start="1117" end="1127" title="twin-turbo" label="twin-turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q548006" start="1150" end="1169" title="MTU Friedrichshafen" label="MTU Friedrichshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="1231" end="1264" title="Kosovo Force" label="peacekeeping operations in Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123768" start="1280" end="1285" title="Royal Netherlands Army" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575188" start="1287" end="1293" title="Royal Danish Army" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="1298" end="1306" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="1352" end="1370" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="1408" end="1447" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q501053" start="1463" end="1470" title="Turkish Armed Forces" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208094" start="1491" end="1506" title="Turkish involvement in the Syrian civil war" label="action in Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q936105" start="1520" end="1529" title="Ukraine Armed Forces" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="1571" end="1590" title="Russo-Ukrainian war" label="Russo-Ukrainian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="1635" end="1644" title="Leopard 1" label="Leopard 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="1671" end="1682" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q707466" start="1791" end="1797" title="MBT-70" label="MBT-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="2110" end="2117" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2182" end="2196" title="Leopard 1#Gilded Leopard, Eber and Keiler" label="Gilded Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275913" start="2304" end="2314" title="autoloader" label="autoloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="2326" end="2336" title="autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="3018" end="3020" title="Deutsche Mark" label="DM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318674" start="3147" end="3154" title="testbed" label="testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q493353" start="4411" end="4437" title="Federal Ministry of Defence (Germany)" label="German Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43191856" start="5095" end="5113" title="Paul-Werner Krapke" label="Paul-Werner Krapke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="5767" end="5777" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640331" start="5891" end="5916" title="hydropneumatic suspension" label="hydropneumatic suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q908333" start="6027" end="6055" title="Auxiliary power unit" label="auxiliary power units (APUs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q956949" start="6472" end="6477" title="Military Load Classification" label="MLC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="7037" end="7051" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q966330" start="7440" end="7457" title="composite armour" label="multilayer armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="7688" end="7704" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="7709" end="7723" title="AEG Telefunken" label="AEG Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q62237" start="7834" end="7845" title="Georg Leber" label="Georg Leber"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7854" end="7856" title="United States of America" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q171989" start="7869" end="7889" title="James R. Schlesinger" label="James R. Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="8090" end="8100" title="M1 Abrams" label="XM1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="8642" end="8669" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426632" start="9646" end="9663" title="laser rangefinder" label="laser rangefinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="9776" end="9782" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542505" start="10807" end="10809" title="Royal Ordnance L7" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="Q161544" start="10924" end="10935" title="Rheinmetall" label="Rheinmetall"/>
<link wikidata="Q176856" start="10987" end="11003" title="Atlas Elektronik" label="Atlas Elektronik"/>
<link wikidata="Q899183" start="11133" end="11148" title="FMC Corporation" label="FMC Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893981" start="12143" end="12151" title="Honeywell AGT1500" label="AGT-1500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438892" start="13502" end="13523" title="Gun stabilizer" label="stabilization systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q830816" start="15742" end="15749" title="Munster Training Area" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q861692" start="16446" end="16463" title="image intensifier" label="image intensifier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18102" end="18125" title="Rheinmetall 120 mm gun#Rh-120 L/44 120 mm" label="Rheinmetall 120 mm L/44"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18209" end="18213" title="Rheinmetall 120 mm gun#Rh-120 L/55 120 mm" label="L/55"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632676" start="19466" end="19495" title="explosively formed penetrator" label="explosively formed penetrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q194565" start="19963" end="19978" title="Welt am Sonntag" label="Welt am Sonntag"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="19998" end="20006" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q192757" start="20071" end="20075" title="T-90" label="T-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q237135" start="20109" end="20113" title="T-80" label="T-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q242398" start="20752" end="20759" title="Leclerc tank" label="Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754406" start="20909" end="20934" title="Main Ground Combat System" label="Main Ground Combat System"/>
<link wikidata="Q333043" start="21085" end="21109" title="active protection system" label="active protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147948" start="21269" end="21273" title="Rheinmetall 120 mm gun" label="L/55"/>
<link wikidata="Q19003618" start="21399" end="21410" title="T-14 Armata" label="T-14 Armata"/>
<link wikidata="Q296600" start="21435" end="21443" title="Arena (countermeasure)" label="Afghanit"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="21515" end="21519" title="ATGM" label="ATGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566984" start="21627" end="21633" title="spaced armour" label="spaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q672645" start="22037" end="22054" title="Chobham armour" label="Burlington armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q284813" start="22338" end="22351" title="shaped charge" label="shaped charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624303" start="22445" end="22492" title="armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot" label="armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="23056" end="23088" title="Rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q265653" start="23813" end="23845" title="CBRN defense" label="nuclear, biological and chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="23958" end="23961" title="Pascal (unit)" label="hPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151641" start="24515" end="24520" title="Halomethane" label="halon"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="26578" end="26602" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q571616" start="26635" end="26646" title="slat armor" label="slat armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926194" start="26775" end="26780" title="MEXAS" label="MEXAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q294603" start="26785" end="26819" title="Advanced Modular Armor Protection" label="Advanced Modular Armour Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156840" start="27251" end="27257" title="Trophy (countermeasure)" label="Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333043" start="27262" end="27286" title="active protection system" label="active protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="27290" end="27296" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q670061" start="28054" end="28058" title="RHAe" label="RHAe"/>
<link wikidata="Q762201" start="28292" end="28325" title="Federation of American Scientists" label="Federation of American Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q60124" start="29772" end="29796" title="high-explosive anti-tank" label="high-explosive anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133085" start="29992" end="30006" title="bore evacuator" label="bore evacuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="30131" end="30155" title="glass-reinforced plastic" label="glass-reinforced plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q595013" start="30377" end="30382" title="LAHAT" label="LAHAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q842031" start="30629" end="30633" title="MG 3 machine gun" label="MG 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q842066" start="30680" end="30686" title="FN MAG" label="FN MAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q666547" start="30724" end="30729" title="MG 51" label="MG 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="31004" end="31035" title="M2 Browning" label="Browning M2HB Heavy Machine Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q422717" start="31343" end="31368" title="mercury cadmium telluride" label="mercury cadmium telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="31403" end="31423" title="thermographic camera" label="thermographic camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q548006" start="32721" end="32724" title="MTU Friedrichshafen" label="MTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="32768" end="32771" title="Revolutions per minute" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="32779" end="32785" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33127" end="33140" title="Renk HSWL 354" label="Renk HSWL 354"/>
<link wikidata="Q84115" start="33243" end="33259" title="torque converter" label="torque converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572417" start="33771" end="33784" title="EuroPowerPack" label="EuroPowerPack"/>
<link wikidata="Q668566" start="33867" end="33889" title="torsion bar suspension" label="torsion bar suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154740" start="34062" end="34076" title="drive sprocket" label="drive sprocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q86518041" start="34306" end="34313" title="grouser" label="grouser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918609" start="34487" end="34494" title="Vehicle snorkel" label="snorkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="35142" end="35162" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q327038" start="35884" end="35899" title="Armed forces of the Netherlands" label="The Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17374096" start="36385" end="36412" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q15859754" start="36421" end="36449" title="Russian occupation of Crimea" label="Russian occupation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q332844" start="36853" end="36863" title="Swiss Army" label="Swiss Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q68978" start="37191" end="37195" title="Thun" label="Thun"/>
<link wikidata="Q684337" start="37342" end="37350" title="strv 103" label="strv 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q783911" start="37357" end="37363" title="Swedish Armed Forces" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="37556" end="37562" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q237135" start="37563" end="37567" title="T-80" label="T-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623719" start="37960" end="37985" title="Stridsvagn 122" label="stridsvagn 122 (strv 122)"/>
<link wikidata="Q646220" start="38167" end="38188" title="Krauss-Maffei Wegmann" label="Krauss-Maffei Wegmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q890353" start="38247" end="38253" title="Bofors" label="Bofors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38258" end="38267" title="BAE Systems AB#Subsidiaries#BAE Systems Hägglunds" label="Hägglunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501564" start="38711" end="38730" title="Defence Act of 2000 (Sweden)" label="Defence Act of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778219" start="38890" end="38902" title="AEV 3 Kodiak" label="AEV 3 Kodiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047443" start="38903" end="38931" title="Military engineering vehicle" label="armoured engineering vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q996525" start="38977" end="38998" title="Armoured vehicle-launched bridge" label="armoured bridgelayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q276291" start="39171" end="39178" title="Danish Defence" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q25060151" start="39255" end="39271" title="Army Combat and Fire Support Centre" label="Hærens Kampskole"/>
<link wikidata="Q828422" start="39586" end="39592" title="Hellenic Armed Forces" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="39654" end="39667" title="Hellenic Army" label="Hellenic Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q234676" start="39718" end="39730" title="Challenger 2" label="Challenger 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q373788" start="39766" end="39770" title="T-84" label="T-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q326991" start="39959" end="39964" title="Spanish Armed Forces" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110120" start="40043" end="40048" title="Lince (tank)" label="Lince"/>
<link wikidata="Q837844" start="40129" end="40151" title="Santa Bárbara Sistemas" label="Santa Bárbara Sistemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q86757476" start="40238" end="40253" title="Vickers MBT Mark 4" label="Vickers Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q282696" start="40408" end="40414" title="Polish Armed Forces" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q327042" start="40538" end="40545" title="Finnish Defence Forces" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="40715" end="40719" title="T-55" label="T-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="40724" end="40728" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q248710" start="40794" end="40801" title="Military of Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="40809" end="40815" title="Canadian Army" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384177" start="40831" end="40837" title="Norwegian Army" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542269" start="40845" end="40853" title="Portuguese Army" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="40893" end="40900" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="41157" end="41181" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="Norwegian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q467948" start="41183" end="41200" title="Jonas Gahr Stoere" label="Jonas Gahr Stoere"/>
<link wikidata="Q495177" start="41521" end="41537" title="K2 Black Panther" label="K2 Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q501053" start="41664" end="41670" title="Turkish Armed Forces" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41842" end="41854" title="T-84#T-84-120 Yatagan" label="T-84 Yatagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="42035" end="42044" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745472" start="42093" end="42098" title="Chilean Army" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q523029" start="42146" end="42156" title="Marder (IFV)" label="Marder 1A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="42157" end="42161" title="Infantry fighting vehicle" label="IFVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q855515" start="42171" end="42180" title="Indonesian National Armed Forces" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897697" start="42560" end="42565" title="Qatar Armed Forces" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q156968" start="42602" end="42621" title="Panzerhaubitze 2000" label="Panzerhaubitze 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="42940" end="42956" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="43664" end="43673" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q111889083" start="43767" end="43777" title="2022 Ramstein Air Base meeting" label="conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="43804" end="43808" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44431" end="44445" title="Jessica Berlin" label="Jessica Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q636296" start="44467" end="44494" title="List of German defence ministers" label="Federal Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083648" start="44495" end="44514" title="Christine Lambrecht" label="Christine Lambrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q568605" start="44569" end="44604" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Germany)" label="German minister for foreign affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q564328" start="44606" end="44623" title="Annalena Baerbock" label="Annalena Baerbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="44952" end="44963" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="44988" end="45005" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="German Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q61053" start="45007" end="45018" title="Olaf Scholz" label="Olaf Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="45188" end="45198" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q893758" start="45427" end="45442" title="Boris Pistorius" label="Boris Pistorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q636296" start="45448" end="45471" title="List of German defence ministers" label="German defence minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="45680" end="45689" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="45877" end="45885" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="46802" end="46812" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q161544" start="46849" end="46860" title="Rheinmetall" label="Rheinmetall"/>
<link wikidata="Q676078" start="47663" end="47685" title="National Council (Switzerland)" label="Swiss National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="47957" end="47972" title="Decommission (ship)" label="decommissioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315114" start="48733" end="48749" title="Minister of National Defence (Canada)" label="Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q67442310" start="48751" end="48762" title="Anita Anand" label="Anita Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="49185" end="49199" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="49201" end="49215" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230631" start="50370" end="50378" title="NATO Enhanced Forward Presence" label="NATO EFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558" start="51183" end="51204" title="President of Finland" label="The Finnish President"/>
<link wikidata="Q29207" start="51206" end="51220" title="Sauli Niinistö" label="Sauli Niinistö"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467367" start="52066" end="52091" title="2023 Pentagon document leaks" label="Leaked Pentagon documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058109" start="52467" end="52481" title="Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q57792" start="52482" end="52492" title="Mark Rutte" label="Mark Rutte"/>
<link wikidata="Q877631" start="52513" end="52529" title="Dutch government" label="Dutch government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919832" start="53550" end="53566" title="Bjørn Arild Gram" label="Bjørn Arild Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q190238" start="53621" end="53624" title="NRK" label="NRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723031" start="54422" end="54436" title="Prime Minister of Portugal" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q610788" start="54437" end="54450" title="António Costa" label="António Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q116343904" start="56546" end="56575" title="Ukraine Defense Contact Group" label="Ukraine Defense Contact Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997107" start="56621" end="56637" title="Margarita Robles" label="Margarita Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q837844" start="57178" end="57200" title="Santa Bárbara Sistemas" label="Santa Bárbara Sistemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q494781" start="57210" end="57228" title="Alcalá de Guadaira" label="Alcalá de Guadaira"/>
<link wikidata="Q920108" start="57850" end="57877" title="Minister of Defence (Sweden)" label="Swedish minister of defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q27299991" start="57878" end="57888" title="Pål Jonson" label="Pål Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="58098" end="58110" title="Kosovo Force" label="Kosovo Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="58177" end="58192" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200061" start="58196" end="58203" title="Prizren" label="Prizren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280140" start="58289" end="58302" title="show of force" label="show of force"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="58340" end="58346" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967767" start="58361" end="58375" title="Prizren incident (1999)" label="started firing"/>
<link wikidata="Q618492" start="58390" end="58399" title="Fiat 125p" label="Fiat 125p"/>
<link wikidata="Q733155" start="58676" end="58684" title="Orahovac, Kosovo" label="Orahovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="59083" end="59101" title="Bosnia-Herzegovina" label="Bosnia-Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q934612" start="59199" end="59206" title="Bugojno" label="Bugojno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017907" start="59208" end="59220" title="Novi Travnik" label="Novi Travnik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59222" end="59228" title="Sisava" label="Sisava"/>
<link wikidata="Q431305" start="59230" end="59237" title="Kneževo, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Knezevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254473" start="59239" end="59248" title="Maslovare" label="Maslovare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280434" start="59253" end="59258" title="Šujica, Tomislavgrad" label="Suica"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="59328" end="59338" title="Leopard C2" label="Leopard C2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500737" start="59353" end="59378" title="Stryker Mobile Gun System" label="Stryker Mobile Gun System"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="59416" end="59427" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763044" start="59453" end="59469" title="Operation Medusa" label="Operation Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="59485" end="59502" title="Canadian military" label="Canadian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="59579" end="59587" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q819577" start="59769" end="59794" title="armoured recovery vehicle" label="armoured recovery vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259400" start="59929" end="59975" title="Lord Strathcona&amp;#x27;s Horse (Royal Canadians)" label="Lord Strathcona&amp;#x27;s Horse (Royal Canadians)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="60034" end="60061" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q360390" start="60379" end="60391" title="Rick Hillier" label="Rick Hillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="60664" end="60671" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357463" start="60960" end="60981" title="Jydske Dragonregiment" label="Jydske Dragonregiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q462407" start="61055" end="61086" title="M113 armored personnel carrier" label="M113 armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8510" start="61894" end="61907" title="Helmand River" label="Helmand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q173821" start="62282" end="62298" title="Helmand Province" label="Helmand Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604714" start="62539" end="62561" title="Forward Operating Base" label="Forward Operating Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379863" start="62832" end="62852" title="Operation Red Dagger" label="Operation Red Dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q477326" start="62921" end="62937" title="Nad Ali District" label="Nad Ali District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="62964" end="62991" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="British Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q382421" start="63250" end="63254" title="M60 tank" label="M60s"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="63321" end="63337" title="Syrian Civil War" label="Syrian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="63346" end="63382" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q26690015" start="63401" end="63427" title="Operation Euphrates Shield" label="Operation Euphrates Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q298656" start="63569" end="63574" title="9K111 Fagot" label="Fagot"/>
<link wikidata="Q298659" start="63578" end="63585" title="9M113 Konkurs" label="Konkurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068744" start="63626" end="63632" title="Syrian Army" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q897614" start="63636" end="63646" title="Iraqi Army" label="Iraqi Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27915277" start="63723" end="63739" title="Battle of al-Bab" label="near al-Bab city"/>
<link wikidata="Q24609008" start="63785" end="63801" title="Amaq News Agency" label="Amaq News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6110890" start="64121" end="64138" title="Jack-in-the-box effect" label="turrets blown off"/>
<link wikidata="Q11244" start="64691" end="64726" title="SVBIED" label="car bombs driven by suicide bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q59200" start="64821" end="64833" title="9M133 Kornet" label="9M133 Kornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465940" start="65071" end="65106" title="Turkish military operation in Afrin" label="Turkish military operation in Afrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q434883" start="65971" end="65993" title="Altay main battle tank" label="Altay main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="66434" end="66453" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q118951092" start="66494" end="66515" title="2023 Ukrainian counteroffensive" label="2023 counteroffensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q171334" start="66545" end="66564" title="Zaporizhzhia Oblast" label="Zaporizhzhia Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4277416" start="66860" end="66874" title="Mala Tokmachka" label="Mala Tokmachka"/>
<link wikidata="Q32024" start="66927" end="66940" title="Sergey Shoigu" label="Sergey Shoigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="67254" end="67260" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q111889690" start="67381" end="67390" title="Oryx (website)" label="Oryx blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q28706818" start="67908" end="67931" title="33rd Mechanized Brigade (Ukraine)" label="33rd Mechanized Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023513" start="68042" end="68051" title="Kurakhove" label="Kurakhove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000446" start="68060" end="68068" title="Pokrovsk" label="Pokrovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28706818" start="68124" end="68147" title="33rd Mechanized Brigade (Ukraine)" label="33rd Mechanized Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023513" start="68208" end="68217" title="Kurakhove" label="Kurakhove"/>
<link wikidata="Q126009585" start="68360" end="68371" title="turtle tank" label="turtle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="73574" end="73579" title="M2 Browning machine gun" label="Mg 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859293" start="74238" end="74280" title="Swiss Military Museum" label="Militär- und Festungsmuseum Full-Reuenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144896" start="75316" end="75322" title="HK GMG" label="HK GMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047443" start="76696" end="76725" title="Military engineering vehicle" label="Armoured Engineering Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q819577" start="76745" end="76771" title="Armoured Recovery Vehicles" label="Armoured Recovery Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q297600" start="76966" end="76973" title="ASELSAN" label="ASELSAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376655" start="77691" end="77703" title="Vickers MBT Mark 7" label="Vickers Mk 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q9182020" start="77867" end="77879" title="Bumar-Labedy" label="Bumar-Labedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77985" end="78035" title="Polish Land Forces#Equipment and modernization" label="Polish modernization program for Leopard 2A4 tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q796295" start="79724" end="79727" title="BMC (Turkey)" label="BMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q434883" start="79755" end="79760" title="Altay (main battle tank)" label="Altay"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266020" start="79761" end="79767" title="MKE 120 mm tank gun" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q56884" start="79868" end="79871" title="Mechanical and Chemical Industry Corporation" label="MKE"/>
<link wikidata="Q152517" start="79909" end="79922" title="Hyundai Rotem" label="Hyundai Rotem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80189" end="80192" title="Reactive armour#Explosive reactive armour" label="ERA"/>
<link wikidata="Q237135" start="80197" end="80202" title="T-80" label="T-80U"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077951" start="80364" end="80373" title="Kontakt-1" label="Kontakt-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428849" start="80442" end="80447" title="SPAAG" label="SPAAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502426" start="81512" end="81521" title="shot trap" label="shot-trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q478293" start="85366" end="85374" title="cooking off" label="cook off"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873124" start="85597" end="85626" title="battlefield management system" label="battlefield management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132492" start="86079" end="86093" title="Royal Ordnance" label="Royal Ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q571665" start="86105" end="86109" title="GIAT" label="GIAT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86701" end="86717" title="Rheinmetall Rh-120#Rh-120 L/55 120mm" label="Rheinmetall L/55"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="88247" end="88255" title="Hellenes" label="Hellenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q948008" start="88427" end="88439" title="Glacis" label="glacis plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926194" start="88476" end="88481" title="MEXAS" label="MEXAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18100" start="88764" end="88765" title="€" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275062" start="88854" end="88858" title="Hellenic Vehicle Industry" label="ELBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="88936" end="88949" title="Hellenic Army" label="Hellenic Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q571616" start="89138" end="89149" title="slat armour" label="slat armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q219501" start="90224" end="90228" title="Saab Group" label="Saab"/>
<link wikidata="Q434883" start="90500" end="90505" title="Altay (main battle tank)" label="Altay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19401271" start="91848" end="91870" title="Polish Armaments Group" label="Polish Armaments Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q248989" start="92845" end="92863" title="Polish Land Forces" label="Polish Land Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="93136" end="93149" title="urban warfare" label="urban warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="93706" end="93729" title="Tank Urban Survival Kit" label="Tank Urban Survival Kit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95146" end="95164" title="Tank Battalion 203" label="Tank Battalion 203"/>
<link wikidata="Q778080" start="95180" end="95210" title="Armoured Corps Training Centre (Germany)" label="Armoured Corps Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378267" start="97257" end="97272" title="Eurosatory" label="Eurosatory 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q369799" start="97534" end="97547" title="low-intensity conflict" label="low-intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="97760" end="97764" title="rocket propelled grenade" label="RPGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="97956" end="97970" title="High Explosive" label="High Explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786877" start="98041" end="98048" title="FLW remote weapon station" label="FLW 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406909" start="98049" end="98083" title="Remote weapon system" label="remotely controlled weapon station"/>
<link wikidata="Q478123" start="98115" end="98136" title="situational awareness" label="situational awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156840" start="98471" end="98477" title="Trophy (countermeasure)" label="Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333043" start="98478" end="98502" title="active protection system" label="active protection system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="99040" end="99059" title="Structure of the German Army#45th Panzer Brigade" label="45th Panzer Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q656588" start="99467" end="99481" title="Ministry of National Defence (Lithuania)" label="Lithuanian MoD"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="99626" end="99635" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q495177" start="99640" end="99656" title="K2 Black Panther" label="K2 Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="99680" end="99689" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="99785" end="99799" title="Battalion" label="Tank Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q646220" start="101550" end="101566" title="KNDS Deutschland" label="KNDS Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q819577" start="103155" end="103180" title="armoured recovery vehicle" label="armoured recovery vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="103197" end="103206" title="bulldozer" label="bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178692" start="103213" end="103218" title="crane (machine)" label="crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q258534" start="103233" end="103238" title="winch" label="winch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="103369" end="103380" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q184613" start="103413" end="103429" title="grenade launcher" label="grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="103485" end="103498" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35953" start="104025" end="104048" title="MAN SE" label="MAN Mobile Bridges GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q996525" start="104056" end="104088" title="armoured vehicle-launched bridge" label="armoured vehicle-launched bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778219" start="104622" end="104634" title="AEV 3 Kodiak" label="AEV 3 Kodiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047443" start="104640" end="104666" title="combat engineering vehicle" label="combat engineering vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182661" start="104804" end="104813" title="excavator" label="excavator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406909" start="104868" end="104889" title="Remote Weapon Station" label="Remote Weapon Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q613116" start="105846" end="105852" title="Patria (company)" label="Patria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428033" start="106308" end="106331" title="Flensburger Fahrzeugbau" label="Flensburger Fahrzeugbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q156968" start="107137" end="107155" title="Panzerhaubitze 2000" label="PzH 2000 howitzers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113255" start="107250" end="107278" title="Ministry of Defence (Croatia)" label="Croatian Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q746774" start="107305" end="107311" title="M-84" label="M-84A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="107348" end="107367" title="Government of Croatia" label="Croatian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="107398" end="107406" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q746774" start="107411" end="107415" title="M-84" label="M-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="107678" end="107693" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623141" start="107972" end="108001" title="Ministry of Defence (Bulgaria)" label="Bulgarian Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q276261" start="108267" end="108285" title="Bulgarian Armed Forces" label="Bulgarian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q612829" start="108393" end="108400" title="Stryker" label="Stryker"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="108532" end="108544" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q14469746" start="108676" end="108690" title="Undersecretary (Italy)" label="undersecretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418695" start="108691" end="108705" title="Isabella Rauti" label="Isabella Rauti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047443" start="109160" end="109188" title="armoured engineering vehicle" label="armoured engineering vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q819577" start="109193" end="109218" title="armoured recovery vehicle" label="armoured recovery vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q996525" start="109234" end="109266" title="armoured vehicle-launched bridge" label="armoured vehicle-launched bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q112507107" start="109409" end="109422" title="Panther KF51" label="KF-51 Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123768" start="109432" end="109442" title="Royal Netherlands Army" label="Dutch Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658974" start="109531" end="109544" title="Peruvian Army" label="Peruvian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="109722" end="109735" title="Romanian Land Forces" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612392" start="109831" end="109850" title="Ministry of National Defence (Romania)" label="Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="109898" end="109907" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="109923" end="109936" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837899" start="109946" end="109970" title="Politics of Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q242864" start="110363" end="110418" title="2011 Bahraini uprising" label="popular protests in the neighbouring country of Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="110456" end="110466" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q567" start="110467" end="110480" title="Angela Merkel" label="Angela Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="110741" end="110774" title="Bundestag" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s federal parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q499118" start="110924" end="110948" title="Federal Ministry of Finance (Germany)" label="Federal Economy Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="110963" end="110978" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q160902" start="110979" end="110993" title="Sigmar Gabriel" label="Sigmar Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264458" start="111278" end="111298" title="Government of Slovenia" label="Slovenian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="111375" end="111381" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="111382" end="111386" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="111541" end="111545" title="T-54/T-55" label="T-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="111717" end="111731" title="British Armed Forces" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q722813" start="111803" end="111815" title="Challenger 1" label="Challenger 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="111837" end="111857" title="British armed forces" label="British armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q234676" start="111892" end="111904" title="Challenger 2" label="Challenger 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="111922" end="111931" title="Leopard 1" label="Leopard 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392043" start="111934" end="111973" title="List of main battle tanks by generation" label="List of main battle tanks by generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754406" start="111976" end="112001" title="Main Ground Combat System" label="Main Ground Combat System"/>
<link wikidata="Q112507107" start="112004" end="112016" title="Panther KF51" label="Panther KF51"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683569" start="112019" end="112043" title="Tanks in the German Army" label="Tanks in the German Army"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584962" wikidata="Q2291388" url="?curid=584962" title="Scaling">
<text>Scaling may refer to:

==Science and technology==

===Mathematics and physics===
* Scaling (geometry), a linear transformation that enlarges or diminishes objects
* Scale invariance, a feature of objects or laws that do not change if scales of length, energy, or other variables are multiplied by a common factor
** Scaling law, a law that describes the scale invariance found in many natural phenomena
* The scaling of critical exponents in physics, such as Widom scaling, or scaling of the renormalization group

===Computing and information technology===
* Feature scaling, a method used to standardize the range of independent variables or features of data
* Image scaling, the resizing of an image
* Multidimensional scaling, a means of visualizing the level of similarity of individual cases of a dataset
* Scalability, a computer or network&#x27;s ability to function as the amount of data or number of users increases
* Scaling along the Z axis, a technique used in computer graphics for a pseudo-3D effect
* Reduced scales of semiconductor device fabrication processes (the ability of a technology to scale to a smaller process)
* Scaling up a neural network to increase performance; see Neural scaling law

===Other uses in science and technology===
* Tooth scaling, in dentistry, the removal of plaque and calculus
* Fouling, i.e., formation of a deposit layer (scale) on a solid surface, e.g., in a boiler; in particular, a kind of micro fouling as crystallization of salts
* Scaling rock, the removal of loose rock from a rock wall after blasting
*  Scaling of innovations, a process that leads to widespread use of an innovation

==Other uses==
* Scaling, North Yorkshire, England
* Climbing
* Card throwing, known in magic circles as scaling
* Scaling fish, the removal of fish scales from the fish

==See also==
* Scale (disambiguation)
* Scaling function (disambiguation)
* Homogeneous function, used for scaling extensive properties in thermodynamic equations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2291388" start="0" end="7" title="Scaling" label="Scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q102441924" start="83" end="101" title="Scaling (geometry)" label="Scaling (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750766" start="165" end="181" title="Scale invariance" label="Scale invariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="316" end="327" title="Scaling law" label="Scaling law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998780" start="459" end="472" title="Widom scaling" label="Widom scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439686" start="560" end="575" title="Feature scaling" label="Feature scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q440296" start="663" end="676" title="Image scaling" label="Image scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q620538" start="705" end="729" title="Multidimensional scaling" label="Multidimensional scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="813" end="824" title="Scalability" label="Scalability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="928" end="952" title="2.5D#Scaling along the Z axis" label="Scaling along the Z axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="1035" end="1067" title="semiconductor device fabrication" label="semiconductor device fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q119398888" start="1197" end="1215" title="Neural scaling law" label="Neural scaling law"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139949" start="1262" end="1275" title="Tooth scaling" label="Tooth scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439803" start="1328" end="1335" title="Fouling" label="Fouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891954" start="1551" end="1559" title="drilling and blasting" label="blasting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1562" end="1585" title=" Scaling of innovations" label=" Scaling of innovations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429779" start="1661" end="1685" title="Scaling, North Yorkshire" label="Scaling, North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22857" start="1697" end="1705" title="Climbing" label="Climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q500364" start="1708" end="1721" title="Card throwing" label="Card throwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454665" start="1788" end="1798" title="fish scale" label="fish scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q393789" start="1830" end="1852" title="Scale (disambiguation)" label="Scale (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429780" start="1855" end="1888" title="Scaling function (disambiguation)" label="Scaling function (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132952" start="1891" end="1911" title="Homogeneous function" label="Homogeneous function"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584964" wikidata="Q450751" url="?curid=584964" title="Henry Morgenthau Jr.">
<text>Henry Morgenthau Jr. (; May 11, 1891February 6, 1967) was the United States Secretary of the Treasury during most of the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt. He played the major role in designing and financing the New Deal. After 1937, while still in charge of the Treasury, he played the central role in financing United States participation in World War II. He also played an increasingly major role in shaping foreign policy, especially with respect to Lend-Lease, support for China, helping Jewish refugees, and proposing (in the &quot;Morgenthau Plan&quot;) measures to deindustrialize Germany.

Morgenthau was the father of Robert M. Morgenthau, who was district attorney of Manhattan for 35 years; Henry Morgenthau III, an American author and television producer; and noted pediatrician Dr. Joan Morganthau Hirschhorn. He continued as Treasury secretary through the first few months of Harry Truman&#x27;s presidency, and from June 27, 1945, to July 3, 1945, following the resignation of Secretary of State Edward Stettinius Jr., was next in line to the presidency. Morgenthau was the only Jew to be next in line to the presidency in the presidential line of succession.

==Early life and education==

Henry Morgenthau Jr. was born into a prominent Jewish family in New York City, the son of Josephine (Sykes) and Henry Morgenthau Sr., a real estate mogul and diplomat. His parents were born in Germany. He had three sisters. He attended Phillips Exeter Academy, later transferring to the Dwight School. And though he never earned a high school diploma, he studied architecture and agriculture at Cornell University. However, struggling to concentrate and read, he twice left school and also never received a college degree. In 1913, he met and became friends with Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. He operated a farm named Fishkill Farms near the Roosevelt estate in upstate New York, specializing, like FDR, in growing Christmas trees. He was concerned about distress among farmers, who comprised over a fourth of the population. In 1922, he took over the &quot;American Agriculturalist&quot; magazine, making it a voice for reclamation, conservation, and scientific farming. In 1929, Roosevelt, as Governor of New York, appointed him chair of the New York State Agricultural Advisory Committee and to the state Conservation Commission.

==Political career==
===New Deal===

In 1933, Roosevelt became President and appointed Morgenthau governor of the Federal Farm Board. Morgenthau was nonetheless involved in monetary decisions. Roosevelt adopted the idea of raising the price of gold to inflate the currency and reverse the debilitating deflation of prices. The idea came from Professor George Warren of Cornell University. Morgenthau wrote in his diary:

In 1934, when William H. Woodin resigned because of poor health, Roosevelt appointed Morgenthau Secretary of the Treasury; even conservatives approved. Morgenthau was a strict monetarist. President Roosevelt, Morgenthau, and Federal Reserve Chairman Marriner Stoddard Eccles jointly kept interest rates low during the depression to finance massive public spending, and then later to support rearmament, support for Britain, and U.S. participation in WWII.

In 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt asked Morgenthau to examine the taxes of William Randolph Hearst because FDR was &quot;advised that Hearst was planning to use his newspapers to launch a major attack on the New Deal and its economic policies&quot;. Treasury Secretary Morgenthau explained that he examined the taxes of Hearst and actress Marion Davies and &quot;advised FDR to mount a preemptive attack on both her and Hearst&quot;.

===Campaign against corruption===
Morgenthau used his position as Treasury chief to investigate organized crime and government corruption. Treasury Intelligence and other agencies (the notoriously fragmented United States federal law enforcement system had five in the Treasury Department alone) were uncoordinated in their efforts; efforts to create a super-agency were stalled by J. Edgar Hoover, who feared his FBI would be overshadowed. Nevertheless, Morgenthau created a coordinator for the Treasury agencies; although the coordinator could not control them, he could move them to some cooperation.

Former head of IRS&#x27; criminal investigators Elmer Lincoln Irey, who had directed major investigations including the successful prosecution of Al Capone, assumed the position in 1937. Investigations of official corruption caused the fall of political boss Thomas &quot;Big Tom&quot; Pendergast of Kansas City. A Mafia-related shootout and massive official corruption led to successful investigations against Pendergast and the local Mafia head Charles Carrollo. Other officials — as well as gangsters, in a few rare cases — were convicted as a result of Morgenthau&#x27;s investigations.

===Fiscal responsibility===
Morgenthau believed in balanced budgets, stable currency, reduction of the national debt, and the need for more private investment. The Wagner Act regarding labor unions met Morgenthau&#x27;s requirement, because it strengthened the party&#x27;s political base and involved no new spending. Morgenthau accepted Roosevelt&#x27;s double budget as legitimate — that is, a balanced regular budget, and an &quot;emergency&quot; budget for agencies, like the Works Progress Administration (WPA), Public Works Administration (PWA) and Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), that would be temporary until full recovery was at hand. He fought against the veterans&#x27; bonus until Congress finally overrode Roosevelt&#x27;s veto and gave out $2.2 billion in 1936. In the 1937 &quot;Depression within the Depression&quot;, Morgenthau was unable to persuade Roosevelt to desist from continued deficit spending. Roosevelt continued to push for more spending, and Morgenthau promoted a balanced budget. In 1937, however, Morgenthau successfully convinced Roosevelt to focus on balancing the budget through major spending cuts and tax increases; Keynesian economists have argued that this new attempt by Roosevelt to balance the budget created the recession of 1937–1938. On November 10, 1937, Morgenthau gave a speech to the Academy of Political Science at New York&#x27;s Hotel Astor, in which he noted that the Depression had required deficit spending, but that the government needed to cut spending to revive the economy. In his speech, he said:

His biggest success was the new Social Security program; he reversed the proposals to fund it from general revenue and insisted it be funded by new taxes on employees. Morgenthau insisted on excluding farm workers and domestic servants from Social Security because workers outside industry would not be paying their way. He questioned the value of the deficit spending that had not reduced unemployment and only added debt:

To reduce the deficit he argued for increased taxes, particularly on the wealthy.

===Jewish refugees===
Once confronted by the Holocaust, the Allied Powers reacted slowly. In 1943, Morgenthau&#x27;s Treasury Department approved the World Jewish Congress&#x27; plan to rescue Jews through the use of blocked accounts in Switzerland, but the State Department and the British Foreign Office procrastinated further. Morgenthau and his staff persisted in bypassing State and ultimately confronting Roosevelt in January 1944 with the &quot;Report to the Secretary on the Acquiescence of This Government in the Murder of the Jews&quot;.

Due to incessant highly visible rescue activism by the Hillel Kook (aka Peter Bergson) led Bergson Group and pressure by Morgenthau and some of his staff, President Roosevelt finally acted and created the United States War Refugee Board (WRB) in January 1944. The board sponsored the Raoul Wallenberg mission to Budapest and allowed an increasing number of Jews to enter the U.S. in 1944 and 1945; as many as 200,000 Jews were saved by the board.

Hurwitz (1991) argues that in late 1943, the Treasury Department drafted a report calling for the creation of a special rescue agency for European Jewry. At the same time, several congressmen connected with the &quot;Bergson Group&quot; introduced a resolution also calling for the creation of such an agency. On January 16, 1944, Morgenthau presented Roosevelt with the Treasury report, and the president agreed to create the War Refugee Board, the first major attempt of the United States to deal with the annihilation of European Jews.

Blum argues that by mid-1944, the War Refugee Board:

As for the top Germans, Morgenthau at one point in summer 1944 suggested to Roosevelt that the top 50 or 100 German &quot;arch-criminals&quot; should be shot upon capture. He changed his mind and by early 1945 proposed formal trials.

===Morgenthau Plan===
In 1944, Morgenthau proposed the Morgenthau Plan for postwar Germany, calling for Germany to lose its heavy industry, and the Ruhr &quot;should not only be stripped of all presently existing industries, but so weakened and controlled that it can not in the foreseeable future become an industrial area&quot;. Germany would keep its rich farmlands in the east. However Stalin insisted on the Oder-Neisse border, which moved those farming areas out of Germany. Therefore, the original Morgenthau plan had to be dropped, Weinberg argues, because it was &quot;too soft on the Germans, not too hard as some still imagine&quot;.

At the Second Quebec Conference on September 16, 1944, Roosevelt and Morgenthau persuaded the initially very reluctant British prime minister Winston Churchill to agree to the Morgenthau Plan, likely using a $6 billion Lend-Lease agreement to do so. Churchill chose however to narrow the scope of Morgenthau&#x27;s proposal by drafting a new version of the memorandum, which ended up being the version signed by the two statesmen. The gist of the signed memorandum was &quot;This programme for eliminating the war-making industries in the Ruhr and the Saar is looking forward to converting Germany into a country primarily agricultural and pastoral in its character.&quot;

The plan faced opposition in Roosevelt&#x27;s cabinet, primarily from Henry L. Stimson, and when the plan was leaked to the press, there was public criticism of Roosevelt. The President&#x27;s response to inquiries was to deny the press reports. As a consequence of the leak, Morgenthau was in bad favor with Roosevelt for a time.

German Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels used the leaked plan, with some success, to encourage the German people to persevere in their war efforts so that their country would not be turned into a &quot;potato field&quot;. General George Marshall complained to Morgenthau that German resistance had strengthened. Hoping to get Morgenthau to relent on his plan for Germany, Roosevelt&#x27;s son-in-law, Lt. Colonel John Boettiger, who worked in the United States Department of War, explained to Morgenthau how the American troops had had to fight for five weeks against fierce German resistance to capture Aachen and complained to him that the Morgenthau Plan was &quot;worth thirty divisions to the Germans&quot;. In late 1944, Roosevelt&#x27;s election opponent, Thomas E. Dewey, said it was worth &quot;ten divisions&quot;. Morgenthau refused to relent.

On May 10, 1945, Truman signed the U.S. occupation directive JCS 1067. Morgenthau told his staff that it was a big day for the Treasury, and that he hoped that &quot;someone doesn&#x27;t recognize it as the Morgenthau Plan&quot;. The directive, which was in effect for over two years directed the U.S. forces of occupation to &quot;take no steps looking toward the economic rehabilitation of Germany&quot;.

In occupied Germany Morgenthau left a direct legacy through what in OMGUS commonly were called &quot;Morgenthau boys&quot;. These were U.S. Treasury officials whom General Dwight D. Eisenhower had &quot;loaned&quot; in to the Army of occupation. These people ensured that JCS 1067 was interpreted as strictly as possible. They were most active in the first crucial months of the occupation, but continued their activities for almost two years following the resignations of Morgenthau in mid-1945, and some time later, of their leader, Colonel Bernard Bernstein, who was &quot;the repository of the Morgenthau spirit in the army of occupation&quot;. They resigned when, in July 1947, JCS 1067 was replaced by JCS 1779, which instead stressed that &quot;An orderly, prosperous Europe requires the economic contributions of a stable and productive Germany.&quot;

Morgenthau&#x27;s legacy was also seen in the plans for preserving German disarmament by significantly reducing German economic might. (see also Allied plans for German industry after World War II)

In October 1945, Morgenthau published a book titled &quot;Germany is Our Problem&quot;, in which he described and motivated the Morgenthau plan in great detail. Roosevelt had granted permission for the book the evening before his death, when dining with Morgenthau at Warm Springs. Morgenthau had asked Churchill for permission to also include the text of the then still secret &quot;pastoralization&quot; memorandum signed by Churchill and FDR at Quebec but permission was denied. In November 1945, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Military Governor of the U.S. Occupation Zone, approved the distribution of 1,000 free copies of the book to American military officials in occupied Germany. Historian Stephen E. Ambrose draws the conclusion that, despite Eisenhower&#x27;s later claims that the act was not an endorsement of the Morgenthau plan, Eisenhower both approved of the plan and had previously given Morgenthau at least some of his ideas on how Germany should be treated.

Following his resignation in 1945, Morgenthau, along with other prominent liberals such as Eleanor Roosevelt, called for a &quot;harsh peace&quot; for Germany. Ultimately though, the policy was adopted of reintegrating a fully industrialized and de-Nazified modern Germany into Europe, as idealized in Frank Capra&#x27;s influential 1945 short film &quot;Here is Germany&quot;.

===Bretton Woods===

Morgenthau was first appointed by the U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt as temporary President of the Bretton Woods Conference, which established the Bretton Woods system, the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank). During the inaugural plenary session on July 1, 1944, the head of the Mexican Delegation, Eduardo Suarez, nominated him as Permanent President of the Conference. This motion was seconded by the Brazilian Head Delegate, Arthur de Souza Costa, and widely supported by several other delegations such as the Canadian and Soviet ones.

==Later life==
In 1945, when Harry S. Truman became president, Morgenthau insisted on accompanying him to Potsdam by threatening to quit if he was not allowed to; Truman accepted his resignation immediately, after he privately said he would refuse to send &quot;any of [FDR&#x27;s advisor] &quot;Jew boys&quot; to Potsdam. Years later Truman also referred to him as a &quot;block head, nut&quot; who &quot;didn&#x27;t know shit from apple butter.&quot;

He devoted the remainder of his life to working with Jewish philanthropies, and also became a financial advisor to Israel. Tal Shahar, an Israeli moshav (agricultural community) near Jerusalem, created in 1948, was named in his honor (&quot;Morgenthau&quot; (modern spelling: &quot;Morgentau&quot;) means &quot;morning dew&quot; in German, as does &quot;Tal Shahar&quot; in Hebrew).

==Legacy==
Morgenthau donated his diary of 840 volumes to the Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum. He died of heart and kidney failure at Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie, New York, in 1967, and is buried in Mount Pleasant, New York. His son Robert M. Morgenthau was the District Attorney of New York County from 1975 to 2009.

The United States Coast Guard &quot;Hamilton&quot;-class cutter USCGC &quot;Morgenthau&quot; (WHEC-722) was named in his honor. The ship was sold to Vietnam Coast Guard as CSB-8020.

==Personal life==
He was married to Elinor Lehman Fatman, granddaughter of Mayer Lehman, a co-founder of Lehman Brothers; they had three children — Joan Elizabeth Morgenthau Hirschhorn, married to Fred Hirschhorn Jr.; Henry Morgenthau III, and Robert M. Morgenthau. In 1913, Morgenthau purchased a farm in Hopewell Junction, New York, naming it Fishkill Farms. The farm still belongs to the Morgenthau family. And despite his nearly life-long political career, Morgenthau insisted on identifying himself, and listing his occupation on his passport and tax forms, as a &quot;farmer.&quot;

On October 30, 1931, along with then Gov. Franklin Roosevelt, Morgenthau became a member of Tri-Po-Bed Grotto in Poughkeespie, NY, an appendant body of Freemasonry.

==See also==
* List of Jewish United States Cabinet members

==References==
===Book sources===
* 
* 
* 
* online

==Further reading==
* Blum, John Morton, ed. &quot;From the Morgenthau Diaries&quot;, a three-volume narrative of Morgenthau&#x27;s New Deal years (1928–1945) based very closely on his diary; abridged edition: &quot;Roosevelt and Morgenthau: A Revision and Condensation of From the Morgenthau Diaries&quot; (1970)
* 
* Levine, Rabbi Menachem (2024). Henry Morgenthau&#x27;s Queen Esther Moment, Aish.com
* Levy, Herbert. &quot;Henry Morgenthau, Jr.: The Remarkable Life of FDR&#x27;s Secretary of the Treasury&quot; (Simon and Schuster, 2010).
* Morgenthau III, Henry. &quot;Mostly Morgenthaus: a family history&quot; (1991).
* 

==External links==

* &quot;Morgenthau&#x27;s Hope&quot;. &quot;Time&quot;. October 15, 1945. Reaction to the publication of Morgenthau&#x27;s book &quot;Germany is Our Problem&quot; where he promotes the Morgenthau Plan.
* &quot;Vengeance v. Vision&quot;. &quot;Time&quot;. September 22, 1967. Review of &quot;Years of War, 1941–1945; From the Morgenthau Diaries&quot; by John Morton Blum.
* U.S. Treasury – Biography of Secretary Morgenthau
* &quot;Stay the Hand of Vengeance&quot; by Gary Bass</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q450751" start="0" end="20" title="Henry Morgenthau Jr." label="Henry Morgenthau Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="62" end="101" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="United States Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="139" end="160" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="218" end="226" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="460" end="470" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q661995" start="544" end="559" title="Morgenthau Plan" label="Morgenthau Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q521095" start="634" end="654" title="Robert M. Morgenthau" label="Robert M. Morgenthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="664" end="681" title="district attorney" label="district attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="685" end="694" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737580" start="709" end="729" title="Henry Morgenthau III" label="Henry Morgenthau III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="897" end="909" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q362118" start="1018" end="1039" title="Edward Stettinius Jr." label="Edward Stettinius Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1050554" start="1045" end="1075" title="United States presidential line of succession" label="next in line to the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="1101" end="1104" title="American Jews" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q47946" start="1325" end="1345" title="Henry Morgenthau Sr." label="Henry Morgenthau Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1426464" start="1449" end="1472" title="Phillips Exeter Academy" label="Phillips Exeter Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318230" start="1500" end="1513" title="Dwight School" label="Dwight School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="1608" end="1626" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="1789" end="1806" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196943" start="1833" end="1847" title="Fishkill Farms" label="Fishkill Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q51391852" start="2073" end="2097" title="American Agriculturalist" label="American Agriculturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="2210" end="2230" title="Governor of New York" label="Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440219" start="2463" end="2481" title="Federal Farm Board" label="Federal Farm Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031553" start="2784" end="2801" title="William H. Woodin" label="William H. Woodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="2866" end="2891" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q373177" start="2946" end="2956" title="Monetarism" label="monetarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666591" start="2995" end="3019" title="Chair of the Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902537" start="3020" end="3044" title="Marriner Stoddard Eccles" label="Marriner Stoddard Eccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3246" end="3267" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="3309" end="3332" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q242416" start="3573" end="3586" title="Marion Davies" label="Marion Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="4051" end="4066" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366611" start="4322" end="4340" title="Elmer Lincoln Irey" label="Elmer Lincoln Irey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80048" start="4420" end="4429" title="Al Capone" label="Al Capone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338080" start="4533" end="4570" title="Tom Pendergast" label="Thomas &amp;quot;Big Tom&amp;quot; Pendergast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076124" start="4721" end="4737" title="Charles Carrollo" label="Charles Carrollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566674" start="4917" end="4932" title="balanced budget" label="balanced budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="4969" end="4982" title="Government debt" label="national debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="5030" end="5040" title="National Labor Relations Act of 1935" label="Wagner Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="5347" end="5376" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177134" start="5384" end="5411" title="Public Works Administration" label="Public Works Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="5422" end="5449" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="5773" end="5789" title="deficit spending" label="deficit spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302382" start="6125" end="6147" title="recession of 1937–1938" label="recession of 1937–1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903297" start="6251" end="6262" title="Hotel Astor (New York City)" label="Hotel Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="6460" end="6475" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="6977" end="6990" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="6996" end="7009" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q541010" start="7086" end="7107" title="World Jewish Congress" label="World Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="7194" end="7210" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="7219" end="7241" title="Foreign and Commonwealth Office" label="British Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631443" start="7388" end="7476" title="Report to the Secretary on the Acquiescence of This Government in the Murder of the Jews" label="Report to the Secretary on the Acquiescence of This Government in the Murder of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q438286" start="7540" end="7551" title="Hillel Kook" label="Hillel Kook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7576" end="7589" title="Hillel Kook#Activism in America" label="Bergson Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="7640" end="7659" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="President Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q474452" start="7704" end="7721" title="War Refugee Board" label="War Refugee Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q152850" start="7769" end="7785" title="Raoul Wallenberg" label="Raoul Wallenberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7933" end="7947" title="#References" label="Hurwitz (1991)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8144" end="8169" title="Hillel Kook#Bergson Group" label="&amp;quot;Bergson Group&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q661995" start="8817" end="8832" title="Morgenthau Plan" label="Morgenthau Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="8910" end="8914" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="9175" end="9193" title="Oder-Neisse border" label="Oder-Neisse border"/>
<link wikidata="Q233311" start="9415" end="9439" title="Second Quebec Conference" label="Second Quebec Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9550" end="9567" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="9627" end="9637" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q310293" start="9960" end="9964" title="Saar Protectorate" label="Saar"/>
<link wikidata="Q314826" start="10152" end="10168" title="Henry L. Stimson" label="Henry L. Stimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="10441" end="10456" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="10646" end="10661" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126613" start="10829" end="10843" title="Clarence John Boettiger" label="John Boettiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="10863" end="10894" title="United States Department of War" label="United States Department of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="11020" end="11026" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="11179" end="11194" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11333" end="11341" title="Morgenthau Plan#JCS 1067" label="JCS 1067"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574110" start="11748" end="11753" title="Office of Military Government, United States" label="OMGUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="11852" end="11872" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892930" start="12223" end="12240" title="Bernard Bernstein" label="Bernard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q661995" start="12388" end="12396" title="Morgenthau Plan" label="JCS 1779"/>
<link wikidata="Q896234" start="12686" end="12737" title="Allied plans for German industry after World War II" label="Allied plans for German industry after World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552159" start="12798" end="12820" title="Germany is Our Problem" label="Germany is Our Problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q995678" start="13008" end="13020" title="Warm Springs, Georgia" label="Warm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q233311" start="13188" end="13194" title="Second Quebec Conference" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="13248" end="13268" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="13299" end="13319" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="U.S. Occupation Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q443953" start="13442" end="13460" title="Stephen E. Ambrose" label="Stephen E. Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="13813" end="13830" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="13968" end="13979" title="Denazification" label="de-Nazified"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="14024" end="14035" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="14175" end="14196" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194052" start="14227" end="14251" title="Bretton Woods Conference" label="Bretton Woods Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="14275" end="14295" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="14301" end="14328" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="14337" end="14390" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="14396" end="14406" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14499" end="14513" title="Eduardo Suarez" label="Eduardo Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="14846" end="14853" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916701" start="15317" end="15327" title="Tal Shahar" label="Tal Shahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q917146" start="15340" end="15346" title="moshav" label="moshav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="15377" end="15386" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="15568" end="15574" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421442" start="15640" end="15693" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468831" start="15734" end="15758" title="Vassar Brothers Hospital" label="Vassar Brothers Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="15762" end="15784" title="Poughkeepsie, New York" label="Poughkeepsie, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018321" start="15812" end="15836" title="Mount Pleasant, New York" label="Mount Pleasant, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q521095" start="15846" end="15866" title="Robert M. Morgenthau" label="Robert M. Morgenthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="15875" end="15892" title="District attorney" label="District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="15896" end="15911" title="Manhattan" label="New York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="15936" end="15961" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268210" start="15962" end="15995" title="Hamilton-class cutter" label="&amp;quot;Hamilton&amp;quot;-class cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11671871" start="15996" end="16035" title="USCGC Morgenthau (WHEC-722)" label="USCGC &amp;quot;Morgenthau&amp;quot; (WHEC-722)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753589" start="16081" end="16100" title="Vietnam Coast Guard" label="Vietnam Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176719" start="16151" end="16171" title="Elinor Morgenthau" label="Elinor Lehman Fatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080212" start="16190" end="16202" title="Mayer Lehman" label="Mayer Lehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="16220" end="16235" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737580" start="16333" end="16353" title="Henry Morgenthau III" label="Henry Morgenthau III"/>
<link wikidata="Q521095" start="16359" end="16379" title="Robert M. Morgenthau" label="Robert M. Morgenthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460358" start="16421" end="16448" title="Hopewell Junction, New York" label="Hopewell Junction, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196943" start="16460" end="16474" title="Fishkill Farms" label="Fishkill Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q130197948" start="16885" end="16929" title="List of Jewish United States Cabinet members" label="List of Jewish United States Cabinet members"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="17678" end="17682" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584966" wikidata="Q1090803" url="?curid=584966" title="Vince Russo">
<text>Vincent James Russo (born January 24, 1961) is an American professional wrestling writer, booker and pundit. He is notable for his tenures with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now WWE), World Championship Wrestling (WCW) and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) in creative roles. He also occasionally made appearances as an on-screen authority figure, and professional wrestler, in WCW and TNA. 

Russo&#x27;s writing style often blurred the lines between reality and fiction, while also favoring elements such as shock twists, grand moments and larger-than-life characters over in-ring action, which made him a controversial figure amongst certain wrestling fans. Russo was part of the WWF&#x27;s creative department during the widely acclaimed Attitude Era, during which the company achieved record high television ratings. 

During a self-booked in-ring career in WCW, Russo became a one-time WCW World Heavyweight Champion, and scored televised singles victories over future WWE Hall of Famers Ric Flair and Booker T (the latter to win his world title).

== Early life ==
Vincent James Russo of Italian descent, grew up in Farmingville, New York, and graduated from the University of Southern Indiana (then known as Indiana State University Evansville) in 1983 with a degree in journalism. He worked for the school newspaper &quot;The Shield&quot; as an assistant sports editor and later as editor-in-chief.

Russo got his start in professional wrestling when he began training under the tutelage of Johnny Rodz at Gleason&#x27;s Gym in Brooklyn. He owned two video stores on Long Island. Russo also hosted his own local radio show from 1992 to 1993 called &quot;Vicious Vincent&#x27;s World of Wrestling&quot;, which aired Sunday nights on WGBB in Freeport. The program ran for exactly one year, the final show being the one-year anniversary.

== Professional wrestling career ==
=== World Wrestling Federation (1992–1999) ===
In 1992, Russo was hired as a freelance writer for &quot;WWF Magazine&quot; following a letter that he had written to Linda McMahon, and would later become an editor in 1994 under the pseudonym of Vic Venom. He was eventually promoted to the WWF Creative Team in 1996. In that same year, &quot;Monday Night Raw&quot; hit a ratings low of 1.8, as &quot;Monday Nitro&quot; (&quot;Raw&quot; chief competition), was in the midst of an 83-week winning-streak against &quot;Raw&quot; head-to-head (&quot;see&quot; Monday Night War). With World Championship Wrestling (WCW) eclipsing the WWF, WWF chairman Vince McMahon called upon Russo to make changes to the televised product. Russo contributed edgy, controversial storylines involving sexual content, profanity, swerves or unexpected heel turns, and worked shoots, as well as short matches, backstage vignettes, shocking angles and levels of depicted violence. Russo&#x27;s style of writing came to be known as &quot;Crash TV&quot; and was heavily inspired by &quot;The Jerry Springer Show&quot;. &quot;Crash TV&quot; centered on Russo&#x27;s philosophy that every character on WWF television should be involved in a storyline (feud). This contrasted conventional wrestling booking that would typically see a number of matches between wrestlers that were not necessarily involved in feuds. Russo believed that by constantly having storyline material on-screen, the viewing audience would be more reluctant to change the channel for fear of missing something.

In 1997, Russo became head writer for the WWF and wrote their flagship show &quot;Raw Is War&quot; as well as their monthly pay-per-views. With the angles that he created, Russo had a large hand in putting WWF ahead of WCW in the Monday night rating war during the Attitude Era. In an interview with Jeff Lane in 2015, Russo acknowledged that the first thing he wrote as WWF head writer was the episode of &quot;Raw&quot; that aired on December 15, 1997. At the King of the Ring pay-per-view in 1998, Ed Ferrara joined the WWF creative team and was paired with Russo. Some of the more controversial characters during this time, often cited by critics of Russo, include Sable, Val Venis and The Godfather. Russo devised the infamous Brawl for All tournament. Russo also contributed to the formation of D-Generation X, The Undertaker vs. Kane feud, the Stone Cold Steve Austin vs. Mr. McMahon feud, the rise of The Rock, and Mick Foley&#x27;s three-face pushes.

In the two years following Russo&#x27;s promotion to head writer, Raw surpassed WCW&#x27;s Nitro in head-to-head ratings.

In October 1999, Russo was replaced by Chris Kreski as WWF head writer, after Russo departed the company.

=== World Championship Wrestling (1999–2000) ===
====Hiring and arrival====
On October 3, 1999, Russo and Ed Ferrara signed with WCW; Russo contends that his reason for leaving the WWF was the result of a dispute with Vince McMahon over the increased workload caused by the introduction of the new &quot;SmackDown!&quot; broadcast and McMahon&#x27;s disregard of Russo&#x27;s family. Russo and Ferrara attempted to make the same &quot;Crash TV&quot; style on &quot;Monday Nitro&quot; which was similar to &quot;Raw Is War&quot;, only at an accelerated pace, including soapier storylines, more lengthy non-wrestling segments, constant heel/face turns, an increased amount of female representation on the show, fake retirements, more backstage vignettes, expanded storyline depth, constant title changes, and the utilization of midcard talent in a more effective manner. Russo and Ferrara often focused on poking fun at the WWF.

Russo&#x27;s writing style created a large turnover in title changes, reflecting his &quot;crash TV&quot; writing philosophy. His booking of Jushin Thunder Liger losing and regaining the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship on &quot;Nitro&quot; in late 1999 was not recognized by New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW) in the title lineage until 2007; Liger lost the title to Juventud Guerrera, a luchador, after being hit over the head with a tequila bottle. Swerves and scenarios treated as &quot;shoots&quot; were heavily emphasized, as wrestlers supposedly gave unscripted interviews using &quot;insider&quot; terms that were only recognized by the Internet smarks; chaotic broadcasts became the norm.

==== Walkout and return ====
In January 2000, Russo received two phone calls, one from Bret Hart (then WCW World Heavyweight Champion) and another from Jeff Jarrett (then WCW United States Heavyweight Champion), both saying that they were injured, thus could not wrestle and forced to vacate their respective championships. This required Russo to alter the plans he had in mind for Hart and the New World Order. Russo and his booking committee sat down to determine what would now happen at Souled Out. One of the ideas included putting the now-vacated WCW Title on the shoot fighter Tank Abbott, a former UFC fighter. In an attempt to do something believable, the idea was originally to have a &quot;rumble match&quot; in which Sid Vicious would be an early entrant in the match and would last all the way to the end when Abbott would come into the match and eliminate him with one punch. Russo said that Abbott might not have held the belt for more than 24 hours if this title change had actually occurred. However, the day after he and his committee came up with the idea, he was asked to work in a committee and no longer be head writer. Russo declined the offer and left the company, with his immediate replacement being Kevin Sullivan, who along with other bookers, chose wrestler Chris Benoit to win the title from Vicious in a singles bout with Arn Anderson as the referee.

Three months after Russo&#x27;s departure, Sullivan was ultimately relieved of his duties in March 2000 and Russo returned as lead writer, alongside the returning Eric Bischoff. The idea was that Russo and Bischoff would reboot WCW into a more modern, streamlined company that would allow the younger talent to work with the established stars. On April 10, 2000&#x27;s, &quot;WCW Monday Nitro&quot; episode, Russo was introduced as an on-screen antagonist authority figure. Notable storyline points his character was involved with include &quot;The New Blood vs. The Millionaire&#x27;s Club&quot;; his feud with Ric Flair where he and David Flair were involved with shaving Ric Flair&#x27;s hair as well as Reid Flair&#x27;s hair; his feud with Goldberg; and his short reign as world champion. On May 8, 2000, Russo booked Miss Elizabeth in her first official wrestling match against Daffney. Elizabeth left the company shortly thereafter.

==== Bash at the Beach 2000 incident ====
At Bash at the Beach 2000, Russo was involved in an incident with Hulk Hogan where Hogan was booked to lose a match against reigning WCW World Heavyweight Champion Jeff Jarrett. Hogan refused to lose the match (invoking his contract&#x27;s &quot;creative control&quot; clause to override Russo), due to Russo&#x27;s apparent lack of direction for Hogan&#x27;s character following the planned loss. In the end, Russo booked Jarrett to literally lie down for Hogan, which resulted in Hogan doing a worked shoot on Russo saying, &quot;That&#x27;s why this company is in the damn shape it&#x27;s in; because of bullshit like this&quot; and scoring the pinfall victory by placing his foot on Jarrett&#x27;s chest. Russo would come out later in the broadcast to nullify the match&#x27;s result, as he publicly fired Hogan. This action restored the title to Jarrett, which set up a new title match between Jarrett and Booker T, with the latter winning the match and the title.
As Russo promised, Hogan never resurfaced in WCW and even filed a lawsuit against Russo for defamation of character (which was dismissed in 2003 stating that the charges filed against Russo were &quot;groundless&quot; and &quot;were just part of a wrestling storyline&quot;). Hogan claims (in his autobiography, &quot;Hollywood Hulk Hogan&quot;) that Russo turned the angle into a shoot, and that he was double-crossed by Turner executive Brad Siegel who did not want to use him anymore due to his costs per appearance. Eric Bischoff states in his autobiography, &quot;Controversy Creates Ca$h&quot;, that Hogan winning and leaving with the title was a work which would result in his return several months later where the plan was to crown a new champion at Halloween Havoc, where Hogan would come out at the end of the show and ultimately win a champion vs. champion match – but Russo coming out to fire him was in fact a shoot which led to the lawsuit filed by Hogan. Bischoff claims that he and Hogan celebrated after the event over the angle, but were distraught to get a phone call hearing of Russo&#x27;s in-ring shoot after Hogan left the arena. Mike Awesome, cousin to Hogan&#x27;s nephew Horace Hogan (who also left the company following the incident) also alleged in a shoot interview published by Highspots that the disputes and the incident also affected his WCW run, in which Russo allegedly took out his problems with Hulk Hogan on Awesome, citing that he was &quot;too close of kin&quot; to Hogan, by portraying several poorly received gimmicks.

====World Heavyweight Champion, injury, and departure====
In mid-2000, Russo entered into an angle with Ric Flair. The angle notably included Russo sending cops to the ring to arrest Flair during the wedding between Stacy Keibler and Flair&#x27;s son David.
In August 2000 at New Blood Rising, Russo entered into a feud with Goldberg after confronting Goldberg when the wrestler left a match and &quot;refused to follow the script.&quot; The next PPV, Fall Brawl, saw Russo interfere in Goldberg&#x27;s match against Scott Steiner, costing Goldberg the match.

On the September 18, 2000 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;, Russo was in a tag match alongside Sting and Booker T versus Scott Steiner and Jeff Jarrett, with the wrestler getting the pin receiving a shot at Booker T&#x27;s WCW World Heavyweight Championship. Russo won after Booker T dragged an unconscious Russo onto Steiner for the three count. The following week, Russo faced Booker T in a steel cage match for the WCW World Heavyweight Championship. The match did not appear to have a clear winner as Russo was speared by Goldberg through the side of the cage at the same time Booker T exited the cage. Two days later on &quot;Thunder&quot;, Russo was announced as the winner and new champion. However, the reign was short lived as Russo announced he was vacating the title immediately after, as he was not a wrestler. Russo suffered a severe concussion from the spear spot, and took time off because of post-concussion syndrome.

Russo&#x27;s run as head writer and fledgling in-ring career came to a halt after the concussion and other injuries. AOL Time Warner bought out Russo&#x27;s contract shortly after the WCW buyout in May 2001.

=== Return to WWE (2002) ===
Russo later returned to WWE in June 2002 as a consultant to oversee creative direction of both &quot;Raw&quot; and &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, but quickly left after two weeks, after stating that there was &quot;no way in the world that this thing would work out&quot;. The major storyline idea he proposed was an entire restart of the WCW Invasion, featuring previously unsigned talent such as Bill Goldberg, Scott Steiner, Eric Bischoff and Bret Hart. After feeling disrespected by a phone call with Stephanie McMahon, Russo then left of his own accord (turning down a $125,000 per year stay-at-home &#x27;advisory&#x27; role with WWE in favor of a $100,000 per year full-time position with TNA).

=== Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (2002–2014) ===

==== Writing and on-screen character ====

In July 2002, Russo joined Jeff and Jerry Jarrett&#x27;s NWA-TNA promotion as a creative writer and would assist in the writing and production of the shows. Russo claims that the name &quot;Total Nonstop Action&quot; came from him and that the original concept was, as they were exclusive to pay-per-view, to be an edgier product than WWE; the initials of the company &quot;TNA&quot; being a play on &quot;T&amp;A,&quot; short for &quot;Tits and Ass.&quot; Throughout the first few years, there were numerous reports of a creative power struggle over the direction of the programming. 

During the time when these rumors circulated, Russo eventually debuted as an on-screen character when the mysterious masked wrestler &quot;Mr. Wrestling III&quot; helped Jeff Jarrett win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship and was eventually unveiled as him. In the on-screen story, Jarrett did not want Russo&#x27;s help which led to the two become involved in a feud. Russo created his own faction of wrestlers he dubbed Sports Entertainment Xtreme (S.E.X.), recruiting the likes of Glenn Gilbertti, Sonny Siaki, B.G. James, Raven, Trinity, and others. S.E.X. faced the more traditional TNA wrestlers led by Jeff Jarrett. Eventually, Russo would leave his on-screen role and Gilbertti would become the leader of S.E.X. instead.

After leaving for a brief period, Russo returned as an on-screen character on the May 28, 2003 pay-per-view where he would hit Raven with a baseball bat helping Gilbertti become the number one contender for the world championship. The next week on June 4, 2003, when Gilbertti fought Jarrett for the world championship, Russo would hit Gilbertti with a baseball bat which in turn helped Jarrett retain his belt. On the following week&#x27;s pay-per-view (June 11, 2003), when A.J. Styles and Raven fought Jarrett for the world title in a triple threat match, Russo teased hitting Styles with Jarrett&#x27;s trademark guitar, but eventually hit Jarrett leading Styles to win the world championship belt.

Russo would then manage NWA World Heavyweight Champion A.J. Styles for the remainder of his 2003 run and S.E.X. was quietly written out of the storylines. On October 1, 2003, Russo suffered the first loss of his in-ring career in a tag team match against Dusty Rhodes and Jeff Jarrett, although his partner, Styles, yielded the pin. On the October 15, 2003 pay-per-view, Russo made his final appearance of that year in a street-fight with Jarrett. It was reported that Russo was written out of the company as a result of Hulk Hogan&#x27;s signing and because Hogan reportedly said that he would not work for TNA as long as Russo was involved with the company. In February 2004, shortly after Hogan was not able to commit with TNA, Russo would eventually return but strictly as an on-air character, becoming the &quot;Director of Authority&quot; in the storylines. This time, he was a face, claiming to have changed his ways (which was likely inspired by Russo&#x27;s real-life conversion to Christianity). However, he would disappear again in late 2004 when Dusty Rhodes was &quot;voted&quot; the new D.O.A. over himself at the three-hour November 2004 pay-per-view Victory Road in an interactive &quot;election&quot; on TNA&#x27;s website. Russo left the company after the 2004 Victory Road pay-per-view. In a November 2005 interview, Russo states that he never wrote a single show on his own during this period at TNA and described his time there as a &quot;total nightmare.&quot;

==== Return as a creative writer ====
On September 21, 2006, TNA president Dixie Carter re-signed Russo as a writer on the TNA creative team. Russo was paired with Dutch Mantell and Jeff Jarrett on the TNA creative team.

During the March 2007 TNA pay-per-view Destination X on the &quot;Last Rites&quot; match with Abyss and Sting, &quot;Fire Russo!&quot; chants erupted from the crowd in the arena at Orlando indicating the fans&#x27; frustration with the incidents that occurred during the match.
Another time the &quot;Fire Russo!&quot; chants were heard was at the following month&#x27;s pay-per-view Lockdown that was held in St. Louis on April 15, 2007. The chants were heard during the electrified steel cage match with Team 3D and The LAX where the lights would flicker on-and-off whenever a wrestler touched the cage giving the impression of electrocution. Dixie Carter has since noted that gimmick was created by writer Dutch Mantell. However, in a 2011 interview, Mantell denied this and the two proceeded to argue over Twitter for several months after this.

Russo became head of creative for TNA sometime during July 2009. On addressing the &quot;Fire Russo!&quot; chants, Russo said he was not head of creative during that time, and when the idea of the electrified steel cage was presented to him, he said that there was no way that the concept could have been done in a believable manner and that he was often blamed for ideas that he never even came up with. At the September 2009 No Surrender pay-per-view, Ed Ferrara joined TNA and began working on the creative team with Vince Russo and junior contributor Matt Conway.

On October 27, 2009, Hulk Hogan and Eric Bischoff signed with TNA and were paired with Russo, whom they had conflicted with in WCW and had not worked with since they departed the company after Bash at the Beach 2000. In 2010, when asked about his relationship with Russo at TNA, Hogan said he came to TNA in peace, that the writing staff of Russo, Ed Ferrara, Matt Conway, and Jeremy Borash have really &quot;stepped it up&quot;, and that Hogan loved Russo &quot;from a distance&quot;. According to Russo, the three met together and worked out their differences. While working with Russo, Bischoff also stated in a February 2010 interview that it was a &quot;very positive experience&quot; and that their collaborations were productive.

By October 6, 2011, Russo had stepped down to the role of a contributing writer, with Bruce Prichard taking over the head writer&#x27;s role. On February 14, 2012, TNA president Dixie Carter explained that TNA and Russo had mutually parted ways during the week.

==== Secret return ====
In April 2014, the &quot;PWInsider&quot; website claimed that Russo was working as a consultant for TNA Wrestling. Russo denied the reports, but on July 15, &quot;PWInsider&quot; reported that Russo had accidentally sent an email to them with instructions on how TNA&#x27;s commentators work. As a result, and after trying to state that he was not involved with TNA, Russo admitted on his website that he was already working as a consultant for TNA Wrestling to work with TNA&#x27;s commentators and that one of TNA&#x27;s conditions was that Russo was to keep his involvement confidential. In less than two days, Russo&#x27;s statement was removed from his website.

On July 30, 2014, Russo claimed that he was &quot;officially done&quot; with TNA. Not long after, Russo revealed that he had been working for TNA since October 24, 2013, claiming that he had been involved in creative meetings and also critiqued the weekly episodes of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;. Russo stated that he was getting paid about $3,000 a month, averaging to $36,000 a year, to be a consultant with TNA.

=== Aro Lucha (2017–2018) ===
On December 8, 2017, Russo signed with the Nashville, Tennessee-based Aro Lucha promotion as a script consultant. On April 5, 2018, Aro Lucha&#x27;s CEO, Jason Brown, explained via a question and answer session on WeFunder (a crowd-funding website), that Russo had been hired as an independent contractor, not as an employee. As of April 2018, Russo is no longer with the promotion.

== Other media ==

=== Online work ===
In 2014, Russo wrote a series of pro wrestling columns for &quot;What Culture&quot;, a UK-based website. He wrote a weekly column for Chris Jericho&#x27;s website &quot;Web Is Jericho&quot; until March 2023.

Since 2015, Russo hosted numerous daily podcasts for his podcast network &quot;Vince Russo&#x27;s The Brand&quot;, formerly &quot;The RELM Network&quot;. Russo also briefly hosted a podcast on website &quot;Fightful Wrestling&quot; in 2016.

Russo now discusses professional wrestling, entertainment and more on his podcasting network called &quot;Channel Attitude&quot; which features wrestling personalities including the &quot;Disco Inferno&quot; Glenn Gilbertti, Justin Credible, EC3, Stevie Richards, Al Snow and Stevie Ray. He also does podcasts reviewing Raw and discussing wrestling news on Sportskeeda.

=== Books ===
Russo has written two autobiographies, including &quot;Forgiven: One Man&#x27;s Journey from Self-Glorification to Sanctification&quot;, released on November 29, 2005. Documenting his early life, his WWF run, as well as becoming a born again Christian, the book was perceived by some to portray a negative attitude towards the wrestling business. Originally titled &quot;Welcome To Bizarroland&quot;, the title and content of the book were revised to correspond with his newly found faith.

Russo&#x27;s second book &quot;Rope Opera: How WCW Killed Vince Russo&quot; was released on March 1, 2010 and chronicles his tenure with WCW and TNA Wrestling. The title &quot;Rope Opera&quot; stems from the title of a television series idea that he pitched to networks at the time of his WWF tenure.

== Personal life ==
Russo is an American of Italian descent, as his maternal grandfather was Sicilian. He has been married to his wife Amy since 1983. The couple have three children together.

In October 2003, Russo became a Born Again Christian. In 2004, he formed a short-lived online Christian ministry titled &quot;Forgiven&quot;. In late 2005, he produced two shows for his Christian &quot;Ring of Glory&quot; independent promotion.

Russo was close friends with Joanie Laurer, professionally known as Chyna before her death in 2016.

Russo worked with Jim Cornette in the WWF during the 1990s and in TNA Wrestling during the early 2000s. They regularly conflicted over their opposing views on the wrestling business. In April 2010, a law firm contacted and accused Cornette of making a &quot;terroristic threat&quot; after writing a letter saying, &quot;I want Vince Russo to die. If I could figure out a way to murder him without going to prison, I would consider it the greatest accomplishment of my life.&quot; In June 2017, Russo filed a restraining order against Cornette after repeated verbal threats of physical harm towards Russo and his family - Cornette, in return, has sold copies of the order in order to raise money for charity. Their real life rivalry has been featured in two episodes of Vice TV&#x27;s &quot;Dark Side of the Ring&quot; documentary series covering the Montreal Screwjob and the other covering the WWF Brawl for All, which aired in 2019 and 2020, including a promise by Cornette to urinate on Russo&#x27;s gravestone.

== Legacy in professional wrestling==
Russo is among the most controversial figures in wrestling. He often states that the story and character elements of the show are what draws viewers, and thus emphasizes entertainment over the in-ring aspect of professional wrestling. &quot;Newsday&quot; writes that &quot;Despite scripting some of the most successful WWF television programs in history, and later doing the same for WCW and TNA, Russo remains one of wrestling&#x27;s most reviled personalities for his sometimes unconventional take on the wrestling business.&quot; According to Russo, one reason he is reviled is due to his take on the current WWE product; he believes there is too much actual wrestling and not enough storylines. In Russo&#x27;s book, &quot;Rope Opera&quot;, he writes that he has been conversely referred to as &quot;the saviour of the WWF&quot; and &quot;the man who destroyed WCW&quot;.

WWE credits Russo with being responsible for many of the Attitude Era&#x27;s storylines. Likewise, Bob Kapur of &quot;Slam! Wrestling&quot; gives Russo credit for the company turning away from the cartoonish style of the early-mid 1990s and instead bringing more mature storylines and characters to the promotion. WWF&#x27;s The Rock spoke fondly of working with Russo, praising his &quot;crazy out of box ideas&quot;.

Gene Okerlund claimed in 2004 that Russo&#x27;s ideas were successful in the WWF because Vince McMahon was able to control them, while Ric Flair doubted Russo&#x27;s WWF influence during their time together in WCW, later blaming Russo for the disorganization of WCW. Eric Bischoff has said that Russo was hired at WCW by overstating his influence in WWF, which Bischoff called &quot;fraudulent.&quot; Wrestling promoters Tony Khan and Jody Hamilton have criticized Russo&#x27;s role in the downfall of WCW, and TNA co-founder Jerry Jarrett expressed regret at the decision of bringing Russo in. 

Russo&#x27;s decision to have David Arquette win the WCW World Heavyweight Championship was viewed as highly controversial, though Russo defended his decision, citing that mainstream American newspapers covered the story. WrestleCrap named Arquette the worst wrestling champion of all time and called Russo&#x27;s decision a &quot;monumentally damaging blow to a company that was already at death&#x27;s door.&quot; WWE&#x27;s &quot;Rise and Fall of WCW&quot; documentary also largely blamed Russo for the decline of WCW, prompting DVD Talk critic Nick Hartel to write that &quot;while Russo deserves a lot of blame, he was not the only one in charge.&quot; R. D. Reynolds was also critical of many of Russo&#x27;s booking decisions but stated that Turner Broadcasting executive Jamie Kellner&#x27;s decision to cancel WCW programs from Turner Networks was ultimately responsible for WCW&#x27;s death. Regarding his time in WCW, Russo personally said, &quot;WCW and I were never on the same page; it was just that simple&quot;.

Booker T credits Vince Russo for his rise to main event status, citing &quot;... if it weren&#x27;t for Vince Russo, perhaps I would have never been the world champion... at all, ever!&quot; Russo thanked Booker for the compliment and has since called Booker&#x27;s coronation as WCW Champion at Bash at the Beach 2000 &quot;the proudest moment of my career, and the greatest contribution I was able to make to the business.&quot;

Former TNA President Dixie Carter praised Russo as &quot;incredibly talented&quot; in 2014, but admitted his presence &quot;proved to be too distracting to continue a working relationship&quot;; when asked if Russo could return to the promotion she said &quot;never say never&quot;. Various wrestlers who worked with Russo in TNA have spoken fondly of him, including Hernandez, Kurt Angle, and AJ Styles. Velvet Sky and Angelina Love credit Russo for being supportive of TNA&#x27;s Knockouts division.

== Championships and accomplishments ==
* World Championship Wrestling
** WCW World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter
** Worst Gimmick (1999) 
**Worst On Interviews (2000)
**Worst Non-Wrestling Personality (2000)

== References ==
== External links ==
* WWE: Inside WWE &gt; Title History &gt; WCW World Championship &gt; 20000925 - Vince Russo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1090803" start="0" end="19" title="Vince Russo" label="Vincent James Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="59" end="81" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="101" end="107" title="pundit" label="pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="148" end="174" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="191" end="219" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="230" end="260" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling" label="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q586060" start="270" end="278" title="Creative writing" label="creative"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988900" start="330" end="356" title="Professional wrestling authority figures" label="on-screen authority figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q35560" start="752" end="764" title="Attitude Era" label="Attitude Era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="848" end="854" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#book" label="booked"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="893" end="901" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="one-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="902" end="932" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="985" end="1001" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="1004" end="1013" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="1018" end="1026" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="1105" end="1112" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q941968" start="1133" end="1145" title="Farmingville, New York" label="Farmingville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1147" end="1155" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q940289" start="1180" end="1210" title="University of Southern Indiana" label="University of Southern Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="1288" end="1298" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="1442" end="1464" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737662" start="1510" end="1521" title="Johnny Rodz" label="Johnny Rodz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567397" start="1525" end="1543" title="Gleason&amp;#x27;s Gym" label="Gleason&amp;#x27;s Gym"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1547" end="1555" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1586" end="1597" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949657" start="1751" end="1755" title="WGBB" label="WGBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323073" start="1759" end="1767" title="Freeport, New York" label="Freeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785076" start="1995" end="2007" title="WWE Magazine" label="WWF Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233905" start="2056" end="2069" title="Linda McMahon" label="Linda McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="2232" end="2248" title="WWE Raw" label="Monday Night Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="2261" end="2268" title="Nielsen ratings" label="ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193741" start="2290" end="2302" title="WCW Monday Nitro" label="Monday Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q35530" start="2446" end="2462" title="Monday Night War" label="Monday Night War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="2470" end="2498" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="2537" end="2550" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="2686" end="2695" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2697" end="2704" title="List of professional wrestling terms#S" label="swerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="2719" end="2723" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2724" end="2729" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Turn" label="turns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2735" end="2741" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#W" label="worked"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304024" start="2742" end="2748" title="Shoot (professional wrestling)" label="shoots"/>
<link wikidata="Q890908" start="2951" end="2974" title="The Jerry Springer Show" label="The Jerry Springer Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="3569" end="3581" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3593" end="3599" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Angle" label="angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35560" start="3710" end="3722" title="Attitude Era" label="Attitude Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q80341" start="3907" end="3923" title="King of the Ring (1998)" label="King of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718843" start="3946" end="3956" title="Ed Ferrara" label="Ed Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q270576" start="4114" end="4119" title="Sable (wrestler)" label="Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q555510" start="4121" end="4130" title="Sean Morley" label="Val Venis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066512" start="4135" end="4148" title="Charles Wright (wrestler)" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041108" start="4177" end="4190" title="WWF Brawl for All" label="Brawl for All"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="4246" end="4260" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="4262" end="4276" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="4281" end="4285" title="Glenn Jacobs" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="4296" end="4319" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="4324" end="4335" title="Vince McMahon" label="Mr. McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="4354" end="4362" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="4368" end="4378" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675522" start="4568" end="4580" title="Chris Kreski" label="Chris Kreski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718843" start="4742" end="4752" title="Ed Ferrara" label="Ed Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="4940" end="4950" title="WWE SmackDown" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395975" start="5705" end="5725" title="Jushin Thunder Liger" label="Jushin Thunder Liger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163866" start="5751" end="5787" title="IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship" label="IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="5844" end="5867" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q251976" start="5932" end="5949" title="Juventud Guerrera" label="Juventud Guerrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="5953" end="5961" title="luchador" label="luchador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304024" start="6055" end="6060" title="Shoot (professional wrestling)" label="shoot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6218" end="6224" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Smark" label="smarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="6350" end="6359" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="6415" end="6427" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="6658" end="6673" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600424" start="6754" end="6764" title="Souled Out (2000)" label="Souled Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q651586" start="6847" end="6858" title="Tank Abbott" label="Tank Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="6869" end="6872" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="UFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q703668" start="6992" end="7003" title="Sid Eudy" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382255" start="7489" end="7503" title="Kevin Sullivan (wrestler)" label="Kevin Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="7550" end="7562" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q690063" start="7616" end="7628" title="Arn Anderson" label="Arn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343020" start="7867" end="7873" title="Reboot (fiction)" label="reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994241" start="8191" end="8204" title="The New Blood" label="The New Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12327250" start="8209" end="8236" title="The Millionaire&amp;#x27;s Club" label="The Millionaire&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="8258" end="8267" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q953187" start="8281" end="8292" title="David Flair" label="David Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951828" start="8353" end="8363" title="Reid Flair" label="Reid Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="8391" end="8399" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q966588" start="8469" end="8483" title="Miss Elizabeth" label="Miss Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411776" start="8530" end="8537" title="Daffney" label="Daffney"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842744" start="8632" end="8654" title="Bash at the Beach (2000)" label="Bash at the Beach 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="8695" end="8705" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304024" start="9125" end="9137" title="worked shoot" label="worked shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="9540" end="9548" title="Booker Huffman" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996108" start="10168" end="10192" title="Controversy Creates Cash" label="Controversy Creates Ca$h"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977081" start="10357" end="10372" title="Halloween Havoc (2000)" label="Halloween Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340386" start="10752" end="10764" title="Mike Awesome" label="Mike Awesome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901863" start="10796" end="10808" title="Horace Hogan" label="Horace Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="11265" end="11274" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q238407" start="11377" end="11390" title="Stacy Keibler" label="Stacy Keibler"/>
<link wikidata="Q953187" start="11412" end="11417" title="David Flair" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363829" start="11437" end="11453" title="New Blood Rising" label="New Blood Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="11486" end="11494" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668043" start="11613" end="11623" title="Fall Brawl (2000)" label="Fall Brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q467367" start="11678" end="11691" title="Scott Steiner" label="Scott Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="11941" end="11975" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="12111" end="12127" title="steel cage match" label="steel cage match"/>
<link wikidata="Q736244" start="12349" end="12356" title="WCW Thunder" label="Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581333" start="12626" end="12650" title="post-concussion syndrome" label="post-concussion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="12770" end="12785" title="AOL Time Warner" label="AOL Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q35574" start="13223" end="13235" title="The Invasion (professional wrestling)" label="WCW Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="13282" end="13295" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Bill Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q467367" start="13297" end="13310" title="Scott Steiner" label="Scott Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="13312" end="13325" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="13330" end="13339" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q842633" start="13389" end="13406" title="Stephanie McMahon" label="Stephanie McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="13709" end="13713" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q938809" start="13718" end="13731" title="Jerry Jarrett" label="Jerry Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="13739" end="13742" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="NWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="13743" end="13746" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling" label="TNA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14386" end="14392" title="Lucha libre#Masks" label="masked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="14460" end="14494" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14664" end="14671" title="List of professional wrestling terms#F" label="faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090803" start="14695" end="14722" title="Sports Entertainment Xtreme" label="Sports Entertainment Xtreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190195" start="14757" end="14772" title="Disco Inferno (wrestler)" label="Glenn Gilbertti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562098" start="14774" end="14785" title="Sonny Siaki" label="Sonny Siaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q536050" start="14787" end="14797" title="Road Dogg" label="B.G. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q452217" start="14799" end="14804" title="Raven (wrestler)" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082629" start="14806" end="14813" title="Trinity (wrestler)" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q452217" start="15130" end="15135" title="Raven (wrestler)" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q83816" start="15479" end="15490" title="A.J. Styles" label="A.J. Styles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15541" end="15560" title="Professional wrestling match types#Basic non-elimination matches" label="triple threat match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="16228" end="16238" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="16591" end="16595" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q361235" start="16765" end="16777" title="Dusty Rhodes" label="Dusty Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927542" start="16873" end="16885" title="Victory Road (2004)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q378224" start="17266" end="17278" title="Dixie Carter (wrestling)" label="Dixie Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502323" start="17355" end="17368" title="Dutch Mantell" label="Dutch Mantell"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="17373" end="17385" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918770" start="17452" end="17465" title="Destination X (2007)" label="Destination X"/>
<link wikidata="Q165350" start="17507" end="17512" title="Abyss (wrestler)" label="Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="17517" end="17522" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257738" start="17797" end="17805" title="Lockdown (2007)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="17823" end="17832" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="17897" end="17913" title="Cage match" label="steel cage match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190952" start="17919" end="17926" title="Dudley Boyz" label="Team 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827473" start="17931" end="17938" title="The Latin American Xchange" label="The LAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502323" start="18122" end="18135" title="Dutch Mantell" label="Dutch Mantell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342469" start="18690" end="18702" title="No Surrender (2009)" label="No Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718843" start="18717" end="18727" title="Ed Ferrara" label="Ed Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="18853" end="18863" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="18868" end="18881" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19025" end="19047" title="Bash At The Beach 2000#2000" label="Bash at the Beach 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718843" start="19180" end="19190" title="Ed Ferrara" label="Ed Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807953" start="19209" end="19222" title="Jeremy Borash" label="Jeremy Borash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978158" start="19656" end="19670" title="Bruce Prichard" label="Bruce Prichard"/>
<link wikidata="Q64160" start="20799" end="20815" title="Impact Wrestling (TV series)" label="Impact Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="21015" end="21035" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089616" start="21186" end="21194" title="Wefunder" label="WeFunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="21482" end="21484" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="21529" end="21542" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190195" start="22028" end="22069" title="Disco Inferno (wrestler)" label="&amp;quot;Disco Inferno&amp;quot; Glenn Gilbertti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391788" start="22071" end="22086" title="Justin Credible" label="Justin Credible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370964" start="22088" end="22091" title="Ethan Carter III" label="EC3"/>
<link wikidata="Q657900" start="22093" end="22108" title="Stevie Richards" label="Stevie Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q584289" start="22110" end="22117" title="Al Snow" label="Al Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256739" start="22122" end="22132" title="Stevie Ray" label="Stevie Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q120644228" start="22203" end="22214" title="Sportskeeda" label="Sportskeeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="22253" end="22268" title="autobiography" label="autobiographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="23249" end="23259" title="Born again (Christianity)" label="Born Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="23321" end="23329" title="Minister (Christianity)" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062492" start="23439" end="23460" title="Independent circuit" label="independent promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q466683" start="23531" end="23536" title="Chyna" label="Chyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q520572" start="23582" end="23594" title="Jim Cornette" label="Jim Cornette"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740084" start="24333" end="24340" title="Vice TV" label="Vice TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q63168970" start="24354" end="24375" title="Dark Side of the Ring" label="Dark Side of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q35546" start="24414" end="24431" title="Montreal Screwjob" label="Montreal Screwjob"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041108" start="24459" end="24476" title="WWF Brawl for All" label="WWF Brawl for All"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="24859" end="24866" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q35560" start="25552" end="25564" title="Attitude Era" label="Attitude Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q902502" start="25613" end="25628" title="Slam! Wrestling" label="Slam! Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="25820" end="25828" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q955033" start="25915" end="25928" title="Gene Okerlund" label="Gene Okerlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="26182" end="26195" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636022" start="26336" end="26345" title="Tony Khan" label="Tony Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208075" start="26350" end="26363" title="Jody Hamilton" label="Jody Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q938809" start="26441" end="26454" title="Jerry Jarrett" label="Jerry Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q294185" start="26542" end="26556" title="David Arquette" label="David Arquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037768" start="26734" end="26745" title="WrestleCrap" label="WrestleCrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670005" start="27044" end="27052" title="DVD Talk" label="DVD Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273572" start="27170" end="27184" title="R. D. Reynolds" label="R. D. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="27261" end="27280" title="Turner Broadcasting" label="Turner Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147052" start="27291" end="27304" title="Jamie Kellner" label="Jamie Kellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="27541" end="27549" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842744" start="27837" end="27859" title="Bash at the Beach (2000)" label="Bash at the Beach 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q287569" start="28340" end="28349" title="Hernandez (wrestler)" label="Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="28351" end="28361" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83816" start="28367" end="28376" title="AJ Styles" label="AJ Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q242941" start="28378" end="28388" title="Velvet Sky" label="Velvet Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q260139" start="28393" end="28406" title="Angelina Love" label="Angelina Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533483" start="28455" end="28464" title="Impact Knockouts" label="Knockouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="28518" end="28546" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="28550" end="28584" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="28586" end="28592" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="28596" end="28625" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28629" end="28642" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Gimmick" label="Worst Gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28653" end="28672" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst on Interviews" label="Worst On Interviews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28682" end="28713" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Non-Wrestling Personality" label="Worst Non-Wrestling Personality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584967" wikidata="Q7798937" url="?curid=584967" title="Thunder Bay Press">
<text>Thunder Bay Press is a California-based publisher of illustrated non-fiction books. Subject matter includes adult crafts and leisure activities, pop culture, cooking, pets and domestic animals, sports, history, transportation, and nature.

Thunder Bay was founded by the book distributor Advanced Marketing Services in 1990. Advanced Marketing Services was acquired by Baker &amp; Taylor in 2007.

It is owned by the book distribution firm, Readerlink Distribution Services, who acquired Thunder Bay from Baker &amp; Taylor in 2015. The imprint&#x27;s distribution is handled by Publishers Group West.

==Publications==
===Then and Now series===
It is also one of the two United States publisher of books in the Then and Now series of books, published in the United Kingdom and Australia by Pavilion Books, that include:
* 

===Bathroom readers===
Thunder Bay is also known for publishing &quot;The Bathroom Reader&quot; and &quot;The Ultimate Bathroom Reader&quot;.

==References ==
==External links==
* Thunder Bay Press Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7798937" start="0" end="17" title="Thunder Bay Press" label="Thunder Bay Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="23" end="33" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="40" end="49" title="publisher" label="publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q213051" start="65" end="76" title="non-fiction" label="non-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587754" start="369" end="387" title="Baker &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Baker &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608032" start="417" end="439" title="book distributor" label="book distribution firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25021721" start="441" end="473" title="Readerlink Distribution Services" label="Readerlink Distribution Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258100" start="579" end="600" title="Publishers Group West" label="Publishers Group West"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219703" start="712" end="724" title="Then and Now (books)" label="Then and Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="791" end="805" title="Pavilion Books" label="Pavilion Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584970" wikidata="Q5450199" url="?curid=584970" title="Finger Lakes Community College">
<text>Finger Lakes Community College (FLCC) is a public community college in Canandaigua, New York. It is affiliated with the State University of New York and sponsored by Ontario County. The main campus is just east of the City of Canandaigua, with additional campus centers in Victor, Geneva, and Newark to serve the needs of Ontario County, Wayne County, Yates County and Seneca County in the Finger Lakes region of New York.

==History==
Finger Lakes Community College was established in 1965 and opened in 1967 as the Community College of the Finger Lakes (CCFL) in a storefront &quot;campus&quot; in Canandaigua, NY. The college now rests on of park-like land just outside Canandaigua, and is home to the Constellation Brands – Marvin Sands Performing Arts Center (CMAC). The college now has affiliated housing in the 356 bed Suites at Laker Landing, adjacent to the campus. In Fall 2010, FLCC&#x27;s headcount enrollment was 6,935 the highest in its history.

In July 2009, FLCC received a $1 Million gift from Constellation Brands and the Sands Family, the largest gift in the school&#x27;s history. The main road leading to the campus was renamed Marvin Sands Drive in honor of Marvin Sands, the Sands&#x27; family patriarch and the Sands&#x27; family&#x27;s dedication to FLCC and the region. In Fall 2009, FLCC named another &quot;loop&quot; road, connecting Marvin Sands Drive and &quot;D&quot; parking lot, Laker Lane after the college&#x27;s athletic teams.

===Expansion===
Construction of the Student Life Center began in early 2010; and opened in spring of 2012. The new building is and is a LEED certified green building housing the new 400-seat cafeteria, One-Stop (enrollment services) center, and bookstore, as well as the college&#x27;s first auditorium (not including the CMAC), which seats 410. The upper floors of the original building have been renovated into classrooms and music recording technology spaces as part of the approximately $45 million project.

Enrollment in 2015 was 6,761.

===Presidents===

==Academics==

FLCC is accredited by the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, and the National League for Nursing. All programs of instruction are registered with the Office of Higher Education of the New York State Education department.

Finger Lakes Community College also operates the Muller Field Station at the southern end of Honeoye Lake which serves as an outdoor education facility, the East Hill Campus, in Naples, New York, and the FLCC Viticulture and Wine Center in Geneva, New York.

==Athletics==
The Lakers are a non-scholarship member of the National Junior College Athletic Association (NJCAA), Division III, and the Mid-State Athletic Conference, Finger Lakes Community College competes against two-year institutions throughout the state.

Teams compete in:

* Baseball
* Women&#x27;s/men&#x27;s basketball
* Women&#x27;s/men&#x27;s cross country
* Men&#x27;s lacrosse
* Women&#x27;s/men&#x27;s soccer
* Women&#x27;s/men&#x27;s track
* Softball
* Women&#x27;s volleyball
* Woodsmen

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5450199" start="0" end="30" title="Finger Lakes Community College" label="Finger Lakes Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450199" start="32" end="36" title="Finger Lakes Community College" label="FLCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="43" end="49" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="50" end="67" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363104" start="71" end="92" title="Canandaigua, New York" label="Canandaigua, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="120" end="148" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q115025" start="166" end="180" title="Ontario County, New York" label="Ontario County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363104" start="226" end="237" title="Canandaigua (city), New York" label="Canandaigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708619" start="273" end="279" title="Victor, New York" label="Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378284" start="281" end="287" title="Geneva, New York" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983435" start="293" end="299" title="Newark, New York" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q115025" start="322" end="336" title="Ontario County, New York" label="Ontario County"/>
<link wikidata="Q56146" start="338" end="350" title="Wayne County, New York" label="Wayne County"/>
<link wikidata="Q56144" start="352" end="364" title="Yates County" label="Yates County"/>
<link wikidata="Q71136" start="369" end="382" title="Seneca County, New York" label="Seneca County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416994" start="390" end="402" title="Finger Lakes" label="Finger Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="413" end="421" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163918" start="705" end="763" title="Constellation Brands – Marvin Sands Performing Arts Center" label="Constellation Brands – Marvin Sands Performing Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q51885228" start="1181" end="1193" title="Marvin Sands" label="Marvin Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="1618" end="1632" title="green building" label="green building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163918" start="1789" end="1793" title="Constellation Brands – Marvin Sands Performing Arts Center" label="CMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q204840" start="2413" end="2425" title="Honeoye Lake" label="Honeoye Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033364" start="3073" end="3081" title="Woodsmen" label="Woodsmen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584975" wikidata="Q6898456" url="?curid=584975" title="Monbetsu">
<text>Monbetsu is the Japanese name of several places in Hokkaidō, Japan. It originates from the Ainu word &quot;mo-pet&quot;, meaning quiet river.
* In Okhotsk Subprefecture:
** Monbetsu, Hokkaidō (紋別市), a city
** Monbetsu District, Hokkaidō (紋別郡), a district
* Monbetsu, Hokkaidō (Hidaka) (門別町), a former town in Hidaka Subprefecture now part of the town Hidaka, Hokkaidō

==See also==
Mountains in Hokkaidō:
* Mount Monbetsu (紋別岳), a mountain on the shore of Lake Shikotsu in Chitose City
* Mount Date Monbetsu (伊達紋別岳), also referred to as Mount Monbetsu, a mountain, in Date City</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6898456" start="0" end="8" title="Monbetsu" label="Monbetsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q692745" start="173" end="191" title="Monbetsu, Hokkaidō" label="Monbetsu, Hokkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208832" start="209" end="236" title="Monbetsu District, Hokkaidō" label="Monbetsu District, Hokkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916284" start="257" end="284" title="Monbetsu, Hokkaidō (Hidaka)" label="Monbetsu, Hokkaidō (Hidaka)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922234" start="407" end="421" title="Mount Monbetsu" label="Mount Monbetsu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="488" end="507" title="Mount Date Monbetsu" label="Mount Date Monbetsu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584985" wikidata="Q6572908" url="?curid=584985" title="List of Harvard University people">
<text>The list of Harvard University alumni includes notable graduates, professors, and administrators affiliated with Harvard University. For a list of notable non-graduates of Harvard, see the list of Harvard University non-graduate alumni. For a list of Harvard&#x27;s presidents, see President of Harvard University.

Eight Presidents of the United States have graduated from Harvard University: John Adams, John Quincy Adams, Rutherford B. Hayes, John F. Kennedy, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Theodore Roosevelt, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama. Bush graduated from Harvard Business School, Hayes and Obama from Harvard Law School, and the others from Harvard College.

Over 150 Nobel Prize winners have been associated with the university as alumni, researchers or faculty.
==Nobel laureates==




























==Pulitzer Prize winners==













































==Royalty and nobility==







==Science, technology, medicine, and mathematics==





































==Business==






















































* Whitney Tilson (born 1966), hedge fund manager, philanthropist, author, and Democratic political activist

==Politics==
==Law==

===Supreme Court justices===





















===Other legal figures===













* Danielle Sassoon, Class of 2008, former acting US Attorney for the Southern District of New York

==Military==























==Journalism==






















==Literature==






























*Benjamin Kunkel (born 1972), novelist and political economist

==Film, theater, and television==


































==Music==





















==Art, architecture, and engineering==
















==Religion==







==Athletics==



















*Spencer Freedman (born 1998), college basketball player for the Harvard Crimson and NYU Violets
*Ross Friedman (born 1992), Major League Soccer player
*Elizabeth Tartakovsky (born 2000), Olympic saber fencer
*Michael Zimmerman (born 1970), tennis player, 2x Ivy League Player of the Year

==Criminals==







==Academics==

===Educational institution founders and presidents===















* Yoram Ben-Porat (1937–1992), Israeli economist and President of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem
* Shlomo Eckstein (1929–2020), Israeli economist and President of Bar-Ilan University
* Amos Eiran, Israeli President of the University of Haifa
* Yosef Tekoah (1925–1991), Ph.D., Israeli President of the Ben-Gurion University of the Negev

===Professors and scholars===


































==Faculty==

































==See also==
* List of Harvard University non-graduate alumni

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6572908" start="4" end="37" title="List of Harvard University people" label="list of Harvard University alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="113" end="131" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163158" start="189" end="235" title="list of Harvard University non-graduate alumni" label="list of Harvard University non-graduate alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588706" start="282" end="313" title="President of Harvard University" label="President of Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="322" end="353" title="President of the United States" label="Presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="394" end="404" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="406" end="423" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="425" end="444" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="446" end="461" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="463" end="488" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="490" end="508" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="510" end="524" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="530" end="542" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="564" end="587" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="610" end="628" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="650" end="665" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996748" start="1082" end="1096" title="Whitney Tilson" label="Whitney Tilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q132328372" start="1302" end="1318" title="Danielle Sassoon" label="Danielle Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889567" start="1349" end="1398" title="United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York" label="US Attorney for the Southern District of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q817585" start="1519" end="1534" title="Benjamin Kunkel" label="Benjamin Kunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45302328" start="1790" end="1806" title="Spencer Freedman" label="Spencer Freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400912" start="1854" end="1869" title="Harvard Crimson men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Harvard Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956118" start="1874" end="1885" title="NYU Violets men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="NYU Violets"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234571" start="1887" end="1900" title="Ross Friedman (soccer)" label="Ross Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243184" start="1942" end="1963" title="Elizabeth Tartakovsky" label="Elizabeth Tartakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q110010506" start="1999" end="2016" title="Michael Zimmerman (tennis)" label="Michael Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845997" start="2186" end="2201" title="Yoram Ben-Porat" label="Yoram Ben-Porat"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="2254" end="2284" title="Hebrew University of Jerusalem" label="Hebrew University of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q28543624" start="2287" end="2302" title="Shlomo Eckstein" label="Shlomo Eckstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124657" start="2351" end="2370" title="Bar-Ilan University" label="Bar-Ilan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788323" start="2373" end="2383" title="Amos Eiran" label="Amos Eiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q591115" start="2410" end="2429" title="University of Haifa" label="University of Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q504844" start="2432" end="2444" title="Yosef Tekoah" label="Yosef Tekoah"/>
<link wikidata="Q737332" start="2490" end="2524" title="Ben-Gurion University of the Negev" label="Ben-Gurion University of the Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163158" start="2650" end="2696" title="List of Harvard University non-graduate alumni" label="List of Harvard University non-graduate alumni"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584987" wikidata="Q2996376" url="?curid=584987" title="Harmonic Convergence">
<text>The Harmonic Convergence was the world&#x27;s first synchronized global peace meditation, coinciding with an exceptional alignment of Solar System planets on August 16–17, 1987. The event was organized by spouses José Argüelles and Lloydine Burris Argüelles, via the Planet Art Network (PAN), a peace movement they founded in 1983. Timing of the Harmonic Convergence allegedly marked a significant celestial alignment of the Sun, Moon, and six planets as &quot;part of the grand trine.&quot;

==Origins==

Though Arguelles eventually connected the timing of the Harmonic Convergence with his understanding of the significance of Maya calendrics, the dates themselves were derived not from Maya cosmology but from the reconstructed Aztec prophecies of Tony Shearer in his 1971 book &quot;Lord of the Dawn&quot;. According to Shearer&#x27;s interpretation of the Aztec calendar, the selected date marked the end of twenty-two cycles of 52 years each, or 1,144 years in all. The twenty-two cycles were divided into thirteen &quot;heaven&quot; cycles, which began in AD 843 and ended in 1519, when the nine &quot;hell&quot; cycles began, ending 468 years later in 1987. The very beginning of the nine &quot;hell&quot; cycles was precisely the day that Hernán Cortés landed in Mexico, April 22, 1519 (coinciding with &quot;1 Reed&quot; on the Aztec/Mayan calendar, the day sacred to Mesoamerican cultural hero Quetzalcoatl). The 9 hell cycles of 52 years each ended precisely on August 16–17, 1987. Shearer introduced the dates and the prophecy to Arguelles, and he eventually co-opted them and coined Harmonic Convergence to promote the event.

==Astrological alignment== 

According to the astrologer Neil Michelsen&#x27;s &quot;The American Ephemeris,&quot; on 24 August 1987 there was an exceptional alignment of planets in the Solar System. Eight primary celestial bodies were aligned in an unusual configuration called a grand trine.

The Sun, Moon and six out of nine planets (note: Astrology continues to consider Pluto as a “planet.”) formed part of the grand trine, that is, they were aligned at the apexes of an equilateral triangle when viewed from the Earth.

The Sun, Moon, Mars, and Venus were in exact alignment, astrologically called a conjunction at the first degree of Virgo in Tropical Astrology. Mercury was in the fourth degree of Virgo which most astrologers count as part of the same conjunction being within the &quot;orb&quot; of influence. Jupiter was in Aries, and Saturn and Uranus in Sagittarius completing the grand trine. However some believe that this is an Earth grand trine with Sun/Moon/Mars/Venus/Mercury in the initial degrees of Virgo, Neptune at 5 degrees of Capricorn, and Jupiter in the last degree of Aries (anaretic degree), on the cusp of Taurus. Uranus, and especially Saturn are on the edge of this trine.

There is disagreement regarding this occurrence being a unique event. Grand trines, where planets share 120 degree positions forming an equilateral triangle, are not uncommon or particularly noteworthy. Traditional astrology does not consider trines to be action points, and would not regard such an occurrence to be significant.

== Astrological interpretations ==

The convergence is purported to have &quot;corresponded with a great shift in the earth’s energy from warlike to peaceful.&quot; Believers of this esoteric prophecy maintain that the Harmonic Convergence ushered in a five-year period of Earth&#x27;s &quot;cleansing&quot;, where many of the planet&#x27;s &quot;false structures of separation&quot; would collapse.

Adherents deemed the event as beginning a new age of universal peace, with signs indicating a &quot;major energy shift&quot; was about to occur, a turning point in Earth&#x27;s collective karma and dharma, and that this energy was powerful enough to change the global perspective of man from one of conflict to one of co-operation. Actress and author Shirley MacLaine called it a &quot;window of light,&quot; allowing access to higher realms of awareness.

According to Argüelles, the Harmonic Convergence also began the final 25-year countdown to the end of the Mayan Long Count in 2012, which would be the so-called end of history and the beginning of a new 5,125-year cycle. Evils of the modern world (war, materialism, violence, abuses, injustice, oppression, etc.) would have ended with the birth of the 6th Sun and the 5th Earth on December 21, 2012.

== Power centers ==

An important part of the Harmonic Convergence observances was the idea of congregating at &quot;power centers.&quot; Power centers were places, such as Mount Shasta, California, Mount Fuji, and Mount Yamnuska where the spiritual energy was held to be particularly strong. The belief was that if 144,000 people assembled at these power centers and meditated for peace, that the arrival of the new era would be facilitated.

==See also==
* &quot;Big Generator&quot;, 1987 album by the band Yes including the song &quot;Holy Lamb (Song for Harmonic Convergence)&quot;
*Harmonic Convergence (&quot;The Legend of Korra&quot;)
*Planetary alignment
*World Contact Day

==References==
* &quot;Adapted in part from the Wikinfo article Harmonic Convergence, licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License.&quot;

• The Legend of Korra season 2 episodes 11, 12, 13, and 14 mentioned the Harmonic Convergence

==External links==
*Thirty Years Ago, People Tried to Save the World By Meditating (&quot;Smithsonian&quot;, August 17, 2017) 
*Almanac: The Harmonic Convergence (CBS &quot;Sunday Morning&quot;, August 16, 2015)
*Simulations of planetary positions on August 16, 1987 and December 21, 2012</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2996376" start="4" end="24" title="Harmonic Convergence" label="Harmonic Convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="134" end="146" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708995" start="213" end="227" title="José Argüelles" label="José Argüelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q708312" start="295" end="309" title="peace movement" label="peace movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q735695" start="473" end="484" title="grand trine" label="grand trine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012" start="629" end="644" title="Maya calendar" label="Maya calendrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921707" start="689" end="703" title="Maya cosmology" label="Maya cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="731" end="736" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823391" start="751" end="763" title="Tony Shearer" label="Tony Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q751493" start="861" end="875" title="Aztec calendar" label="Aztec calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="1027" end="1033" title="heaven" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="1109" end="1113" title="hell" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="1203" end="1207" title="hell" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="1248" end="1261" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q735695" start="1922" end="1933" title="grand trine" label="grand trine"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="2118" end="2138" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="2248" end="2259" title="Conjunction (astronomy and astrology)" label="conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q134061" start="2283" end="2288" title="Virgo (astrology)" label="Virgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281810" start="2292" end="2310" title="Tropical Astrology" label="Tropical Astrology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2746" end="2761" title="anaretic degree" label="anaretic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="3745" end="3750" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="3769" end="3774" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="3779" end="3785" title="dharma" label="dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q380962" start="3899" end="3911" title="co-operation" label="co-operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q95026" start="3932" end="3948" title="Shirley MacLaine" label="Shirley MacLaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q767358" start="4144" end="4160" title="Mayan Long Count" label="Mayan Long Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q139274" start="4164" end="4168" title="2012 millenarianism" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218530" start="4199" end="4213" title="end of history" label="end of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q139274" start="4419" end="4436" title="December 21, 2012" label="December 21, 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="4612" end="4624" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q39231" start="4638" end="4648" title="Mount Fuji" label="Mount Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472694" start="4654" end="4668" title="Mount Yamnuska" label="Mount Yamnuska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807787" start="4755" end="4762" title="144,000" label="144,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q794719" start="4904" end="4917" title="Big Generator" label="Big Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="4948" end="4951" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10425694" start="5026" end="5080" title="Harmonic Convergence (The Legend of Korra)" label="Harmonic Convergence (&amp;quot;The Legend of Korra&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567909" start="5082" end="5101" title="Syzygy (astronomy)" label="Planetary alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035582" start="5103" end="5120" title="World Contact Day" label="World Contact Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871082" start="5170" end="5177" title="Wikinfo" label="Wikinfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22169" start="5227" end="5257" title="GNU Free Documentation License" label="GNU Free Documentation License"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487014" start="5451" end="5462" title="Smithsonian (magazine)" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009252" start="5524" end="5554" title="CBS News Sunday Morning" label="CBS &amp;quot;Sunday Morning&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584992" wikidata="Q130859" url="?curid=584992" title="Argentinosaurus">
<text>Argentinosaurus (meaning &quot;lizard from Argentina&quot;) is a genus of giant sauropod dinosaur that lived during the Late Cretaceous period in what is now Argentina. Although it is only known from fragmentary remains, &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; is one of the largest known land animals of all time, perhaps the largest, measuring long and weighing . It was a member of Titanosauria, the dominant group of sauropods during the Cretaceous. It is regarded by many paleontologists as the largest dinosaur ever, and perhaps lengthwise the longest animal ever, though both claims have no concrete evidence yet.

The first &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; bone was discovered in 1987 by a farmer on his farm near the city of Plaza Huincul. A scientific excavation of the site led by the Argentine palaeontologist José Bonaparte was conducted in 1989, yielding several back vertebrae and parts of a sacrum—fused vertebrae between the back and tail vertebrae. Additional specimens include a complete femur (thigh bone) and the shaft of another. &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; was named by Bonaparte and the Argentine palaeontologist Rodolfo Coria in 1993; the genus contains a single species, A. huinculensis. The generic name &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; means &quot;Argentine lizard&quot;, and the specific name &quot;huinculensis&quot; refers to its place of discovery, Plaza Huincul.

The fragmentary nature of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; remains makes their interpretation difficult. Arguments revolve around the position of the recovered vertebrae within the vertebral column and the presence of accessory articulations between the vertebrae that would have strengthened the spine. A computer model of the skeleton and muscles estimated this dinosaur had a maximum speed of 7 km/h (5 mph) with a pace, a gait where the fore and hind limb of the same side of the body move simultaneously. The fossils of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; were recovered from the Huincul Formation, which was deposited in the middle Cenomanian to early Turonian ages (about 96 to 92 million years ago) and contains a diverse dinosaur fauna including the giant theropod &quot;Mapusaurus&quot;.

==Discovery==
The first &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; bone, which is now thought to be a fibula (calf bone), was discovered in 1987 by Guillermo Heredia on his farm &quot;Las Overas&quot; about east of Plaza Huincul, in Neuquén Province, Argentina. Heredia, initially believing he had discovered petrified logs, informed the local museum, the Museo Carmen Funes, whose staff members excavated the bone and stored it in the museum&#x27;s exhibition room. In early 1989, the Argentine palaeontologist José F. Bonaparte initiated a larger excavation of the site involving palaeontologists of the Museo Argentino de Ciencias Naturales, yielding a number of additional elements from the same individual. The individual, which later became the holotype of &quot;Argentinosaurus huinculensis&quot;, is catalogued under the specimen number MCF-PVPH 1.

Separating fossils from the very hard rock in which the bones were encased required the use of pneumatic hammers. The additional material recovered included seven dorsal vertebrae (vertebrae of the back), the underside of the sacrum (fused vertebrae between the dorsal and tail vertebrae) including the first to fifth and some sacral ribs, and a part of a dorsal rib (rib from the flank). These finds were also incorporated into the collection of the Museo Carmen Funes.

Bonaparte presented the new find in 1989 at a scientific conference in San Juan. The formal description was published in 1993 by Bonaparte and the Argentine palaeontologist Rodolfo Coria, with the naming of a new genus and species, &quot;Argentinosaurus huinculensis&quot;. The generic name means &quot;Argentine lizard&quot;, while the specific name refers to the town Plaza Huincul. Bonaparte and Coria described the limb bone discovered in 1987 as an eroded tibia (shin bone), although the Uruguayan palaeontologist Gerardo Mazzetta and colleagues reidentified this bone as a left fibula in 2004. In 1996, Bonaparte referred (assigned) a complete femur (thigh bone) from the same locality to the genus, which was put on exhibit at the Museo Carmen Funes. This bone was deformed by front-to-back crushing during fossilization. In their 2004 study, Mazzetta and colleagues mentioned an additional femur that is housed in the La Plata Museum under the specimen number MLP-DP 46-VIII-21-3. Though not as strongly deformed as the complete femur, it preserves only the shaft and lacks its upper and lower ends. Both specimens belonged to individuals equivalent in size to the holotype individual. As of 2019, however, it was still uncertain whether any of these femora belonged to &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot;.

==Description==
===Size===

&quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; is among the largest known land animals, although its exact size is difficult to estimate because of the incompleteness of its remains. To counter this problem, palaeontologists can compare the known material with that of smaller related sauropods known from more complete remains. The more complete taxon can then be scaled up to match the dimensions of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot;. Mass can be estimated from known relationships between certain bone measurements and body mass, or through determining the volume of models.

A reconstruction of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; created by Gregory Paul in 1994 yielded a length estimate of . Later that year, estimates by Bonaparte and Coria suggesting a hind limb length of , a trunk length (hip to shoulder) of , and an overall body length of were published. In 2006, Kenneth Carpenter reconstructed &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; using the more complete &quot;Saltasaurus&quot; as a guide and estimated a length of . In 2008, Jorge Calvo and colleagues used the proportions of &quot;Futalognkosaurus&quot; to estimate the length of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; at less than . In 2013, William Sellers and colleagues arrived at a length estimate of and a shoulder height of by measuring the skeletal mount in Museo Carmen Funes. During the same year, Scott Hartman suggested that because &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; was then thought to be a basal titanosaur, it would have a shorter tail and narrower chest than &quot;Puertasaurus&quot;, which he estimated to be about long, indicating &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; was slightly smaller. In 2016, Paul estimated the length of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; at , but later estimated a greater length of or longer in 2019, restoring the unknown neck and tail of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; after those of other large South American titanosaurs.
Paul estimated a body mass of for &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; in 1994. In 2004, Mazzetta and colleagues provided a range of and considered to be the most likely mass, making it the heaviest sauropod known from good material. In 2013, Sellers and colleagues estimated a mass of by calculating the volume of the aforementioned Museo Carmen Funes skeleton. In 2014 and 2018, Roger Benson and colleagues estimated the mass of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; at , but these estimates were questioned due to a very large error range and lack of precision. In 2016, using equations that estimate body mass based on the circumference of the humerus and femur of quadrupedal animals, Bernardo Gonzáles Riga and colleagues estimated a mass of based on an isolated femur; it is uncertain whether this femur actually belongs to &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot;. In the same year, Paul moderated his earlier estimate from 1994 and listed the body mass of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; at more than . In 2019, Paul moderated his 2016 estimate and gave a mass estimate of based on his skeletal reconstructions (diagrams illustrating the bones and shape of an animal) of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; in dorsal and lateral view. In 2020, Campione and Evans also yielded a body mass estimate of approximately . In 2023, Paul and Larramendi proposed that the holotype would have weighed between at maximum. They further suggested that the enigmatic, fragmentary &quot;Bruhathkayosaurus&quot; possibly weighed more, between .

While &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; was definitely a massive animal, there is disagreement over whether it was the largest known titanosaur. &quot;Puertasaurus&quot;, &quot;Futalognkosaurus&quot;, &quot;Dreadnoughtus&quot;, &quot;Paralititan&quot;, &quot;&quot;Antarctosaurus&quot; giganteus&quot;, and &quot;Alamosaurus&quot; have all been considered to be comparable in size with &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; by some studies, although others have found them to be notably smaller. In 2017, Carballido and colleagues considered &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; to be smaller than &quot;Patagotitan&quot;, since the latter had a greater area enclosed by the , , and of its anterior dorsal vertebrae. However, Paul found &quot;Patagotitan&quot; to be smaller than &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; in 2019, due to the latter&#x27;s dorsal column being considerably longer. Even if &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; was the largest-known titanosaur, other sauropods including &quot;Maraapunisaurus&quot; and a giant mamenchisaurid, may have been larger, although these are only known from very scant remains. Some diplodocids, such as &quot;Supersaurus&quot; and &quot;Diplodocus&quot; may have exceeded &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; in length despite being considerably less massive. The mass of the blue whale, however, which can be greater than , still exceeds that of all known sauropods.

===Vertebrae===
&quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; likely possessed 10 dorsal vertebrae, like other titanosaurs. The vertebrae were enormous even for sauropods; one dorsal vertebra has a reconstructed height of and a width of , and the are up to in width. In 2019, Paul estimated the total length of the dorsal vertebral column at and the width of the pelvis at 0.6 times the combined length of the dorsal and sacral vertebral column. The dorsals were (concave at the rear) as in other macronarian sauropods. The (excavations on the sides of the centra) were proportionally small and positioned in the front half of the centrum. The vertebrae were internally lightened by a complex pattern of numerous air-filled chambers. Such camellate bone is, among sauropods, especially pronounced in the largest and longest-necked species. In both the dorsal and sacral vertebrae, very large cavities measuring were present. The dorsal ribs were tubular and cylindrical in shape, in contrast with other titanosaurs. Bonaparte and Coria, in their 1993 description, noted the ribs were hollow, unlike those of many other sauropods, but later authors argued this hollowing could also have been due to erosion after the death of the individual. &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot;, like many titanosaurs, probably had six sacral vertebrae (those in the hip region), although the last one is not preserved. The centra of the second to fifth sacral vertebrae were much reduced in size and considerably smaller than the centrum of the first sacral. The sacral ribs curved downwards. The second sacral rib was larger than the other preserved sacral ribs, though the size of the first is unknown due to its incompleteness.
Because of their incomplete preservation, the original position of the known dorsal vertebrae within the vertebral column is disputed. Dissenting configurations were suggested by Bonaparte and Coria in 1993; Fernando Novas and Martín Ezcurra in 2006; and Leonardo Salgado and Jaime Powell in 2010. One vertebra was interpreted by these studies as the first, fifth or third; and another vertebra as the second, tenth or eleventh, or ninth, respectively. A reasonably complete vertebra was found to be the third by the 1993 and 2006 studies, but the fourth by the 2010 study. Another vertebra was interpreted by the three studies as being part of the rear section of the dorsal vertebral column, as the fourth, or as the fifth, respectively. In 1993, two articulated (still connected) vertebrae were thought to be of the rear part of the dorsal column but are interpreted as the sixth and seventh vertebrae in the two later studies. The 2010 study mentioned another vertebra that was not mentioned by the 1993 and 2006 studies; it was presumed to belong to the rear part of the dorsal column.

Another contentious issue is the presence of hyposphene-hypantrum articulations, accessory joints between vertebrae that were located below the main articular processes. Difficulties in interpretation arise from the fragmentary preservation of the vertebral column; these joints are hidden from view in the two connected vertebrae. In 1993, Bonaparte and Coria said the hyposphene-hypantrum articulations were enlarged, as in the related &quot;Epachthosaurus&quot;, and had additional articular surfaces that extended downwards. This was confirmed by some later authors; Novas noted the hypantrum (a bony extension below the articular processes of the front face of a vertebra) extended sidewards and downwards, forming a much-broadened surface that connected with the equally enlarged hyposphene at the back face of the following vertebra. In 1996, Bonaparte stated these features would have made the spine more rigid and were possibly an adaptation to the giant size of the animal. Other authors argued most titanosaur genera lacked hyposphene-hypantrum articulations and that the articular structures seen in &quot;Epachthosaurus&quot; and &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; are thickened vertebral (ridges). Sebastián Apesteguía, in 2005, argued the structures seen in &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot;, which he termed hyposphenal bars, are indeed thickened laminae that could have been derived from the original hyposphene and had the same function.

===Limbs===
The complete femur that was assigned to &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; is long. The femoral shaft has a circumference of about at its narrowest part. Mazzetta and colleagues used regression equations to estimate its original length at , which is similar to the length of the other femur, and later in 2019 Paul gave a similar estimate of . By comparison, the complete femora preserved in the other giant titanosaurs &quot;Antarctosaurus giganteus&quot; and &quot;Patagotitan mayorum&quot; measure and , respectively. While the holotype specimen does not preserve a femur, it preserves a slender fibula (originally interpreted as a tibia) that is in length. When it was identified as a tibia, it was thought to have a comparatively short , a prominent extension at the upper front that anchored muscles for stretching the leg. However, as stated by Mazzetta and colleagues, this bone lacks both the proportions and anatomical details of a tibia, while being similar in shape to other sauropod fibulae.

==Classification==
Relationships within Titanosauria are amongst the least understood of all groups of dinosaurs. Traditionally, the majority of sauropod fossils from the Cretaceous had been referred to a single family, the Titanosauridae, which has been in use since 1893. In their 1993 first description of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot;, Bonaparte and Coria noted it differed from typical titanosaurids in having hyposphene-hypantrum articulations. As these articulations were also present in the titanosaurids &quot;Andesaurus&quot; and &quot;Epachthosaurus&quot;, Bonaparte and Coria proposed a separate family for the three genera, the Andesauridae. Both families were united into a new, higher group called Titanosauria.

In 1997, Salgado and colleagues found &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; to belong to Titanosauridae in an unnamed clade with &quot;Opisthocoelicaudia&quot; and an indeterminate titanosaur. In 2002, Davide Pisani and colleagues recovered &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; as a member of Titanosauria, and again found it to be in a clade with &quot;Opisthocoelicaudia&quot; and an unnamed taxon, in addition to &quot;Lirainosaurus&quot;. A 2003 study by Jeffrey Wilson and Paul Upchurch found both Titanosauridae and Andesauridae to be invalid; the Titanosauridae because it was based on the dubious genus &quot;Titanosaurus&quot; and the Andesauridae because it was defined on plesiomorphies (primitive features) rather than on synapomorphies (newly evolved features that distinguish the group from related groups). A 2011 study by Philip Mannion and Calvo found Andesauridae to be paraphyletic (excluding some of the group&#x27;s descendants) and likewise recommended its disuse.

In 2004, Upchurch and colleagues introduced a new group called Lithostrotia that included the more derived (evolved) members of Titanosauria. &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; was classified outside this group and thus as a more basal (&quot;primitive&quot;) titanosaurian. The basal position within Titanosauria was confirmed by a number of subsequent studies. In 2007, Calvo and colleagues named &quot;Futalognkosaurus&quot;; they found it to form a clade with &quot;Mendozasaurus&quot; and named it Lognkosauria. A 2017 study by Carballido and colleagues recovered &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; as a member of Lognkosauria and the sister taxon of &quot;Patagotitan&quot;. In 2018, González Riga and colleagues also found it to belong in Lognkosauria, which in turn was found to belong to Lithostrotia.

Another 2018 study by Hesham Sallam and colleagues found two different phylogenetic positions for &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; based on two data sets. They did not recover it as a lognkosaurian but as either a basal titanosaur or a sister taxon of the more derived &quot;Epachthosaurus&quot;. In 2019, Julian Silva Junior and colleagues found &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; to belong to Lognkosauria once again; they recovered Lognkosauria and Rinconsauria (another group generally included in Titanosauria) to be outside Titanosauria. Another 2019 study by González Riga and colleagues also found &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; to belong to Lognkosauria; they found this group to form a larger clade with Rinconsauria within Titanosauria, which they named Colossosauria.

Topology according to Carballido and colleagues, 2017.

Topology according to González Riga and colleagues, 2019.


==Palaeobiology==
The giant size of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; and other sauropods was likely made possible by a combination of factors; these include fast and energy-efficient feeding allowed for by the long neck and lack of mastication, fast growth and fast population recovery due to their many small offspring. Advantages of giant sizes would likely have included the ability to keep food inside the digestive tract for lengthy periods to extract a maximum of energy, and increased protection against predators. Sauropods were oviparous (egg-laying). In 2016, Mark Hallett and Matthew Wedel stated that the eggs of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; were probably only in volume, and that a hatched &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; was no longer than and not heavier than . The largest sauropods increased their size by five orders of magnitude after hatching, more than in any other amniote animals. Hallett and Wedel argued size increases in the evolution of sauropods were commonly followed by size increases of their predators, theropod dinosaurs. &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; might have been preyed on by &quot;Mapusaurus&quot;, which is among the largest theropods known. &quot;Mapusaurus&quot; is known from at least seven individuals found together, raising the possibility that this theropod hunted in packs to bring down large prey including &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot;.
In 2013, Sellers and colleagues used a computer model of the skeleton and muscles of &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; to study its speed and gait. Before computer simulations, the only way of estimating speeds of dinosaurs was through studying anatomy and trackways. The computer model was based on a laser scan of a mounted skeletal reconstruction on display at the Museo Carmen Funes. Muscles and their properties were based on comparisons with living animals; the final model had a mass of . Using computer simulation and machine learning techniques, which found a combination of movements that minimised energy requirements, the digital &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; learned to walk. The optimal gait found by the algorithms was close to a pace (forelimb and hind limb on the same side of the body move simultaneously). The model reached a top speed of just over 2 m/s (7.2 km/h, 5 mph). The authors concluded with its giant size, &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; reached a functional limit. Much larger terrestrial vertebrates might be possible but would require different body shapes and possibly behavioural change to prevent joint collapse. The authors of the study cautioned the model is not fully realistic and too simplistic, and that it could be improved in many areas. For further studies, more data from living animals is needed to improve the soft tissue reconstruction, and the model needs to be confirmed based on more complete sauropod specimens.

==Palaeoenvironment==
&quot;Argentinosaurus&quot; was discovered in the Argentine Province of Neuquén. It was originally reported from the Huincul Group of the Río Limay Formation, which have since become known as the Huincul Formation and the Río Limay Subgroup, the latter of which is a subdivision of the Neuquén Group. This unit is located in the Neuquén Basin in Patagonia. The Huincul Formation is composed of yellowish and greenish sandstones of fine-to-medium grain, some of which are tuffaceous. These deposits were laid down during the Upper Cretaceous, either in the middle Cenomanian to early Turonian stages or the early Turonian to late Santonian. The deposits represent the drainage system of a braided river.

Fossilised pollen indicates a wide variety of plants were present in the Huincul Formation. A study of the El Zampal section of the formation found hornworts, liverworts, ferns, Selaginellales, possible Noeggerathiales, gymnosperms (including gnetophytes and conifers), and angiosperms (flowering plants), in addition to several pollen grains of unknown affinities. The Huincul Formation is among the richest Patagonian vertebrate associations, preserving fish including dipnoans and gar, chelid turtles, squamates, sphenodonts, neosuchian crocodilians, and a wide variety of dinosaurs. Vertebrates are most commonly found in the lower, and therefore older, part of the formation.

In addition to &quot;Argentinosaurus&quot;, the sauropods of the Huincul Formation are represented by another titanosaur, &quot;Choconsaurus&quot;, and several rebbachisaurids including &quot;Cathartesaura&quot;, &quot;Limaysaurus&quot;, and some unnamed species. Theropods including carcharodontosaurids such as &quot;Mapusaurus,&quot; abelisaurids including &quot;Skorpiovenator&quot;, &quot;Ilokelesia&quot;, and &quot;Tralkasaurus&quot;, noasaurids such as &quot;Huinculsaurus&quot;, paravians such as &quot;Overoraptor&quot;, and other theropods such as &quot;Aoniraptor&quot; and &quot;Gualicho&quot; have also been discovered there. Several iguanodonts are also present in the Huincul Formation.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="43" end="52" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="65" end="70" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14416" start="80" end="88" title="sauropod" label="sauropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="89" end="97" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="120" end="135" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="136" end="142" title="Period (geology)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="158" end="167" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="263" end="301" title="Largest prehistoric animals#Non-avian dinosaurs (Dinosauria)" label="largest known land animals of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q133051" start="373" end="385" title="Titanosauria" label="Titanosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q980712" start="717" end="730" title="Plaza Huincul" label="Plaza Huincul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="789" end="804" title="palaeontologist" label="palaeontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q149802" start="805" end="819" title="José Bonaparte" label="José Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="865" end="873" title="vertebra" label="vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="890" end="896" title="sacrum" label="sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="990" end="995" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888405" start="1120" end="1133" title="Rodolfo Coria" label="Rodolfo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1171" end="1178" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1788" end="1792" title="Horse gait#Pace" label="pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935123" start="1947" end="1964" title="Huincul Formation" label="Huincul Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185567" start="1993" end="2010" title="Cenomanian" label="middle Cenomanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q691429" start="2014" end="2028" title="Turonian" label="early Turonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="2050" end="2063" title="million years" label="million years"/>
<link wikidata="Q188438" start="2127" end="2135" title="theropod" label="theropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q131176" start="2142" end="2152" title="Mapusaurus" label="Mapusaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="2248" end="2254" title="fibula" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q980712" start="2361" end="2374" title="Plaza Huincul" label="Plaza Huincul"/>
<link wikidata="Q44800" start="2379" end="2395" title="Neuquén Province" label="Neuquén Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324895" start="2502" end="2520" title="Museo Carmen Funes" label="Museo Carmen Funes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="2642" end="2657" title="palaeontologist" label="palaeontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q149802" start="2658" end="2675" title="José F. Bonaparte" label="José F. Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633517" start="2752" end="2789" title="Museo Argentino de Ciencias Naturales" label="Museo Argentino de Ciencias Naturales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="2897" end="2905" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324895" start="2991" end="2994" title="Museo Carmen Funes" label="MCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q578786" start="3167" end="3183" title="dorsal vertebrae" label="dorsal vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="3230" end="3236" title="sacrum" label="sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44241" start="3547" end="3555" title="San Juan, Argentina" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888405" start="3649" end="3662" title="Rodolfo Coria" label="Rodolfo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q178366" start="3937" end="3942" title="tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="4290" end="4303" title="fossilization" label="fossilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798541" start="4402" end="4417" title="La Plata Museum" label="La Plata Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q764789" start="5425" end="5437" title="Gregory S. Paul" label="Gregory Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041772" start="5655" end="5672" title="Kenneth Carpenter" label="Kenneth Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131111" start="5745" end="5756" title="Saltasaurus" label="Saltasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131249" start="5868" end="5884" title="Futalognkosaurus" label="Futalognkosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133051" start="6230" end="6240" title="titanosaur" label="titanosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q133158" start="6301" end="6313" title="Puertasaurus" label="Puertasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q764789" start="7961" end="7965" title="Gregory S. Paul" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q132867" start="8108" end="8125" title="Bruhathkayosaurus" label="Bruhathkayosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581455" start="8367" end="8380" title="Dreadnoughtus" label="Dreadnoughtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131636" start="8394" end="8405" title="Paralititan" label="Paralititan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8419" end="8455" title="Antarctosaurus#&amp;quot;Antarctosaurus&amp;quot; giganteus" label="&amp;quot;Antarctosaurus&amp;quot; giganteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131583" start="8473" end="8484" title="Alamosaurus" label="Alamosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103736" start="8745" end="8756" title="Patagotitan" label="Patagotitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57612918" start="9126" end="9141" title="Maraapunisaurus" label="Maraapunisaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q138692" start="9160" end="9174" title="mamenchisaurid" label="mamenchisaurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131223" start="9258" end="9268" title="diplodocid" label="diplodocid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131177" start="9285" end="9296" title="Supersaurus" label="Supersaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14330" start="9313" end="9323" title="Diplodocus" label="Diplodocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42196" start="9443" end="9453" title="blue whale" label="blue whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132504" start="10015" end="10025" title="macronaria" label="macronaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q519093" start="10231" end="10241" title="air sac" label="air-filled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099987" start="10242" end="10250" title="skeletal pneumaticity" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496150" start="11432" end="11446" title="Fernando Novas" label="Fernando Novas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973219" start="11479" end="11495" title="Leonardo Salgado" label="Leonardo Salgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q21392891" start="11500" end="11512" title="Jaime Powell" label="Jaime Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q980736" start="12361" end="12394" title="hyposphene-hypantrum articulation" label="hyposphene-hypantrum articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q651620" start="12465" end="12484" title="articular processes" label="articular processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134607" start="12760" end="12774" title="Epachthosaurus" label="Epachthosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="13948" end="13968" title="regression analysis" label="regression equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="14983" end="14989" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q140061" start="14995" end="15009" title="Titanosauridae" label="Titanosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134701" start="15288" end="15298" title="Andesaurus" label="Andesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134701" start="15410" end="15422" title="Andesauridae" label="Andesauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133051" start="15482" end="15494" title="Titanosauria" label="Titanosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="15605" end="15610" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q133088" start="15622" end="15640" title="Opisthocoelicaudia" label="Opisthocoelicaudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="15872" end="15877" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102280" start="15900" end="15913" title="Lirainosaurus" label="Lirainosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q922448" start="16075" end="16082" title="Nomen dubium" label="dubious"/>
<link wikidata="Q131547" start="16095" end="16107" title="Titanosaurus" label="Titanosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="16161" end="16175" title="cladistics" label="plesiomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="16212" end="16226" title="Synapomorphy and apomorphy" label="synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="16366" end="16378" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q140061" start="16529" end="16541" title="Lithostrotia" label="Lithostrotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243545" start="16565" end="16572" title="Derived (phylogenetics)" label="derived"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="16689" end="16694" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134799" start="16929" end="16942" title="Mendozasaurus" label="Mendozasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051234" start="16962" end="16974" title="Lognkosauria" label="Lognkosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="17092" end="17104" title="sister taxon" label="sister taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288210" start="17704" end="17716" title="Rinconsauria" label="Rinconsauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q77853179" start="18014" end="18027" title="Colossosauria" label="Colossosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="18678" end="18687" title="oviparous" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732005" start="18711" end="18723" title="Mark Hallett (artist)" label="Mark Hallett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006432" start="18728" end="18741" title="Matt Wedel" label="Matthew Wedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="18964" end="18983" title="order of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q181537" start="19023" end="19030" title="Amniota" label="amniote"/>
<link wikidata="Q188438" start="19171" end="19179" title="theropod" label="theropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q131176" start="19254" end="19264" title="Mapusaurus" label="Mapusaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="20039" end="20066" title="Machine learning" label="machine learning techniques"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20256" end="20260" title="Horse gait#Pace" label="pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q44239" start="21067" end="21074" title="Neuquén" label="Neuquén"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935123" start="21191" end="21208" title="Huincul Formation" label="Huincul Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335271" start="21217" end="21235" title="Río Limay Subgroup" label="Río Limay Subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644360" start="21281" end="21294" title="Neuquén Group" label="Neuquén Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694119" start="21301" end="21305" title="Unit (geology)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960815" start="21324" end="21337" title="Neuquén Basin" label="Neuquén Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="21341" end="21350" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="21412" end="21421" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="21466" end="21470" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q185567" start="21558" end="21568" title="Cenomanian" label="Cenomanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q691429" start="21578" end="21586" title="Turonian" label="Turonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q257290" start="21624" end="21633" title="Santonian" label="Santonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q285451" start="21662" end="21677" title="Drainage system (geomorphology)" label="drainage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q590219" start="21683" end="21696" title="braided river" label="braided river"/>
<link wikidata="Q191156" start="21847" end="21855" title="hornwort" label="hornwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q189808" start="21858" end="21867" title="liverwort" label="liverwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="21870" end="21874" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q379743" start="21877" end="21891" title="Selaginellales" label="Selaginellales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877690" start="21902" end="21917" title="Noeggerathiales" label="Noeggerathiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="21919" end="21929" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q309147" start="21942" end="21952" title="gnetophyte" label="gnetophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="21958" end="21965" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="21973" end="21983" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q168422" start="22170" end="22177" title="dipnoan" label="dipnoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q506144" start="22183" end="22186" title="gar" label="gar"/>
<link wikidata="Q583074" start="22188" end="22194" title="chelid" label="chelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q122422" start="22204" end="22212" title="squamate" label="squamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15099738" start="22215" end="22225" title="sphenodont" label="sphenodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042061" start="22228" end="22238" title="neosuchian" label="neosuchian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="22239" end="22250" title="crocodilian" label="crocodilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14416" start="22429" end="22438" title="sauropods" label="sauropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508018" start="22509" end="22521" title="Choconsaurus" label="Choconsaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132733" start="22541" end="22555" title="rebbachisaurid" label="rebbachisaurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q135219" start="22573" end="22586" title="Cathartesaura" label="Cathartesaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q137252" start="22600" end="22611" title="Limaysaurus" label="Limaysaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131334" start="22665" end="22684" title="carcharodontosaurid" label="carcharodontosaurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q134184" start="22718" end="22729" title="abelisaurid" label="abelisaurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510901" start="22747" end="22761" title="Skorpiovenator" label="Skorpiovenator"/>
<link wikidata="Q135101" start="22775" end="22785" title="Ilokelesia" label="Ilokelesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q77035223" start="22803" end="22815" title="Tralkasaurus" label="Tralkasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132531" start="22823" end="22832" title="noasaurid" label="noasaurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q84463821" start="22848" end="22861" title="Huinculsaurus" label="Huinculsaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q136586" start="22869" end="22878" title="Paraves" label="paravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q95715804" start="22893" end="22904" title="Overoraptor" label="Overoraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24705122" start="22946" end="22956" title="Aoniraptor" label="Aoniraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25859335" start="22973" end="22981" title="Gualicho" label="Gualicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q467430" start="23029" end="23040" title="iguanodontia" label="iguanodonts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584993" wikidata="Q8035454" url="?curid=584993" title="World Building">
<text>World Building can refer to:

* New York World Building, the tallest building in New York City from 1890 to 1894
* Sun Tower, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, known as the World Building until 1924
* Worldbuilding, the process of constructing an imaginary world or milieu</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q956198" start="32" end="55" title="New York World Building" label="New York World Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q650762" start="115" end="124" title="Sun Tower" label="Sun Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822655" start="204" end="217" title="Worldbuilding" label="Worldbuilding"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="584997" wikidata="Q17092363" url="?curid=584997" title="In-band signaling">
<text>In telecommunications, in-band signaling is the sending of control information within the same band or channel used for data such as voice or video. This is in contrast to out-of-band signaling which is sent over a different channel, or even over a separate network. In-band signals may often be heard by telephony participants, while out-of-band signals are inaccessible to the user. The term is also used more generally, for example of computer data files that include both literal data, and metadata and/or instructions for how to process the literal data.

==Telephony==
When dialing from a land-line telephone, the telephone number is encoded and transmitted across the telephone line in form of dual-tone multi-frequency signaling (DTMF). The tones control the telephone system by instructing the telephone switch where to route the call. These control tones are sent over the same channel, the copper wire, and in the frequency range (300 Hz to 3.4 kHz) as the audio of the telephone call. In-band signaling is also used on older telephone carrier systems to provide inter-exchange information for routing calls. Examples of this kind of in-band signaling system are the Signaling System No. 5 (SS5) and its predecessors, and R2 signalling.

Separating the control signals, also referred to as the control plane, from the data, if a bit-transparent connection is desired, is usually done by escaping the control instructions. Occasionally, however, networks are designed so that data is, to a varying degree, garbled by the signaling. Allowing data to become garbled is usually acceptable when transmitting sounds between humans, since the users rarely notice the slight degradation, but this leads to problems when sending data that has very low error tolerance, such as information transmitted using a modem.

In-band signaling is insecure because it exposes control signals, protocols and management systems to end users, which may result in falsing. In the 1960s and 1970s, so-called &quot;phone phreaks&quot; used blue boxes for deliberate falsing, in which the appropriate tones for routing were intentionally generated, enabling the caller to abuse functions intended for testing and administrative use and to make free long-distance calls.

Modems may also interfere with in-band signaling, in which case a guard tone may be employed to prevent this.

==Voice over IP==
In voice over IP (VoIP), DTMF signals are transmitted in-band by two methods. When transmitted as audio tones in the voice stream, voice encoding must use a lossless coder, such as μ-law or A-law pulse-code modulation, to preserve the integrity of frequency signals. Still, this method proved often unreliable and was subject to interference from other audio sources. The standard method is to digitally remove DTMF tones from the audio at the source and from the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) voice stream and encode them separately as a digital information payload, often termed &quot;named telephone events&quot; (NTE), according to RFC 4733. Such DTMF frames are transmit in-band with all other RTP packets on the identical network path.

In contrast to in-band transmission of DTMF, VoIP signaling protocols also implement out-of-band method of DTMF transmission. For example, the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), as well as the Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP) define special message types for the transmission of digits.

==Other applications==
As a method of in-band signaling, DTMF tones were also used by cable television broadcasters to indicate the start and stop times of local insertion points during station breaks for the benefit of cable companies. Until better, out-of-band signaling equipment was developed in the 1990s, fast, unacknowledged, and loud DTMF tone sequences could be heard during the commercial breaks of cable channels in the United States and elsewhere.

These DTMF sequences were sent by the originating cable network&#x27;s equipment at the uplink satellite facility, and were decoded by equipment at local cable companies. A specific tone sequence indicated the exact time that the feeds should be switched to and away from the master control feed, to locally-broadcast commercials. The following is an example of such a sequence by a cable company that communicated the following to the cable company&#x27;s broadcast equipment:

SWITCH TO LOCAL NOW - SWITCH TO LOCAL NOW - PREPARE TO SWITCH BACK - PREPARE TO SWITCH BACK - SWITCH BACK TO NATIONAL NOW - SWITCH BACK TO NATIONAL NOW - &quot;IF YOU HAVEN&#x27;T SWITCHED BACK TO NATIONAL NOW, DO SO IMMEDIATELY&quot;

DTMF signaling in the cable industry was discontinued because it was distracting to viewers, and was susceptible to interference when DTMF tones were sounded by characters in television shows. For example, a character dialing a Touch-Tone telephone in a television show could cause the cable company computers to switch away from a &quot;hot feed&quot; to dead air, and the cost of human-imperceptible signaling technologies decreased.

In-band signaling applies only to channel-associated signaling (CAS). In common channel signaling (CCS) separate channels are used for control and data, as opposed to the shared channel in CAS, so all control is out-of-band by definition.

In computer data, the term refers to embedding any kind of metadata directly within regular data. These uses have similar tradeoffs as in telecommunications, such as opening an attack surface vs. simplifying processing. A few of many examples:

* Embedding a magic number at the very start of files, to signal the format or language of the following data. 
* Embedding a NULL character as in C strings, to signal the end of the string (as opposed to keeping that information outside the string).
* Embedding markup within text, whether to categorize parts of the text, provide processing or formatting instructions, or for other purposes.
* Reserving some characters in regular expressions, such as &quot;*&quot;, to have special processing meanings, rather than representing literals.
* Embedding control codes in computer terminal input as a means of device control, allowing command-line users to issue single-character commands directly, e.g. issues a codice_1 code, causing command-line programs to expect no further input from the user, and therefore to quit.

When out-of-band communication is unavailable, one of two techniques may be used to preserve network transparency.
* Encapsulation: The bundling of the control data in the packet&#x27;s header and then removing the header (and/or footer) of the packet at the far end, restoring the data to be the same as the original.
* Bit stuffing: The insertion of non-information or escape characters to modify, synchronize and justify the data so it never looks like signaling information (and remove the stuffed bits and escape codes at the far end, restoring the data to be the same as the original).

== See also ==
* Control character
* Escape sequence
* In-band control
* Line signaling
* Out-of-band control
* Quindar tones
* +++ (modem)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="3" end="21" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092363" start="23" end="40" title="In-band signaling" label="in-band signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501541" start="59" end="78" title="control signal" label="control information"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501541" start="172" end="190" title="out-of-band signal" label="out-of-band signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="494" end="502" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="605" end="614" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q214995" start="620" end="636" title="telephone number" label="telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q941685" start="701" end="736" title="dual-tone multi-frequency signaling" label="dual-tone multi-frequency signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="803" end="819" title="telephone switch" label="telephone switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q733553" start="888" end="895" title="channel (communications)" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696188" start="1074" end="1088" title="Interexchange carrier" label="inter-exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512768" start="1178" end="1200" title="Signaling System No. 5" label="Signaling System No. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414995" start="1233" end="1246" title="R2 signalling" label="R2 signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834769" start="1340" end="1355" title="Transparency (telecommunication)" label="bit-transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366300" start="1398" end="1406" title="Escape sequence" label="escaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="1811" end="1816" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q528074" start="1921" end="1929" title="end user" label="end user"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432790" start="1952" end="1959" title="falsing" label="falsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162746" start="2001" end="2014" title="phone phreaks" label="phone phreaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q586874" start="2026" end="2034" title="blue box" label="blue box"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613984" start="2322" end="2332" title="guard tone" label="guard tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="2388" end="2401" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q311989" start="2566" end="2571" title="μ-law" label="μ-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q278059" start="2575" end="2580" title="A-law" label="A-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043846" start="2581" end="2602" title="pulse-code modulation" label="pulse-code modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q321213" start="2849" end="2877" title="Real-time Transport Protocol" label="Real-time Transport Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041884" start="3218" end="3229" title="out-of-band" label="out-of-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q191018" start="3276" end="3303" title="Session Initiation Protocol" label="Session Initiation Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483431" start="3326" end="3356" title="Media Gateway Control Protocol" label="Media Gateway Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="3512" end="3528" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="3529" end="3541" title="Broadcasting" label="broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041833" start="3582" end="3597" title="local insertion" label="local insertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501541" start="3677" end="3698" title="out-of-band signaling" label="out-of-band signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833047" start="3975" end="3981" title="uplink" label="uplink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245448" start="4958" end="4966" title="dead air" label="dead air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062233" start="5073" end="5101" title="channel-associated signaling" label="channel-associated signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116037" start="5112" end="5136" title="common channel signaling" label="common channel signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="5338" end="5346" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q303569" start="5456" end="5470" title="attack surface" label="attack surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q284099" start="5538" end="5550" title="magic number (programming)" label="magic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="5787" end="5793" title="Markup language" label="markup"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="5949" end="5968" title="regular expressions" label="regular expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q718147" start="6077" end="6090" title="C0 and C1 control codes" label="control codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="6094" end="6111" title="computer terminal" label="computer terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146123" start="6351" end="6362" title="Out-of-band data" label="out-of-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834769" start="6447" end="6459" title="transparency (telecommunication)" label="transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172449" start="6463" end="6476" title="Encapsulation (networking)" label="Encapsulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214111" start="6518" end="6524" title="packet (information technology)" label="packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141160" start="6532" end="6538" title="header (computing)" label="header"/>
<link wikidata="Q878887" start="6667" end="6679" title="Bit stuffing" label="Bit stuffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q998991" start="6717" end="6733" title="escape character" label="escape character"/>
<link wikidata="Q617945" start="6956" end="6973" title="Control character" label="Control character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366300" start="6976" end="6991" title="Escape sequence" label="Escape sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008598" start="6994" end="7009" title="In-band control" label="In-band control"/>
<link wikidata="Q10371827" start="7012" end="7026" title="Line signaling" label="Line signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111387" start="7029" end="7048" title="Out-of-band control" label="Out-of-band control"/>
<link wikidata="Q955161" start="7051" end="7064" title="Quindar tones" label="Quindar tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q298684" start="7067" end="7078" title="+++ (modem)" label="+++ (modem)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585003" wikidata="Q1916133" url="?curid=585003" title="Medeski Martin &amp; Wood">
<text>Medeski Martin &amp; Wood (or MMW) is an American jazz fusion band formed in 1991, consisting of John Medeski on keyboards, Billy Martin on drums, and Chris Wood on bass. The band is influenced by musical traditions including funk and hip hop and is known for an unconventional style sometimes described as &quot;avant-groove&quot;.

MMW has found moderate mainstream success, often working with guitarist John Scofield and touring on the jam band circuit.

==History==
The band members were introduced to each other by jazz drummer Bob Moses, who had performed with Medeski and Wood, and was Martin&#x27;s instructor.

Medeski Martin &amp; Wood&#x27;s first performances together were at the Village Gate, a popular New York jazz club. Though they started out with a more-or-less straightforward piano-bass-drums jazz setup, the threesome expanded their sound with unusual configurations. Their first album, &quot;Notes from the Underground&quot;, is a record of their entirely-acoustic era, but Medeski soon added electric piano (outfitted with distortion pedals and other effects), and began switching back and forth among Hammond organ, Clavinet, Mellotron and other keyboards. Wood alternated between stand-up and bass guitar, stuck paper behind his strings for a &quot;snare&quot; effect and occasionally employed a drumstick as a slide. Wood entirely eschewed the electric bass for MMW&#x27;s first three albums, and still relies heavily on the acoustic upright bass in recordings and during live performances. Their earlier albums reveal a Hip Hop influenced updating of classic soul jazz sounds, which is the primary theme of their well-known 1996 album, &quot;Shack-man&quot;.

The band received some of their first significant exposure outside of the New York City jazz scene by performing with Phish at their October 14, 1995 concert, which led to the association of the group as a jam band. In addition, their performance on John Scofield&#x27;s 1997 album &quot;A Go Go&quot; helped to further their exposure. The band collaborated further with Scofield again in 2006, releasing the album &quot;Out Louder&quot; under the name Medeski Scofield Martin &amp; Wood. This was the first album released on MMW&#x27;s own Indirecto Records.

From 1998 to 2005, MMW were signed to jazz label Blue Note Records, and showed them delving deeper into dense, electronic funk than their earlier albums, although the band continued to experiment with free jazz and free improvisation both on their albums and in concert.

In 2001 MMW performed several songs for the Red Hot Organization&#x27;s compilation album &quot;Red Hot + Indigo&quot;, a tribute to Duke Ellington, which raised money for various charities devoted to increasing AIDS awareness and fighting the disease.

Medeski Martin &amp; Wood&#x27;s live performances are renowned for their exploratory nature. Their concerts usually involve extended improvisations, which may be both arrhythmic and atonal, an aspect of their musicianship that is rarely documented in the studio. They occasionally tour using only acoustic instruments, reverting to the instrumentation that they began their career with. Their album &quot;Tonic&quot; is an example of these more contemporary acoustic performances. They have also done short tours of entirely improvisatory performances. These shows usually consisted of two sets of improvisation, followed by an encore of a song from an album.

==Side projects==
Each of the trio&#x27;s three members is involved in a large music community, and has participated in numerous side projects over the years.

In 2001 John Medeski collaborated with the North Mississippi Allstars and steel guitarist Robert Randolph; together, these five musicians formed The Word, a bluesy gospel instrumental jam band. They released two albums and toured extensively.

Beginning around 2005 Chris Wood formed The Wood Brothers with his brother, blues guitarist Oliver Wood. They have released several albums to date and continue to tour and record together.

In 2007 John Medeski and Billy Martin released an album as a duo, called &quot;Mago&quot;. They performed that material together at the 2007 Bonnaroo Music Festival.

In 2016, John Medeski formed supergroup Saudade with Chino Moreno of Deftones, Team Sleep, Palms, and Crosses; guitarist Dr. Know of Bad Brains; bassist Chuck Doom of Crosses and Team Sleep; and drummer Mackie Jayson of Cro-Mags and Bad Brains. In 2018 John Medeski formed John Medeski&#x27;s Mad Skillet with two members of the Dirty Dozen Brass Band, releasing an album and touring under the name.

In March 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic, Medeski and Martin posted on YouTube an hour-long, live in-studio video performance as &quot;Bandemic&quot; with John Scofield and Jesse Murphy. The performance was part of the Woodstock Sessions project, a series of performances documented at Applehead Recording Studios in Woodstock, New York.

==Discography==
(Artist name if not Medeski Martin &amp; Wood)

=== Albums ===
* &quot;Notes from the Underground&quot; (1992)
* &quot;It&#x27;s a Jungle in Here&quot; (October 18, 1993)
* &quot;Friday Afternoon in the Universe&quot; (January 24, 1995)
* &quot;Shack-man&quot; (October 15, 1996)
* &quot;Farmer&#x27;s Reserve&quot; (February 11, 1997) 
* (John Scofield) - &quot;A Go Go&quot; (April 7, 1998)
* &quot;Combustication&quot; (August 11, 1998)
* &quot;The Dropper&quot; (October 24, 2000)
* &quot;Uninvisible&quot; (April 9, 2002)
* &quot;End of the World Party (Just in Case)&quot; (September 7, 2004)
* (Medeski Scofield Martin &amp; Wood) - &quot;Out Louder&quot; (September 26, 2006) 
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Everywhere&quot; (January 8, 2008)
* &quot;&quot; (August 19, 2008)
* &quot;Radiolarians I&quot; (September 30, 2008)
* &quot;Radiolarians II&quot; (April 14, 2009)
* &quot;Radiolarians III&quot; (August 4, 2009)
* &quot;20&quot; (March – December 2011)
* (Medeski Martin &amp; Wood + Nels Cline) - &quot;Woodstock Sessions Vol. 2&quot; (April 15, 2014)
* (Medeski Scofield Martin &amp; Wood) - &quot;Juice&quot; (September 16, 2014) 

=== Live albums ===
* &quot;Tonic&quot; (April 25, 2000)
* &quot;Electric Tonic&quot; (October 31, 2001)
* &quot;The Stone: Issue Four&quot; (November 2010) 
* (Medeski Scofield Martin &amp; Wood) - &quot;In Case the World Changes Its Mind&quot; (November 8, 2011)
* &quot;Free Magic&quot; (September 25, 2012)
* (Medeski Martin &amp; Wood with Alarm Will Sound) - &quot;Omnisphere&quot; (September 14, 2018) 

=== EPs ===
* &quot;Bubblehouse&quot; (April 8, 1997)
* &quot;Combustication Remix EP&quot; (April 20, 1999)

===Compilations===
* &quot;Last Chance to Dance Trance (Perhaps)&quot; (October 12, 1999)
* &quot;Note Bleu: Best of the Blue Note Years 1998–2005&quot; (April 4, 2006)

===Box sets===
* &quot;Radiolarians: The Evolutionary Set&quot; (December 8, 2009)

===DVDs===
* &quot;Fly in a Bottle&quot; (October 25, 2011)

==See also==
*The Word
*The Wood Brothers
*Organ trio

==References==
==External links==
*Medeski Martin &amp; Wood official website
*Interview with John Poirier for Aural States (Sept 2009)
*Conversation with Chris Wood Interview with Chris Wood</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1916133" start="0" end="25" title="Medeski Martin &amp;amp; Wood" label="Medeski Martin &amp;amp; Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916133" start="30" end="33" title="Medeski Martin &amp;amp; Wood" label="MMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="50" end="61" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q719672" start="97" end="109" title="John Medeski" label="John Medeski"/>
<link wikidata="Q863178" start="124" end="136" title="Billy Martin (percussionist)" label="Billy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q738825" start="151" end="161" title="Chris Wood (jazz musician)" label="Chris Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="226" end="230" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="235" end="242" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q790188" start="313" end="318" title="avant-jazz" label="avant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501482" start="319" end="325" title="Groove (music)" label="groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q357176" start="406" end="419" title="John Scofield" label="John Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="439" end="447" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q347046" start="533" end="542" title="Bob Moses (musician)" label="Bob Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128095" start="693" end="705" title="Village Gate" label="Village Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062612" start="915" end="941" title="Notes from the Underground (Medeski Martin &amp;amp; Wood album)" label="Notes from the Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="1126" end="1139" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="1141" end="1149" title="Clavinet" label="Clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="1151" end="1160" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="1206" end="1214" title="Stand-up bass" label="stand-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1219" end="1230" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566344" start="1322" end="1331" title="Drum stick" label="drumstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="1548" end="1555" title="Hip hop music" label="Hip Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615483" start="1587" end="1596" title="soul jazz" label="soul jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032670" start="1670" end="1679" title="Shack-man" label="Shack-man"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1762" end="1775" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q921267" start="1806" end="1811" title="Phish" label="Phish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="1894" end="1902" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q357176" start="1938" end="1951" title="John Scofield" label="John Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q300421" start="1976" end="1983" title="A Go Go (John Scofield album)" label="A Go Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111456" start="2109" end="2119" title="Out Louder" label="Out Louder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916133" start="2229" end="2246" title="Indirecto Records" label="Indirecto Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q885833" start="2298" end="2315" title="Blue Note Records" label="Blue Note Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q211781" start="2450" end="2459" title="free jazz" label="free jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q592060" start="2464" end="2482" title="free improvisation" label="free improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="2565" end="2585" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304336" start="2617" end="2633" title="Red Hot + Indigo" label="Red Hot + Indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="2654" end="2668" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2733" end="2737" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="2958" end="2964" title="atonality" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821371" start="3181" end="3186" title="Tonic (Medeski Martin &amp;amp; Wood album)" label="Tonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q475935" start="3640" end="3666" title="North Mississippi Allstars" label="North Mississippi Allstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="3671" end="3683" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550716" start="3687" end="3702" title="Robert Randolph (guitarist)" label="Robert Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775776" start="3742" end="3750" title="The Word (band)" label="The Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="3754" end="3759" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="3761" end="3767" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="3768" end="3780" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="3781" end="3789" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775714" start="3881" end="3898" title="The Wood Brothers" label="The Wood Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732265" start="4110" end="4114" title="Mago (album)" label="Mago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984221" start="4172" end="4195" title="Bonnaroo Music Festival" label="Bonnaroo Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="4227" end="4237" title="supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q507734" start="4251" end="4263" title="Chino Moreno" label="Chino Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="4267" end="4275" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q953444" start="4277" end="4287" title="Team Sleep" label="Team Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494401" start="4289" end="4294" title="Palms (band)" label="Palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036698" start="4300" end="4307" title="Crosses (band)" label="Crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038421" start="4319" end="4327" title="Dr. Know (guitarist)" label="Dr. Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="4331" end="4341" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140657" start="4418" end="4426" title="Cro-Mags" label="Cro-Mags"/>
<link wikidata="Q488728" start="4527" end="4549" title="Dirty Dozen Brass Band" label="Dirty Dozen Brass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="4624" end="4641" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="4672" end="4679" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q357176" start="4756" end="4769" title="John Scofield" label="John Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4774" end="4786" title="Jesse Murphy (bassist)" label="Jesse Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q608293" start="4918" end="4937" title="Woodstock, New York" label="Woodstock, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062612" start="5027" end="5053" title="Notes from the Underground (Medeski Martin &amp;amp; Wood album)" label="Notes from the Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014815" start="5075" end="5101" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Jungle in Here" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Jungle in Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503480" start="5135" end="5167" title="Friday Afternoon in the Universe" label="Friday Afternoon in the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032670" start="5201" end="5210" title="Shack-man" label="Shack-man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435692" start="5244" end="5265" title="Farmer&amp;#x27;s Reserve" label="Farmer&amp;#x27;s Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q300421" start="5319" end="5326" title="A Go Go (John Scofield album)" label="A Go Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150984" start="5357" end="5371" title="Combustication" label="Combustication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731053" start="5404" end="5415" title="The Dropper" label="The Dropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885266" start="5449" end="5460" title="Uninvisible" label="Uninvisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375885" start="5491" end="5528" title="End of the World Party (Just in Case)" label="End of the World Party (Just in Case)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111456" start="5602" end="5612" title="Out Louder" label="Out Louder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532412" start="5649" end="5673" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Go Everywhere" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Go Everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165855" start="5739" end="5753" title="The Radiolarian Series" label="Radiolarians I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165855" start="5789" end="5804" title="The Radiolarian Series" label="Radiolarians II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165855" start="5836" end="5852" title="The Radiolarian Series" label="Radiolarians III"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164862" start="5968" end="5993" title="Woodstock Sessions Vol. 2" label="Woodstock Sessions Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846247" start="6064" end="6069" title="Juice (Medeski Scofield Martin &amp;amp; Wood album)" label="Juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821371" start="6127" end="6132" title="Tonic (Medeski Martin &amp;amp; Wood album)" label="Tonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357517" start="6164" end="6178" title="Electric Tonic" label="Electric Tonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708389" start="6444" end="6460" title="Alarm Will Sound" label="Alarm Will Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741457" start="6470" end="6480" title="Omnisphere" label="Omnisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245006" start="6530" end="6541" title="Bubblehouse" label="Bubblehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150985" start="6572" end="6595" title="Combustication Remix EP" label="Combustication Remix EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494226" start="6647" end="6684" title="Last Chance to Dance Trance (Perhaps)" label="Last Chance to Dance Trance (Perhaps)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6718" end="6766" title="Note Bleu: Best of the Blue Note Years 1998–2005" label="Note Bleu: Best of the Blue Note Years 1998–2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165855" start="6813" end="6847" title="The Radiolarian Series" label="Radiolarians: The Evolutionary Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775776" start="6949" end="6957" title="The Word (band)" label="The Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775714" start="6959" end="6976" title="The Wood Brothers" label="The Wood Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247308" start="6978" end="6988" title="Organ trio" label="Organ trio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585004" wikidata="Q597781" url="?curid=585004" title="Battletoads (1991 video game)">
<text>Battletoads is a beat &#x27;em up platform video game developed by Rare and published by Tradewest for the Nintendo Entertainment System. The first installment of the &quot;Battletoads&quot; series, it was released in North America and Japan in 1991 and in Europe in 1993. Ports without Rare&#x27;s involvement were released on the Mega Drive and Game Gear in 1993, and on the Amiga and Amiga CD32 in 1994 (despite the former having been developed in 1992); a port developed by Rare for the Game Boy was released in 1993 as Battletoads in Ragnarok&#x27;s World. In the game, three space humanoid warrior toads form a group known as the Battletoads. Two of the Battletoads, Rash and Zitz, embark on a mission to defeat the evil Dark Queen on her planet and rescue their kidnapped friends: Pimple, the third member of the Battletoads, and Princess Angelica.

The game was developed in response to the interest in Mirage Studios&#x27; &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot; franchise. It received mostly positive reviews upon release, with critics praising the graphics and variations of gameplay; however, many critics were divided over the game&#x27;s difficulty. It won seven awards from the 1991 Nintendo Power Awards, and has since been renowned as one of the most difficult video games ever created. It was later included in Rare&#x27;s 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation, &quot;Rare Replay&quot;.

==Gameplay==
The game is a platform scrolling beat &#x27;em up, with varying elements of racing, climbing and vehicle-based obstacle courses. Players start with three lives each time the game is started, which get replenished every time the player continues after getting defeated. The game contains no saving system or password features. The player has a maximum of six hit points that can be replenished by eating flies. While the levels of &quot;Battletoads&quot; vary greatly in gameplay style, the game is generally presented as a &quot;beat&#x27;em up&quot;, in which players progress by defeating enemies while avoiding the hazards in the environment.

Most of the attacks in the game have a &quot;Smash Hit&quot; variant, which triggers after a series of hits, or as the final hit to the enemy, and delivers a powerful blow to the enemy, often enlarging the body part delivering the blow.

The Toads&#x27;s regular hit is a regular punch, with its Smash Hit variant, &quot;Kiss-My-Fist&quot;. Also, while running, which is done by tapping left or right on the D-pad twice in a row, the toads can deliver a head-butt. The head-butt&#x27;s Smash Hit has the toads delivering a headbutt with giant ram horns, named the &quot;Battletoad Butt&quot;. In addition, by standing close to them, most enemies can be picked up and thrown overhead.

Due to the variety of gameplay styles between stages, many of the attacks are only usable in certain levels. For example, while hanging on the Turbo Cable in the second level, the toads gain access to a kick, with its Smash Hit variant called &quot;Swingin&#x27; Size Thirteens&quot;, a giant punch similar to Kiss-My-Fist, named the &quot;Turbo Thwack&quot;, and &quot;BT Bashing Ball&quot; in which the character shape-shifts into a wrecking ball when hanging next to a wall. In 2D levels, the toads can perform an uppercut, and its Smash Hit variation, called &quot;Jawbuster&quot;. Also, in certain levels, a move is available in which the toads clasp both hands to bash an enemy into the ground, named &quot;Nuclear Knuckles&quot;. After an enemy is buried by Nuclear Knuckles, the toads can use &quot;the Punt&quot; which involves repeatedly kicking their head, ending with its Smash Hit version, named the &quot;Big Bad Boot&quot;.

Certain objects can also be used as weapons, such as legs from defeated Walkers, beaks from ravens, pipes on the walls of Intruder Excluder, and flagpoles from the Dark Queen&#x27;s tower.

Side-scrolling stages are generally presented as having an isometric perspective, while platforming stages that feature vertical progression are presented in 2D, which allows the player characters to crouch by pressing down. Several levels in the game feature sections in the form of an obstacle course, where the players must dodge a series of obstacles with speed increasing as the level progresses. Other types of level include two &quot;tower climb&quot; levels, a descent to a chasm while hanging from a rope, a level with underwater sections, a maze chase riding a unicycle-style vehicle, a platforming &quot;snake maze&quot;, and a race level in which the players have to fall as quickly as possible through countless platforms to reach the bottom of a tower before an enemy does. Hidden in four of the levels are &quot;mega warp&quot; points, which, when reached, allow the players to automatically advance by two levels.

== Plot and levels ==
Professor T. Bird and the three Battletoads, Rash, Zitz, and Pimple, are escorting Princess Angelica to her home planet using their spacecraft, the &quot;Vulture&quot;, for her to meet her father, the Terran Emperor. When Pimple and Angelica decide to take a leisurely trip on Pimple&#x27;s flying car, they are ambushed and captured by the Dark Queen&#x27;s ship, the &quot;Gargantua&quot;. The Dark Queen and her minions have been hiding in the dark spaces between the stars following their loss to the Galactic Corporation in the battle of Canis Major. Pimple then sends out a distress signal to the &quot;Vulture&quot;, alerting Professor T. Bird, Rash, and Zitz. Learning that the &quot;Gargantua&quot; is hidden beneath the surface of a nearby planet called Ragnarok&#x27;s World, Professor T. Bird flies Rash and Zitz there in the &quot;Vulture&quot; to rescue them. Between levels, the toads receive briefing comments from Professor T. Bird, along with teasing from the Dark Queen.

The professor drops the toads to the first level, Ragnarok Canyon, the surface of the planet guarded by axe-wielding Psyko-Pigs and Dragons that the player can fly on after taking them out; its boss is the Tall Walker, which throws boulders the heroes must throw back at it while avoiding its lasers. Then in the second level, named Wookie Hole, the toads descend through a downward-scrolling impact crater, where they face the threat of ravens that can cut off the toads&#x27; Turbo Cable, plants named Saturn Toadtraps that eat toads, Retro Blasters that pop out of the wall and shoot electrical bolts, and Electro Zappers that form a line of 2,000 volts of energy.

Ride levels include the third stage, the Turbo Tunnel, where the players dodges stone walls while riding on a Speed Bike and having to use ramps to get across long gaps; the fifth level, Surf City, where the player bounces on water surfaces on a &quot;Space Board&quot; while dodging logs, whirlpools, mines, and spiked balls; the seventh stage, Volkmire&#x27;s Inferno, where the &#x27;toads fly on the Toad Plane in a fire environment going through Force Fields and dodging fireballs and rockets; and level eleven, the Clinger-Winger, where the toads ride on the stage&#x27;s titular unicycles while being chased by a hypnotic energy orb, named the Buzzball. All of them include a section of beat &#x27;em up gameplay, with Surf City being the location of a boss fight with Big Blag, the chief of the Dark Queen&#x27;s rat army that can squash the Battletoads with his weighty blubber slam, and Buzzball also serving as Clinger-Winger&#x27;s boss.

The fourth stage, the Ice Cavern, is a platforming level where the player has to use snowballs and ice blocks to destroy barriers while dodging those cold elements, as well as spikes and hedgehogs, and facing snowball-throwing snowmen. Level six, Karnath&#x27;s Lair, is a set of rooms that each consist of only one exit and multiple snakes moving in varied, twisting rectangular patterns that serve as platforms that the toads must traverse while also dodging spikes. Intruder Excluder, the vertical-scrolling eighth stage, is a platform-oriented level involving several jumps on platforms, springs and through electric barriers between moving gaps in the platforms, avoiding obstacles such as rolling Big Balls, Snotballs, suction valves named Suckas and poisonous gas guns named Gassers. Its only beat &#x27;em up consist of encounters with Sentry-Drones, The player must get from the bottom to the top of the level, where a boss fight with the Queen&#x27;s genetically modified biogen Robo-Manus takes place. Level nine, Terra Tubes, is a mixture of a platforming and underwater stage, and the only instance of the toads swimming in the game; it involves the player going through the piping into the Gargantua, with sections including encounters with Mechno-Droids and Steel-Beck duck creatures that guard the tubes, chases from the Krazy Kog, and rivers infested with spikes, sharks, electric eels named Elctra-Eels, and instant-attacking Hammerfish.

The tenth level, the Rat Race, is one of two levels in &quot;Battletoads&quot; located in the Gargantua, the other being the eleventh level, Clinger-Winger. Rat Race is a downward vertical-scrolling stage with the same hazards and enemies as Intruder Excluder. In the stage, the Dark Queen sends fast rodent Giblet to activate three bombs in the ship for it to explode, and the player must destroy the bombs them before the rat makes it to them. After the bombs are successfully switched off, a showdown with the Queen&#x27;s least quick-witted commander, General Slaughter who only attacks with his head, ensues.

The Battletoads escape the ship and, in another upward-vertical-scrolling stage named the Revolution, go to the top of the Dark Queen&#x27;s Tower; the level involves the camera being fixed to the toads&#x27; position while the rest of the scenery rotates along with the circular tower as the toads go around it with a three-dimensional effect. In the level, a variety of platforms must be used as support in order to progress, including some that sink the longer the playable character is on them, those that disappear and re-appear, those that move around the tower, and springs; foes include oafs named Hornheads, Shadow Clouds that either harm the player with poisonous gas or blow wind to change the player&#x27;s speed, Spiked Balls that rotate around the tower, and Swellcheeks where player are required to hang from the flag poles to avoid being blown away by their wind power.

Once the toads reach the top of the tower, they will battle the Dark Queen. Once defeated, the Queen claims it will not be the last they would see from her. She then turns into a whirlwind and flies into space, &quot;retreating into the shadowy margins of the galaxy to recoup her losses&quot;. With Pimple and Princess Angelica rescued, the four are brought back into the &quot;Vulture&quot; and fly away from the planet.

==Development==
The game was developed by Rare and published by Tradewest. Rare founders Tim and Chris Stamper created the series in response to the &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot; craze of the early 1990s. To create a contrast to the popular media franchise and other beat &#x27;em ups of the time, Rare added extra mechanics in the game to help separate it from these genres, such as racing stages and climbing courses. Rare decided early to take the game&#x27;s art style and tone in a cartoony direction, both to distance &quot;Battletoads&quot; further from other beat &#x27;em up franchises and to comply with Nintendo&#x27;s restrictions on violence in games.

According to Rare artist Kevin Bayliss, the characters of &quot;Battletoads&quot; were conceived in order to &quot;produce merchandise&quot; on a mass scale, in a similar vein to Tim Burton&#x27;s &quot;Batman&quot;. Bayliss claims that he did most of the work on sketching the game&#x27;s characters while Tim Stamper was largely responsible for translating the sketches and artwork into sprites. Rare attempted to create variation through shifts in gameplay between levels, and intentionally made &quot;Battletoads&quot; &quot;crazy hard&quot; in order to increase its longevity. Bayliss frequently heard the team&#x27;s programmer Mark Betteridge scream in anger after failing to complete levels he had assembled himself. Despite their own difficulties, the team&#x27;s consensus was that &quot;Battletoads&quot; was possible to complete with practice and skill.

The game underwent changes through early stages of development, and at one point was originally titled &quot;Amphibianz&quot;. Bayliss originally designed &quot;Battletoads&quot; as a Disney-themed video game, however as the game gradually became more violent, Bayliss took extra liberties to tone it down and restrict all usage of weapons in the game, whilst creating a sense of uniqueness for the characters. According to Bayliss, the box art was designed by him but airbrushed and produced by Tim Stamper. Bayliss&#x27; initial design for the box art was rejected as the team felt that it failed to attract customers&#x27; attention, but the team was satisfied with their second and final revision.

== Release and promotion ==
&quot;Battletoads&quot; was presented at the 1991 winter Consumer Electronics Show; an article about the event from &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot; claimed it to be &quot;highly innovative.&quot;

A few months after the initial North American release in June 1991 for the NES, &quot;Battletoads&quot; got a Japanese-localized release for the Famicom, getting distributed in Japan by NCS, as opposed to Tradewest. This release featured several gameplay tweaks, which resulted in a marginally easier experience.

==Initial reception==

&quot;Battletoads&quot; started at number 26 on &quot;Nintendo Power&quot;″s July 1991 Top 30 list of NES games for Players&#x27; Picks only with 464 points, rising to number 13 the following issue with 858 points. In September 1991, it premiered on the actual Top 30 list at number 11 with 3,219 points, landing in the top ten of both respective lists for Players&#x27; Pick (number seven) and Pros&#x27; Picks (number six). In the October 1991 issue, the game skyrocketed to the number-three spot on the overall list with 6,008 points, remaining in that position in the November issue with 6,397 points. By January 1992, the issue &quot;Nintendo Power&quot; turned the Top 30 list into a Top 20 list (as they added Top 20 rankings for games of other consoles), &quot;Battletoads&quot; budged to number two with 6,140 points that month, staying in that ranking for three more consecutive issues but remaining out of the top spot due to having significantly less points than the long-lasting &quot;Super Mario Bros. 3&quot; (1990). Afterwards, the game remained in the top ten for 17 more consecutive months, and eleven times in the top five. The game still charted when the Top 20 NES list ended in November 1994, and most of the game&#x27;s final eleven months on the chart were in the bottom half, with only one of those months in February 1994 being in a top ten spot.

&quot;Battletoads&quot; was greeted with mostly enthusiastic reviews upon release, with critics calling it one of the best all-time video games, one of the best games of 1991, one of the best all-time NES games, and the greatest NES game of 1991. The &quot;innovative and fun&quot; presentation was frequently praised, particularly when it came to the cutscenes, the cartoon style of the characters and attacks, the music and sound, multi-layer scrolling, variety of colors, humor, and the first level gimmick of the Big Walker boss being from the perspective of the boss. Only minor complaints were made, such as towards the sprites being too small, the attacks looking too non-aggressive, some backgrounds being a &quot;bit bland on occasions,&quot; and flickering.

Gameplay-wise, &quot;Battletoads&quot; was praised for its diverse gameplay styles, addictiveness, and motivating challenge level. Rob Bright of &quot;Nintendo Magazine System&quot; explained that &quot;progress isn&#x27;t slow, but then it isn&#x27;t a breeze,&quot; and Julian Rignall of &quot;Mean Machines&quot; wrote that it&#x27;s &quot;brilliantly designed to allow you to get just a little bit further each time you play, and give experts the potential to hone their skills and rack up enormous amount of bonus points.&quot; Chris Bieniek appreciated the simplicity of the controls of its multiple speciality moves, particularly how attacks triggered by the B button change between levels. The platforming bits, however, were criticized for having poor collision detection that result in cheap deaths; reviewers from &quot;Sega Force&quot; also noted this problem in the Mega Drive port and called the game a &quot;run-of-the-mill&quot; platformer with unresponsive controls, &quot;random&quot; difficulty between levels, very little surprises, and &quot;menial&quot; objectives.

&quot;Battletoads&quot; was nominated for the 1991 Nintendo Power Awards in nine categories, winning the first place in the categories: Graphics and Sound (NES), Theme and Fun (NES), Best Play Control (NES) and Best Multi-Player or Simultaneous (NES), it was also given the title of the Overall Best Game for NES of 1991.

== Later years ==
&quot;AllGame&quot; acclaimed &quot;Battletoads&quot; as a mixture of a &quot;great sense of humor (especially in the two-player mode) with a surprisingly good storyline and near-perfect gameplay,&quot; also praising its &quot;smooth and responsive&quot; controls &quot;fluid&quot; character animation, and the stages being &quot;huge, gorgeously rendered and full of surprises.&quot; In a negative retrospective review, Spike ranked the game&#x27;s ending as the sixth biggest letdown in video game history.

In 1997, &quot;Nintendo Power&quot; ranked the NES version as the 89th best game on any Nintendo platform. In 2010, UGO included it on their &quot;Top 25 games that need sequels&quot; also featuring the Arctic Cavern level on the list of &quot;coolest ice levels&quot;. Topless Robot ranked &quot;Battletoads&quot; as the number one &quot;least terrible &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot; rip-off&quot; in 2008, also naming it as one of ten best beat-&#x27;em-ups of all time in 2010 and as one of ten video games that should have gotten toys in 2011. In 2012, it was also listed among ten &quot;classic videos games that deserve an HD remake&quot; by Yahoo! News. &quot;GamesRadar&quot; ranked it the 18th best NES game ever made, stating that &quot;it was a fun game but its most notable element was its difficulty&quot;. Jeremy Dunham of &quot;IGN&quot; listed &quot;Battletoads&quot; as the 40th best NES game of all time.

===Difficulty===

&quot;Battletoads&quot; has been noted by critics for its extreme difficulty. The game has even been included on numerous occasions among the hardest games ever made, including the number one spot according to GameTrailers. A reviewer of &quot;Destructoid&quot; stated that despite the game&#x27;s &quot;brutal and unbalanced&quot; difficulty, it was often remembered as one of the most &quot;beloved titles&quot; of the eight-bit generation. A consumer guide named &quot;The Winner&#x27;s Guide to Nintendo&quot; (1991), published upon the game&#x27;s release, admitted the Turbo Tunnel level to be &quot;one of the toughest challenges of any NES game.&quot; In 2012, Yahoo! Games stated that the game was still widely recognised as one of the most difficult games ever made, particularly noting the chance of players accidentally killing their partner in two-player mode. Nerdist remarks that &quot;Battletoads&quot;&#x27;s sudden difficulty spike was intended to combat the video game rental industry; if the game was more difficult, then it would take longer to complete, and consumers would be more likely to purchase a retail cartridge instead of renting one.

&quot;Hardcore Gaming 101&quot; writer Eric Provenza analyzed &quot;Battletoads&quot; to be unlike other video games known for their difficulty, such as &quot;Ninja Gaiden&quot; (1989) and &quot;Adventure Island&quot;, in that it does not get harder gradually; there are different mechanics, enemies, and obstacles for each section, with no opportunities for players to familiarize themselves with them due to limited continues and lives and the absence of a password system or save feature. The game starts as &quot;a quirky beat-em-up before rapidly shifting into high-speed obstacle courses and manic action platforming with very little cohesion.&quot; &quot;Game Players&quot; explained that while most of the game&#x27;s challenges involved patterns that could be memorized by playing the game several times, it had long section lengths and very few continues; he also noted the two-player involving both players having to start over a stage if only one player loses all of his lives.

===Legacy===
The game&#x27;s initial success led to Rare developing various sequels which would later become part of the &quot;Battletoads&quot; franchise. A spin-off game for the Game Boy, also titled &quot;Battletoads&quot;, was first released in November 1991. Despite having the same box art and title as the NES release, &quot;Battletoads&quot; for the Game Boy is a separate game in the series, featuring different levels and mechanics from the original.

Two direct sequels, &quot;Battletoads in Battlemaniacs&quot; and &quot;Battletoads &amp; Double Dragon&quot;, were both released for various consoles in 1993, with the latter being placed number 76 on IGN&#x27;s &quot;Top 100 NES Games of All Time&quot; list. &quot;Battletoads Arcade&quot; was released in 1994 to mediocre sales.

A pilot episode for a &quot;Battletoads&quot; TV series was also produced by Canadian DIC Entertainment, in an attempt to capitalise on the popularity of the &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot;. The pilot originally aired in syndication in the United States on the weekend of Thanksgiving 1992, but it was never picked up as a full series.

In July 2020, Megalopolis Toys announced a partnership with Rare to release a line of six-inch action figures based on the games.

== Ports ==

Due to the extreme difficulty of the original NES &quot;Battletoads&quot;, almost all subsequent ports of the game went to varying measures to tone it down, in an attempt to make the game more accessible to casual players. This caused some of the more demanding levels to be modified, and some of them even removed altogether in certain versions of the game.

In 1992 the game was ported to the Amiga home computers by Mindscape, though the Amiga version went on unreleased until 1994. A Mega Drive version developed by Arc System Works and a Game Gear version were released by Sega (in Europe and Japan) and Tradewest (in North America) during 1993. The Mega Drive version features toned-down difficulty, as well as providing higher definition and more colourful graphics than the NES version. The Game Gear port features downscaled graphics, also removing three levels and the two-player mode. While the Genesis port was appreciated by critics for keeping the gameplay and humorous animations of the NES title, its presentation was criticized as not improved enough from its 8-bit predecessor, with &quot;GamePro&quot; suggesting it lacked &quot;soaring stereo orchestration,&quot; digitized voices, or even &quot;one croak&quot; to significantly differentiate it.

Also in 1993, a Game Boy version of the game was released, titled &quot;Battletoads in Ragnarok&#x27;s World&quot;. Like the Game Gear version, it is missing several levels and featured single-player support only. Tim Chaney, European CEO of Virgin Interactive, purchased the Master System rights for &quot;Battletoads&quot; from Tradewest after the game found popularity in the United States and had planned to release a version for that console in 1993, but it never materialised.

In 1994 Mindscape brought the game to the Amiga CD32 and released it together with the previously unreleased Amiga version. It had also planned ports for PC DOS and the Atari ST back for the originally intended 1992 release of the computer versions, but these two were never released. A port for the Atari Lynx was also announced and planned to be published by Telegames, but it was never released.

During E3 2015 it was announced that the NES version of &quot;Battletoads&quot; would be coming to the Xbox One as part of &quot;Rare Replay&quot;, a retrospective collection of 30 emulated classic games from Rare. &quot;Rare Replay&quot; was released on August 4, 2015, featuring a fix to a bug in the original game that made the eleventh level unplayable for player 2.

==Notes==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 

==External links==
* (Game Gear)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q401831" start="17" end="33" title="beat &amp;#x27;em up" label="beat &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="34" end="42" title="Platformer" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="43" end="53" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q642707" start="67" end="71" title="Rare (company)" label="Rare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447732" start="89" end="98" title="Tradewest" label="Tradewest"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="107" end="136" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034917" start="167" end="197" title="Battletoads" label="&amp;quot;Battletoads&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="332" end="342" title="Mega Drive" label="Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="347" end="356" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="377" end="382" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q695161" start="387" end="397" title="Amiga CD32" label="Amiga CD32"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="491" end="499" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034917" start="636" end="647" title="Battletoads" label="Battletoads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623393" start="911" end="925" title="Mirage Studios" label="Mirage Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381762" start="938" end="966" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q719801" start="1199" end="1220" title="Nintendo Power Awards" label="Nintendo Power Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="1347" end="1355" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q20538675" start="1389" end="1400" title="Rare Replay" label="Rare Replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="1436" end="1444" title="platform game" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q181319" start="1445" end="1454" title="scrolling" label="scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q401831" start="1455" end="1471" title="beat &amp;#x27;em up" label="beat &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1657" end="1666" title="Glossary of video game terms#Continue" label="continues"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="1780" end="1790" title="Health (game terminology)" label="hit points"/>
<link wikidata="Q401831" start="1951" end="1966" title="beat&amp;#x27;em up" label="beat&amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q10868220" start="2736" end="2751" title="Overhand throw" label="thrown overhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q841486" start="3943" end="3952" title="Isometric projection" label="isometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q223924" start="4455" end="4463" title="unicycle" label="unicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034917" start="4869" end="4880" title="Battletoads (characters)" label="Battletoads"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="4969" end="4979" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="5417" end="5432" title="distress signal" label="distress signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="5601" end="5609" title="Ragnarok" label="Ragnarok"/>
<link wikidata="Q642707" start="10873" end="10877" title="Rare (company)" label="Rare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447732" start="10895" end="10904" title="Tradewest" label="Tradewest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302115" start="10920" end="10941" title="Tim and Chris Stamper" label="Tim and Chris Stamper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381762" start="10986" end="11014" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="11687" end="11697" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q116852" start="11711" end="11717" title="Batman (1989 film)" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597163" start="12627" end="12634" title="graphic violence" label="violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q408151" start="12844" end="12852" title="airbrush" label="airbrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="13163" end="13188" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="13228" end="13253" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="13454" end="13461" title="Famicom" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q19695395" start="13495" end="13498" title="Masaya Games" label="NCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q639619" start="14644" end="14663" title="Super Mario Bros. 3" label="Super Mario Bros. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q668937" start="15940" end="15964" title="Official Nintendo Magazine" label="Nintendo Magazine System"/>
<link wikidata="Q15853476" start="16085" end="16098" title="Mean Machines" label="Mean Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550329" start="16550" end="16569" title="collision detection" label="collision detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446146" start="16620" end="16630" title="Sega Force" label="Sega Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q719801" start="16929" end="16950" title="Nintendo Power Awards" label="Nintendo Power Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118540" start="17225" end="17232" title="AllGame" label="AllGame"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="17640" end="17645" title="Paramount Network" label="Spike"/>
<link wikidata="Q719801" start="17744" end="17758" title="Nintendo Power" label="Nintendo Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864628" start="17845" end="17848" title="UGO" label="UGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479155" start="17999" end="18012" title="Topless Robot" label="Topless Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381762" start="18089" end="18117" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="18371" end="18377" title="Video game remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044717" start="18387" end="18398" title="Yahoo! News" label="Yahoo! News"/>
<link wikidata="Q960011" start="18406" end="18416" title="GamesRadar" label="GamesRadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="18582" end="18585" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q677385" start="18891" end="18903" title="GameTrailers" label="GameTrailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265424" start="18925" end="18936" title="Destructoid" label="Destructoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="19102" end="19111" title="8-bit" label="eight-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328188" start="19350" end="19362" title="Yahoo! Games" label="Yahoo! Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151749" start="19555" end="19562" title="Nerdist Industries" label="Nerdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756711" start="19658" end="19675" title="video game rental" label="video game rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658381" start="20007" end="20019" title="Ninja Gaiden (NES video game)" label="Ninja Gaiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q568489" start="20043" end="20059" title="Adventure Island (video game)" label="Adventure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519886" start="20510" end="20522" title="Game Players" label="Game Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598913" start="21047" end="21058" title="Battletoads (Game Boy video game)" label="Battletoads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016892" start="21327" end="21355" title="Battletoads in Battlemaniacs" label="Battletoads in Battlemaniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532676" start="21372" end="21403" title="Battletoads &amp;amp; Double Dragon" label="Battletoads &amp;amp; Double Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873263" start="21567" end="21585" title="Battletoads Arcade" label="Battletoads Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21655" end="21688" title="Battletoads#Cartoon" label="&amp;quot;Battletoads&amp;quot; TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q515708" start="21719" end="21736" title="DIC Entertainment" label="DIC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381762" start="21797" end="21825" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="21863" end="21874" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="21914" end="21926" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="22518" end="22523" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570468" start="22542" end="22551" title="Mindscape (company)" label="Mindscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="22611" end="22621" title="Sega Genesis" label="Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617855" start="22643" end="22659" title="Arc System Works" label="Arc System Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="22666" end="22675" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="22701" end="22705" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447732" start="22732" end="22741" title="Tradewest" label="Tradewest"/>
<link wikidata="Q315718" start="23230" end="23237" title="GamePro" label="GamePro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="23633" end="23651" title="Virgin Interactive" label="Virgin Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="23667" end="23680" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q695161" start="23917" end="23927" title="Amiga CD32" label="Amiga CD32"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="24032" end="24035" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="24044" end="24052" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q753657" start="24175" end="24185" title="Atari Lynx" label="Atari Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696177" start="24236" end="24245" title="Telegames" label="Telegames"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585009" wikidata="Q1052846" url="?curid=585009" title="Last Exile">
<text>is a Japanese anime television series created by Gonzo. It featured a production team led by director Koichi Chigira, character designer Range Murata, and production designer Mahiro Maeda. The three had previously worked together in &quot;Blue Submarine No. 6&quot;, one of the first CG anime series. It aired on TV Tokyo from April to September 2003. A sequel series, , aired from October 2011 to March 2012. A film adaptation of the series, Last Exile -Fam, the Silver Wing-: Over the Wishes, was released in February 2016.

The story is set on the fictional world of Prester, where its inhabitants use aerial vehicles known as vanships as a means of transportation. On this world, which is divided in eternal conflict between the nations of Anatoray and Disith, sky couriers Claus Valca and Lavie Head must deliver a girl who holds the key to uniting the two factions. Although Prester itself is not a representation of Earth, it features technology reminiscent of nineteenth century Europe at the dawn of the Industrial Revolution. Many of its designs were also inspired by Germany&#x27;s technological advances during the interwar period.

The series was licensed in North America by Geneon Entertainment in June 2003, two months after the first episode aired in Japan. Funimation began licensing the series after Geneon ceased production of its titles, later licensing the sequel series. It was also licensed for English releases in the United Kingdom, originally by ADV Films until its closure in 2009, and is now licensed by Manga Entertainment, and in Australia by Madman Entertainment. Other published media included two soundtracks, two manga, and artbooks.

&quot;Last Exile&quot; has received widespread critical acclaim and is considered to be one of Gonzo&#x27;s best works. It has been praised for its narrative, visuals, themes, soundtrack and production values.

==Setting==
&quot;Last Exile&quot; is set on the fictional world of Prester. Prester&#x27;s two nations of Anatoray and Disith are separated by a turbulent region of the sky known as the Grand Stream and are engaged in conflict according to the code of chivalric warfare. A superior faction known as the Guild enforces these rules. It also provides the two nations with technology but, unknown to them, has dishonorable intentions, to preserve the status quo and enforce its dominance of both sides. Although the story is set in the future, the technology employed differs from that in a typical space opera. Instead, the show&#x27;s retro-futuristic setting resembles nineteenth-century Europe at the height of the Industrial Revolution. Inhabitants of Prester operate aerial vehicles known as vanships in the world&#x27;s Golden Age of Aviation; although the technology is primitive, the aerial vehicles use a form of antigravity (developed by the Guild) and lighter-than-air methods of flight rather than the use of wings.

Various scenes in the series also show existing tension between the upper and lower classes. Anatoray&#x27;s nobility and military officers generally believe that commoners do not understand their codes of chivalry. On the other hand, the lower class also despise the aristocracy for their monopoly on resources. This tension extends to the accessibility of clean water, which varies in price according to purity grades. In the larger story, the advanced Guild society is portrayed as degenerate and lazy, while the people of Anatoray and Disith are creative and industrious.

The series introduces viewers to a wide range of naval and military vocabulary. More primitive navigational methods such as dead reckoning and instruments such as the sextant are also used in the series.

==Plot==

===&quot;Last Exile&quot;===
The story revolves around fifteen-year-old pilot Claus Valca and navigator Lavie Head, who fly their vanship as sky couriers in the nation of Anatoray. Although they usually take up missions of relatively low difficulty, they are one day asked to complete the mission of a dying courier. The mission, rated seven stars out of ten, is to deliver a young girl named Alvis Hamilton to the mysterious battleship &quot;Silvana&quot;. Despite their fears, Claus and Lavie deliver Alvis to the battleship but decide to remain aboard to keep her safe. Claus and Lavie are initially treated as intruders but eventually befriend the crew of the &quot;Silvana&quot;. They learn that the Guild intends to capture Alvis for reasons unknown to them. In the first battle between the &quot;Silvana&quot; and Guild forces, Guild member Dio Eraclea takes an interest in Claus&#x27;s flying skills and his signature move, the Immelmann turn. Wanting to learn more about Claus, Dio willingly allows himself to be captured. He reveals to the &quot;Silvana&#x27;s&quot; captain, Alex Row, the existence of one of four Mysteria which act as a key to something known as &quot;Exile&quot;.

When the &quot;Silvana&quot;″s executive officer, Sophia Forrester, is revealed to be the Emperor&#x27;s daughter and heir, she returns to Anatoray at the request of the prime minister. Sophia assumes the throne after the Emperor is killed during a surprise attack at the capital by the Disith nation and pleads for an alliance with Disith in order to capture &quot;Exile&quot; and end the Guild&#x27;s control. Sophia reveals to Claus that Alvis is linked to the Mysteria, but as preparations for the assault are made, Alvis is captured by the Guild.

Delphine Eraclea, the Maestro of the Guild, reveals that &quot;Exile&quot; is a colony ship used by those who first settled their world, and she intends to use Alvis and the Mysteria to take control of it. However, Claus and Alvis escape the Guild stronghold and are reunited with Lavie when the alliance fleet attacks. As the fleet follows &quot;Exile&quot; past the Grand Stream and enters Disith, it is able to destroy Delphine&#x27;s forces. After Claus and Alvis recite the four Mysteria, &quot;Exile&quot; reveals itself as a starship that will carry people back to their old home world.

===&quot;Last Exile: Travelers from the Hourglass&quot;===
A manga set right after the events of &quot;Last Exile&quot; and before &quot;Fam, the Silver Wing&quot;, &quot;Travelers from the Hourglass&quot; continues the story of Claus, Lavie, Alvis, and the others who left Prester and settled on Earth, their ancestors&#x27; home world. As they get used to their new home, Al is pursued by the Earth Guild.

===&quot;Last Exile: Fam, the Silver Wing&quot;===
Taking place two years after the events of &quot;Last Exile&quot;, &quot;Last Exile: Fam, the Silver Wing&quot; is set on Earth, the original home world of the colonists of Prester. The new story focuses on Fam Fan Fan and Giselle Collette, two vespa vanship pilots who work as Sky Pirates, capturing and selling battleships for a living. Fam and Giselle get into an adventure when they and the Sky Pirates rescue Liliana il Grazioso Merlo Turan and her younger sister, Millia Il Velch Cutrettola Turan, Princesses of the Turan Kingdom, from the clutches of the mighty Ades Federation. The Federation, led by Empress Sārā Augusta and Premier Luscinia Hāfez, is on an all out war against nations who descended from immigrants who came back to Earth by Exile ships.

As Ades was the only nation to stay on Earth when it was in a state of chaos and ruin, Luscinia believes that the Exile immigrants have no right to return to Earth since their ancestors abandoned Earth when it was in chaos only to return when Earth was viable to live on again and force the original inhabitants of Earth off their lands to form their own nations. To return these lands to their original inhabitants, Luscinia leads the Ades Federation to conquer the immigrant nations and destroy their armies, with Turan being one of them. After Luscinia kidnaps Liliana, who has the ability to control an Exile, Luscinia summons an Exile to destroy Iglasia, the capital of Turan, killing its soldiers and the King of Turan, leading to the surrender of Turan to Ades. With everything she cared for lost, Millia is given refuge by the Sky Pirates, where Fam promises to help Millia regain her kingdom.

==Production==
&quot;Last Exile&quot; was created by Gonzo in celebration of the company&#x27;s 10th anniversary. It featured a production team led by director Koichi Chigira, character designer Range Murata, and production designer Mahiro Maeda. The three had previously worked together to create &quot;Blue Submarine No. 6&quot;, one of the first CG anime series.

===Art design===

Conceptual designs were created by Range Murata, who was given complete freedom to create the setting. He began drawing detailed sketches of machines and everyday objects from a daily newspaper. His research was given no constraints with the exception of production deadlines. Gonzo initially intended for &quot;Last Exile&quot; to be shown in a space setting, but producers did not want the characters to wear sterile space suits. Murata believed the design took &quot;the course the story had laid out&quot;. His character conceptualization included a great amount of time spent on costume design. Wanting to portray each character&#x27;s personality more fully, he &quot;tried to draw in the kind of material that would have been used in creating their clothes and try to represent the stitches connecting the fabric.&quot; In contrast to crewmembers of the battleship &quot;Silvana&quot; who wear modern and utilitarian uniforms, other characters wear traditionally aristocratic attire. High amount of attention was given to character animation. Animators especially experienced difficulties with Alex Row&#x27;s hair and flowing cape.

Production of &quot;Last Exile&quot; relied heavily on 3D computer animation. Of the 350 shots used in the first episode, more than 200 included computer-generated animation. In comparison, Gonzo&#x27;s previous work, &quot;Vandread&quot;, used an average of 40 to 50 computer-generated shots per episode. Animation was also supplemented with Victorian era flourishes. In order to combine hand-drawn animation with computer-generated ones, the production team used a technique for non-photorealistic rendering, which could not be used for &quot;Blue Submarine No. 6&quot; because of a stylistic conflict. At the 2003 Anime Expo, Maeda, who also worked with Studio Ghibli&#x27;s production of &quot;Castle in the Sky&quot;, commented that &quot;[&quot;Last Exile&quot;] is very advanced in how it will incorporate the two mediums&quot;.

===Historical references===
Real-world historical designs were also adapted for the fictional world. Flying battleships of the Anatoray and Disith nations included components of Japanese dreadnoughts in commission at the turn of the twentieth century. Uniform designs for Anatoray&#x27;s musketeers were based on Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s army and American Civil War soldiers. On the other hand, Soviet Red Army fur coats provided the basis for Disith uniforms. Another inspiration for creators came from a silent film of the airship &quot;Hindenburg&quot;, which depicted the aircraft&#x27;s UFO-like silver-plated design in contrast to the traditional buildings below. This imagery was reproduced in the series.

Producers selected a specific historical time frame to serve as a point of reference.
Several characters were also named after historical figures. The name of Claus Valca&#x27;s father was derived from Hamilcar Barca, the leading commander of Carthaginian forces during the First Punic War and father of the talented tactician Hannibal. An Anatoray general was named after Vitellius, who led the Roman Empire for several months during the Year of the Four Emperors.

==Media==
===Anime===

&quot;Last Exile&quot; premiered in Japan on April 8, 2003, and aired on TV Tokyo until the airing of its final episode on September 30. A total of 13 DVD compilations were released by Victor Entertainment from July 23, 2003 to July 21, 2004. A complete seven-disc boxed set was released on November 21, 2004. The deluxe edition of this set included a model of Tatiana&#x27;s and Alister&#x27;s red vanship, a short story on the fictional Battle of Otranto; unpublished articles on the series, and illustrations by character designer Range Murata.

Pioneer Entertainment (later Geneon Entertainment) licensed the series in June 2003, two months after the first episode aired in Japan; and the first compilation DVD was released on November 18. TechTV premiered the series in English during its Anime Unleashed programming block on March 8, 2004. The first thirteen episodes aired nightly until March 14; and remaining episodes premiered on December 6 after channel was merged into G4techTV, with new episodes airing each weeknight until the series concluded on December 22. All 26 episodes were also aired in a marathon broadcast on Christmas Day. AZN Television and G4techTV Canada also broadcast the series in 2007. After Geneon ceased distribution of its licensed titles in North America, rights to the series were transferred to Funimation; and a four-disc boxed set was released on May 5, 2009; and again on June 14, 2011, under the &quot;Anime Classics&quot; line.

ADV Films originally owned the license for the series&#x27; English release in the United Kingdom until its parent company&#x27;s shutdown in 2009. It was then relicensed by Manga Entertainment, while distribution rights in Australia and New Zealand are owned by Madman Entertainment. &quot;Last Exile&quot; is also licensed for regional language release in France; Germany; Sweden; Russia; and Taiwan. It has been hosted at the streaming media website Crunchyroll.

On February 1, 2011, Gonzo revealed that a new &quot;Last Exile&quot; anime was planned titled &quot;Last Exile -Fam, the Silver Wing-&quot;; described as &quot;a new series of &quot;Last Exile&quot; [with] new story, [main] characters, and mechanical designs.&quot; Koichi Chigira and Hitomi Kuroishi returned to direct and score the anime, respectively. The series aired in Japan from October 15, 2011 to March 24, 2012 and was also simulcasted on the same day in Asia by Animax Asia, making it the fifth anime to be simulcasted the same time as its Japanese premiere on the channel, after &quot;Tears to Tiara&quot;, &quot;Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;Maid Sama!&quot;. Funimation licensed the series for streaming and home video release and simulcast the series as it aired. A film adaptation of the series, titled &quot;Last Exile -Fam, the Silver Wing-: Over the Wishes&quot;, was released in theaters on February 6, 2016. The film recompiles the events of the television series with some newly animated footage.

===Soundtracks===
Two pieces of theme music were used for the series. &quot;Cloud Age Symphony&quot;, performed by Shuntaro Okino, was used as the opening theme for all 26 episodes. It was released by Victor Entertainment as a maxi single on May 21, 2003, and remained on the Oricon music charts for six weeks, where it peaked at 52nd position. Hitomi Kuroishi&#x27;s &quot;Over the Sky&quot; was used as the ending theme. Music trio Dolce Triade, which includes Kuroishi, produced two CD soundtracks for the series. &quot;Last Exile O.S.T.&quot; was released by Victor Entertainment on June 21, 2003, and remained on the Oricon music charts for seven weeks, where it peaked at 52nd position. It includes both theme songs and 17 additional instrumental tracks. The second soundtrack, &quot;Last Exile O.S.T. 2&quot; was released on September 3, 2003, and remained on the Oricon music charts for five weeks, where it peaked at 55th position. It includes an alternate version of the ending theme song and 19 additional instrumental tracks.

Geneon Entertainment licensed both soundtracks for release in North America. The first soundtrack was released on February 17, 2004; and the second was released on April 13. Both soundtracks are out of print in North America after Geneon ceased production of its licensed titles in 2007.

===Art book===
A 136-page art book titled &quot;Last Exile Aerial Log&quot;, was released in February 2005. It was published in Japanese and was never translated for English-language release. The book contains detailed character sketches and descriptions as well as technical manuals for aircraft that appeared in the series. It also includes exclusive interviews with members of the production staff.

===Manga===
There is two manga series published in Japan. The first, is an adaptation of &quot;Last Exile: Fam, the Silver Wing&quot; written by Gonzo and illustrated by Robo Miyamoto, serialized in &quot;Young Ace&quot; magazine and published by Kadokawa. The second, titled , tells what happened to the Claus and his friends after the events of &quot;Last Exile&quot; and before the events of &quot;Last Exile: Fam, the Silver Wing&quot;. The manga was written by Gonzo and illustrated by Minoru Murao, one of the original animators of the &quot;Last Exile&quot; anime. &quot;Last Exile – Travelers from the Hourglass&quot; was serialized in &quot;Newtype Ace&quot; and published by Kadokawa.

===Live-action film===
On February 11, 2005, a report on Anime News Network mentioned a possible live-action &quot;Last Exile&quot; film. It was based on a blog post by Patrick Macias, writer for &quot;Animerica&quot; and author of several books on Japanese pop culture and anime, which noted that while he was attending the Tokyo International Anime Fair, a Gonzo employee suggested that an unnamed New Line Cinema producer was interested in adapting the series for a live-action production. On July 8, 2009, a concept art image was leaked on the Internet but was removed at the request of filmmakers. However, as of 2013, there has been no new news about the film, suggesting it has been canceled.

==Reception==
After receiving a respectable amount of attention in the United States, the series was licensed to Pioneer Entertainment (later Geneon Entertainment) in June 2003, only two months after the first episode aired in Japan. It received numerous praises for its artwork and production, placing it as one of Gonzo&#x27;s best work. By integrating music and sounds of a European theme, the soundtrack contributed to the series&#x27; unique flavor. Divers Allen of Anime News Network gave it an A, and describes the series as &quot;&quot;Last Exile&quot; is filled with breathtaking scenery, non-stop action and intriguing characters that will keep even the most casual anime fans glued to the edge of their seats. It is a stunning series that leaves viewers craving for more, it continues to shine as a TV series that has the production values of a theatrical animated film. A visual masterpiece with the story to back it up&quot;.

&quot;Last Exile&quot; has been likened to Hayao Miyazaki&#x27;s classic work &quot;Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind&quot; and the early steampunk novel trilogy &quot;A Nomad of the Time Streams&quot;.

Enoch Lau of THEM Anime Reviews gave the anime series 5 out of 5 stars. Lau praised the series for its great story, outstanding animation and characters. Saying that &quot;resembling something from Miyazaki more than Gonzo, &quot;Last Exile&quot; looks different. From the faces of the characters down to the stylings of the battleships, it evokes a classic feel but all the while look entirely new. The vanships and battleships are rendered in CG, and so are the myriad of battle effects and the plot is quite solid and intriguing. &quot;Last Exile&quot; has one of the most interesting settings that I have come across in recent anime. It is a time of war, and chivalry dictates how the opposing forces battle. But instead of using horses and chariots, they use battleships&quot;. When Geneon&#x27;s compilation DVDs were released, reviewers such as &quot;IGN&quot; praised them despite the use of Dolby Digital 2.0 audio mix over a 5.1 mix. &quot;The separation is masterfully taken care of with voices, music, and sound effects leveled off very cleanly for both the Japanese and English audio tracks.&quot; In an interview with director Koichi Chigira given in July 2004, he was surprised to find that the series had reached a great level of popularity among fans in the United States.

TechTV vice president Laura Civiello stated that &quot;Last Exile&quot; &quot;had more universal appeal than other types of anime shown on the network, which often contained lots of references recognizable only by hard-core fans.&quot; When the series premiered on the network, &quot;The New York Times&quot; recommended it for young audience as well with the headline &quot;An Anime Marathon, and It is Not Just for Adults.&quot; The network moved its Anime Unleashed programming block into prime time to take advantage of the quality of the series; eventually launching it into a top ten position on the Nielsen VideoScan anime survey in the middle of 2004. Sony Pictures Entertainment selected &quot;Last Exile&quot;, &quot;Blood+&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;R.O.D the TV&quot; as part of its promotional campaign throughout 2007 and 2008 targeting a bigger audience. It streamed the four series throughout Europe, Latin America, and other parts of Asia on Animax and Animax Asia through various 3G mobile phone services.

==Notes==

==References==
* 

==External links==
* &quot;Last Exile&quot; at JVC Music official website 
* &quot;Last Exile&quot; at Funimation Entertainment official website
* &quot;Last Exile&quot; at Madman Entertainment official website
* &quot;Last Exile -Fam, the Silver Wing&quot; at Gonzo&#x27;s official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="14" end="19" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137522" start="49" end="54" title="Gonzo (company)" label="Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201281" start="102" end="116" title="Koichi Chigira" label="Koichi Chigira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335548" start="137" end="149" title="Range Murata" label="Range Murata"/>
<link wikidata="Q81078" start="175" end="187" title="Mahiro Maeda" label="Mahiro Maeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q885903" start="239" end="259" title="Blue Submarine No. 6" label="Blue Submarine No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="284" end="286" title="Computer graphics" label="CG"/>
<link wikidata="Q734663" start="313" end="321" title="TV Tokyo" label="TV Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="605" end="620" title="Aircraft" label="aerial vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q848466" start="769" end="776" title="courier" label="courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1013" end="1034" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="1127" end="1142" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205595" start="1189" end="1209" title="NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan" label="Geneon Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="1275" end="1285" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1473" end="1482" title="A.D. Vision#ADV Films" label="ADV Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726798" start="1533" end="1552" title="Crunchyroll UK and Ireland" label="Manga Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618413" start="1574" end="1594" title="Crunchyroll Store Australia" label="Madman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="2134" end="2151" title="Chivalry" label="chivalric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="2477" end="2488" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q919036" start="2515" end="2531" title="Retro-futurism" label="retro-futuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="2597" end="2618" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q575625" start="2801" end="2812" title="antigravity" label="antigravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="2900" end="2904" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q152255" start="3609" end="3623" title="dead reckoning" label="dead reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q179430" start="3652" end="3659" title="sextant" label="sextant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3778" end="3789" title="List of Last Exile characters#Claus Valca" label="Claus Valca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3804" end="3814" title="List of Last Exile characters#Lavie Head" label="Lavie Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q848466" start="3845" end="3852" title="courier" label="courier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4093" end="4107" title="List of Last Exile characters#Alvis E. Hamilton" label="Alvis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4548" end="4559" title="List of Last Exile characters#Dio Eraclea" label="Dio Eraclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196161" start="4636" end="4650" title="Immelmann turn" label="Immelmann turn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4786" end="4794" title="List of Last Exile characters#Alexander Row" label="Alex Row"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4945" end="4961" title="List of Last Exile characters#Sophia Forrester" label="Sophia Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5448" end="5464" title="List of Last Exile characters#Delphine Eraclea" label="Delphine Eraclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q964131" start="5528" end="5539" title="Generation ship" label="colony ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q20950064" start="6781" end="6792" title="Air pirate" label="Sky Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137522" start="8224" end="8229" title="Gonzo (company)" label="Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201281" start="8331" end="8345" title="Koichi Chigira" label="Koichi Chigira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335548" start="8366" end="8378" title="Range Murata" label="Range Murata"/>
<link wikidata="Q81078" start="8404" end="8416" title="Mahiro Maeda" label="Mahiro Maeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q885903" start="8475" end="8495" title="Blue Submarine No. 6" label="Blue Submarine No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="8520" end="8522" title="Computer graphics" label="CG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335548" start="8591" end="8603" title="Range Murata" label="Range Murata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078274" start="8685" end="8693" title="Sketch (drawing)" label="sketches"/>
<link wikidata="Q223571" start="8975" end="8985" title="space suit" label="space suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16331597" start="9140" end="9154" title="costume design" label="costume design"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9657" end="9665" title="List of Last Exile characters#Alexander Row" label="Alex Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="9752" end="9754" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="9755" end="9773" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q597380" start="9921" end="9929" title="Vandread" label="Vandread"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="10040" end="10053" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q259326" start="10178" end="10206" title="non-photorealistic rendering" label="non-photorealistic rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584209" start="10314" end="10324" title="Anime Expo" label="Anime Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="10354" end="10367" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q498577" start="10395" end="10412" title="Castle in the Sky" label="Castle in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="10721" end="10732" title="dreadnought" label="dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q721960" start="10822" end="10831" title="musketeer" label="musketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="10847" end="10865" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="10882" end="10900" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="10930" end="10945" title="Red Army" label="Soviet Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="11041" end="11052" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q217964" start="11074" end="11084" title="LZ 129 Hindenburg" label="Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="11127" end="11130" title="Unidentified flying object" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q185101" start="11451" end="11465" title="Hamilcar Barca" label="Hamilcar Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="11492" end="11504" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="11523" end="11538" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="11576" end="11584" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="11622" end="11631" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="11645" end="11657" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="11688" end="11713" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q734663" start="11812" end="11820" title="TV Tokyo" label="TV Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="11890" end="11893" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202628" start="11924" end="11944" title="JVCKenwood Victor Entertainment" label="Victor Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205595" start="12317" end="12337" title="Geneon Universal Entertainment" label="Geneon Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q514487" start="12483" end="12489" title="TechTV" label="TechTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635221" start="12533" end="12548" title="Anime Unleashed" label="Anime Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512720" start="12720" end="12728" title="G4techTV" label="G4techTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655246" start="12887" end="12901" title="AZN Television" label="AZN Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093084" start="12906" end="12921" title="G4techTV Canada" label="G4techTV Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="13072" end="13082" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13211" end="13220" title="A.D. Vision#ADV Films" label="ADV Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726798" start="13385" end="13404" title="Crunchyroll UK and Ireland" label="Manga Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618413" start="13474" end="13494" title="Crunchyroll Store Australia" label="Madman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142035" start="13664" end="13675" title="Crunchyroll" label="Crunchyroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201281" start="13945" end="13959" title="Koichi Chigira" label="Koichi Chigira"/>
<link wikidata="Q161405" start="14152" end="14163" title="Animax" label="Animax Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q276744" start="14276" end="14290" title="Tears to Tiara" label="Tears to Tiara"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14304" end="14336" title="Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood" label="Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141838" start="14368" end="14378" title="Maid Sama!" label="Maid Sama!"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="14386" end="14396" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202628" start="14934" end="14954" title="Victor Entertainment" label="Victor Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046922" start="14960" end="14971" title="maxi single" label="maxi single"/>
<link wikidata="Q476215" start="15009" end="15015" title="Oricon" label="Oricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="16489" end="16494" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706671" start="16669" end="16678" title="Young Ace" label="Young Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031115" start="16711" end="16719" title="Kadokawa Future Publishing" label="Kadokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q482793" start="17114" end="17125" title="Newtype Ace" label="Newtype Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q220509" start="17217" end="17235" title="Anime News Network" label="Anime News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="17257" end="17268" title="live-action" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q15457274" start="17329" end="17343" title="Patrick Macias" label="Patrick Macias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034049" start="17362" end="17371" title="Animerica" label="Animerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202921" start="17485" end="17515" title="Tokyo International Anime Fair" label="Tokyo International Anime Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="17560" end="17575" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205595" start="18003" end="18023" title="Geneon Universal Entertainment" label="Geneon Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137522" start="18177" end="18182" title="Gonzo (company)" label="Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q220509" start="18332" end="18350" title="Anime News Network" label="Anime News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="18844" end="18858" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8885676" start="18885" end="18919" title="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (film)" label="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="18940" end="18949" title="steampunk" label="steampunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225022" start="18970" end="18997" title="A Nomad of the Time Streams" label="A Nomad of the Time Streams"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861860" start="19019" end="19037" title="THEM Anime Reviews" label="THEM Anime Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="19864" end="19867" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201281" start="20147" end="20161" title="Koichi Chigira" label="Koichi Chigira"/>
<link wikidata="Q514487" start="20297" end="20303" title="TechTV" label="TechTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="20581" end="20599" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635221" start="20750" end="20765" title="Anime Unleashed" label="Anime Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031617" start="20903" end="20920" title="Nielsen VideoScan" label="Nielsen VideoScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="20957" end="20984" title="Sony Pictures Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q615245" start="21024" end="21030" title="Blood+" label="Blood+"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276539" start="21062" end="21074" title="R.O.D the TV" label="R.O.D the TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q161405" start="21260" end="21266" title="Animax" label="Animax"/>
<link wikidata="Q706610" start="21271" end="21282" title="Animax Asia" label="Animax Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="21299" end="21301" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q215901" start="21403" end="21406" title="JVC" label="JVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q88911913" start="21459" end="21483" title="Funimation Entertainment" label="Funimation Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816526" start="21529" end="21549" title="Madman Entertainment" label="Madman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137522" start="21617" end="21629" title="Gonzo (company)" label="Gonzo&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585010" wikidata="Q6407196" url="?curid=585010" title="Kill stealing">
<text>In multiplayer video games, particularly in MOBAs, first-person shooters, MMORPGs and MUDs, kill stealing is the practice of obtaining credit for killing an enemy when another player has put more effort into the kill. This usually happens when a game only keeps track of which player defeats an enemy, rather than which player dealt the most damage, leading to the so-called last-hitting mechanics. If one player whittles down some enemy&#x27;s health points, but a different player eventually finishes the enemy off, this second player might obtain all of the loot or experience points from the enemy. Kill stealing is common when the rewards for finishing enemies off are highly desired within the game.

Some players feel that kill stealing is a dishonorable practice. A good faith attempt to secure a kill on an enemy that might otherwise have gotten away can sometimes be perceived as a kill steal if the other player believes the kill was already certain.

==Overview==

There are two main causes for kill stealing: the desire for the reward and the desire to cause other players grief. Kill stealing is predominantly done to gain the rewards from a kill. Griefers kill steal as only one of their tactics in annoying other players. However, there are side-reasons towards kill stealing, with a few being unintentional, i.e. killing an enemy with low player HP, and then killing another enemy - in a panic - which is being dealt by someone else.

Complaints of kill stealing are sometimes heard in online first-person shooters. In most of these games, the credit for a kill goes to the player who deals the killing shot. Players usually ignore complaints of kill stealing in FPSs because the rewards are less significant and because these games move much faster (i.e., it was probably accidental). Furthermore, in FPS combat, players are usually either allies (in which case the kill&#x27;s credit going to one player or another has no in-game meaning beyond ego) or in direct enmity with one another (providing both a justification for cutthroat tactics, and a generally immediate means of redress). Kill stealing can sometimes specifically refer to the disruption of a particularly &quot;interesting&quot; kill that would have earned a lot of extra points beyond the kill itself.

By contrast, in most MMORPGs players may be competing for the same in-game resources, but are not generally in direct conflict with one another. (In situations where they are, such as two opposite-faction players in a World of Warcraft player-versus-player server, there is usually little animosity towards kill-stealing, as there is a means of redress and prevention, and it is seen as part of the general struggle between Horde and Alliance)

In team based game modes, many players overreact when they do not understand the objective is for the team to win, rather than individual progression.

== Prevention ==
Many newer MMORPGs implement game designs that distributes the reward more fairly to those who fought a creature. Rewards can be distributed based on how much the player contributed to defeating the creature. A player that does 30% of the damage gains 30% of the money and experience points rewarded for defeating the creature. A game might have a more sophisticated way to measure a player&#x27;s contribution to the fight as well. A character whose primary task is healing other characters might be judged based on how much (s)he healed combatants during the fight.

In some newer multiplayer first-person shooters such as Battlefield 4 and Battlefield 1, if a player does enough damage to an enemy player, but a teammate gets the final blow, then the player will receive what is known as &#x27;Assist Counts as Kill&#x27;. The player then gets awarded the amount of damage they did to the enemy as points, and on their statistics it counts as kill rather than as an assist.

==See also==
* Camping – another practice that arises when players compete for rewards
* Ninja looting – improperly taking the reward from a defeated creature
* Powerleveling – powerlevelers are frequently blamed for kill stealing
* Gold farming

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="3" end="25" title="multiplayer video game" label="multiplayer video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="44" end="49" title="Multiplayer online battle arena" label="MOBAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="51" end="71" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="74" end="80" title="MMORPG" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="86" end="89" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="MUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407196" start="92" end="105" title="Kill stealing" label="kill stealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517599" start="157" end="162" title="mob (gaming)" label="enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="375" end="387" title="Last-hitting (game design)" label="last-hitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="445" end="457" title="health point" label="health point"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="569" end="585" title="experience point" label="experience point"/>
<link wikidata="Q444316" start="1086" end="1091" title="griefing" label="grief"/>
<link wikidata="Q444316" start="1162" end="1169" title="Griefer" label="Griefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="2506" end="2523" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618557" start="3527" end="3540" title="Battlefield 4" label="Battlefield 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q24031560" start="3545" end="3558" title="Battlefield 1" label="Battlefield 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q260906" start="3895" end="3902" title="camping (gaming)" label="Camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669107" start="3969" end="3982" title="Looting (gaming)" label="Ninja looting"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="4041" end="4054" title="Powerleveling" label="Powerleveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535646" start="4113" end="4125" title="Gold farming" label="Gold farming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585013" wikidata="Q218305" url="?curid=585013" title="40 Wall Street">
<text>40 Wall Street (also the Trump Building; formerly the Bank of Manhattan Trust Building and Manhattan Company Building) is a neo-Gothic skyscraper on Wall Street between Nassau and William streets in the Financial District of Manhattan in New York City, New York. Erected in 1929–1930 as the headquarters of the Manhattan Company, the building was designed by H. Craig Severance with Yasuo Matsui and Shreve &amp; Lamb. The building is a New York City designated landmark and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP); it is also a contributing property to the Wall Street Historic District, an NRHP district.

The building is on an L-shaped site. While the lower section has a facade of limestone, the upper stories incorporate a buff-colored brick facade and contain numerous setbacks. The facade also includes spandrels between the windows on each story, which are recessed behind the vertical piers on the facade. At the top of the building is a pyramid with a spire at its pinnacle. Inside, the lower floors contained the Manhattan Company&#x27;s double-height banking room, a board room, a trading floor, and two basements with vaults. The remaining stories were rented to tenants; there were private clubs on several floors, as well as an observation deck on the 69th and 70th floors.

Plans for 40 Wall Street were revealed in April 1929, with the Manhattan Company as the primary tenant, and the structure was opened on May 26, 1930. 40 Wall Street and the Chrysler Building competed for the distinction of world&#x27;s tallest building at the time of both buildings&#x27; construction; the Chrysler Building ultimately won that title. 40 Wall Street initially had low tenancy rates due to the Great Depression and was not fully occupied until 1944. Ownership of the building and the land underneath it, as well as the leasehold on the building, has changed several times throughout its history. Since 1982, the building has been owned by two German companies. The leasehold was held by interests on behalf of Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos in the mid-1980s. A company controlled by developer and later U.S. president Donald Trump bought the lease in 1995.

== Site ==
40 Wall Street is in the Financial District of Manhattan, in the middle of the block bounded by Pine Street to the north, William Street to the east, Wall Street to the south, and Nassau Street to the west. The site is L-shaped, with a longer facade on Pine Street than on Wall Street. The lot measures on Pine Street and on Wall Street. Originally, the site measured on Pine Street and 150 feet on Wall Street. The lot has a total area of .

40 Wall Street is surrounded by several buildings, including Federal Hall and 30 Wall Street to the west; 44 Wall Street and 48 Wall Street to the east; 55 Wall Street to the southeast; 28 Liberty Street to the north; and 23 Wall Street and 15 Broad Street to the south. The site slopes down southward so that the Pine Street entrance is on the second floor while the Wall Street entrance is on the first floor.

Prior to the current building&#x27;s completion, the site was occupied by numerous smaller office buildings. The southern part of the site was occupied by the eight-story Gallatin Bank Building at 34–36 Wall Street, designed by Cady, Berg &amp; See and completed in 1887; the nine-story Marshall Field Building at 38 Wall Street; the Manhattan Company&#x27;s original headquarters at 40 Wall Street; and a 13-story building to the east. The northern portion contained a 13-story building at 25 Pine Street, a 12-story building at 27–29 Pine Street, and the 13-story Redmond Building at 31–33 Pine Street.

== Architecture ==
The building was designed by lead architect H. Craig Severance, associate architect Yasuo Matsui, and consulting architects Shreve &amp; Lamb. Moran &amp; Proctor were consulting engineers for the foundation, the Starrett Corporation was the builder, and Purdy and Henderson were the structural engineers. The interior was designed by Morrell Smith with Walker &amp; Gillette. Many engineers and contractors were involved in various other aspects of the building&#x27;s construction.

The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission has described 40 Wall Street&#x27;s facade as having &quot;modernized French Gothic&quot; features. The building&#x27;s massing largely conforms to the Art Deco style, though there are also abstract shapes and elements of classical architecture. According to art history professor Daniel M. Abramson, the classically-styled details at the base were intended to provide &quot;context and support&quot;, while the Gothic-style roof was intended to emphasize the building&#x27;s height. 40 Wall Street is 70 stories tall, with two additional basement stories. The building&#x27;s pinnacle reaches , which made it the world&#x27;s tallest building for one month upon its completion.

=== Form ===
40 Wall Street, like many other early-20th-century skyscrapers in New York City, is designed as a freestanding tower, rising separately from all adjacent buildings. 40 Wall Street is one of several skyscrapers in the city that have pyramidal roofs, along with the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower, 14 Wall Street, Woolworth Building, Consolidated Edison Building, and Thurgood Marshall United States Courthouse. The building is articulated into three horizontal sections similar to the components of a column, namely a base, shaft, and capital. The floors at the six-story base cover the entire L-shaped lot, while the 7th through 35th stories (making up the middle section) are shaped in a &quot;U&quot;, with two wings of different lengths facing west. The 7th through 35th stories occupy nearly the entire lot. Above the 35th story, the building rises as a smaller, square tower through the 62nd story.

40 Wall Street has several setbacks to conform with New York City&#x27;s 1916 Zoning Resolution. On the Wall Street side, the central portion of the facade is recessed through the 26th floor, while symmetrical pavilions project slightly on either side, with setbacks above the 17th, 19th, and 21st floors. The entire Wall Street facade has setbacks above the 26th, 33rd, and 35th floors. The Pine Street facade is asymmetrical, with the western pavilion being much longer; this facade has a setback above the 12th, 17th, 19th, 23rd, 26th, 28th, and 29th floors. The projecting pavilions on both sides are connected at the eighth floor by a dormer.

The building&#x27;s west-facing wings are of different lengths; the northern wing is significantly longer and has cooling systems atop it, but both wings have minor setbacks above the 26th and 33rd floors, and rise only to the 35th floor. The eastern facade does not have any setbacks below the 35th story.

=== Facade ===
40 Wall Street&#x27;s exterior curtain wall is composed of two layers of brick; the inner layer provides fireproofing, while the outer layer is the exterior cladding. In general, the facade is composed of buff-colored brick, as well as decorative elements made of terracotta and buff brick. The vertical bays, which contain the building&#x27;s windows, are separated by piers. The piers are flat, a characteristic of the Art Deco style. Spandrel panels, which separate the rows of windows on each floor, are generally recessed behind the piers; the spandrels are generally darker on upper stories. The building&#x27;s window openings, initially composed of one-over-one sash windows, were later replaced by numerous types of window-pane arrangements or by louvers.

==== Base ====

The first through sixth stories contain a limestone-and-granite facade. On the first story, the podium on the facade&#x27;s Wall Street elevation is made of granite. The second- to fifth-floor facades on both sides consist of a colonnade with pilasters made of limestone. The colonnades were intended to resemble those found in Greek temples. During the design of the building, Matsui adjusted the colonnades to match the dimensions of the nearby Subtreasury building (now Federal Hall).

On the Wall Street side, the first floor originally had a central entryway with three bronze-and-glass doors, flanked by numerous entrances to the elevator lobby and the lower banking room. Double-height bronze and glass windows spanned the second and third floors, while cast-iron windows were on the fourth through sixth floors. Above the central entrance was Elie Nadelman&#x27;s &quot;Oceanus&quot; sculpture (also called &quot;Aquarius&quot;); the sculpture was a bronze depiction of Oceanus, a Greek Titan pictured on a 19th-century stock certificate issued by the Manhattan Company. The &quot;Oceanus&quot; sculpture was removed prior to 1973. Between 1961 and 1963, Carson, Lundin &amp; Shaw added granite cladding and reconfigured the doorways on the first floor, and replaced the second- through sixth-floor windows. By 1995, the entrance had been reconfigured with seven bronze rectangular doors and three revolving doors, recessed behind the main facade. Letters reading &quot;The Trump Building&quot; are placed above the first floor, while the fourth floor has a pair of flagpoles.

The Pine Street elevation is arranged similarly to the Wall Street elevation and was likewise redesigned from 1961 to 1963. The Pine Street elevation rises above a low stylobate, in contrast to the Wall Street elevation, which rises above a podium. A clock was on the Pine Street facade from 1967 to 1993. This portion of the facade consists of either 10 or 11 bays. At ground level, there is an entrance to the main elevator lobby, a service entrance, and storefronts slightly above grade. As with the Wall Street side, the fourth floor features a pair of flagpoles.

==== Upper stories ====
The 8th through 35th stories comprise the midsection of the building. There are eight flagpoles on the ninth floor of the Wall Street side, four on each pavilion. On the 19th floor of the Pine Street side, there are louvers in place of window openings. On the 36th through 62nd stories, there are brick spandrels between the windows on each story. The spandrels on the 52nd through 57th floors are made of terracotta; on the 58th through 60th floors, terracotta with buttresses; and on the 61st and 62nd floors, darker bricks with pediments and rhombus patterns.

The building&#x27;s pyramidal roof is made of lead-coated copper, which over time has oxidized and turned green. The roof has French Renaissance-style detail, a design element intended to make the building appear much older than it actually was at the time of its construction. The decorations on the roof include diaperwork patterns, where the brickwork is laid in a repeating diagonal grid pattern; terraces, which are supported by buttresses; and small dormer windows. There is a cornice surrounding the roof. On top is a spire with a flagpole and a glass lantern.

=== Features ===
The building&#x27;s frame is made of steel. The superstructure contains eight main columns, each of which weighs and can carry loads of up to . As originally arranged, 40 Wall Street hosted the Manhattan Company&#x27;s banking facilities on the first through sixth floors; offices on its middle floors; and machinery, an observation deck, and recreation areas on the top floors. There were also 43 elevators inside the building when it opened; , there are 36 elevators. When 40 Wall Street was completed, it could accommodate 10,000 employees.

==== Lower stories ====
Like other early-20th-century skyscrapers in the Financial District, the lobby of 40 Wall Street originally was designed with classical elements such as moldings, pilasters, columns, and heavy doorframes. The ground story was highly decentralized with seven entrances from Wall Street, leading to various vestibules. The westernmost entrance led to a private foyer with its own elevator, while the easternmost entrance connected with the elevator banks on the eastern side of the building. Two ground-level banking rooms extended northward to Pine Street: one at the center and one on the west. There was also space for brokerage-house messengers. A wide, marble staircase from the ground level led up to the main banking room on the second floor. The modern design of the lobby dates to a 1990s renovation by Der Scutt. Following Scutt&#x27;s renovation, the lobby was redecorated with bronze and marble surfaces. The lobby also has escalators to the second floor.

The main banking room, a double-height space measuring , was on the second floor. The room could be accessed from ground level or directly from Pine Street. The Pine Street entrance had a foyer with two pairs of octagonal, black marble Ionic columns, while the Wall Street side of the room was supported by veined octagonal columns. The room itself consists of a main hall below five groin vaults, flanked by arcades that lead into smaller vaulted spaces. In the main hall were desks for tellers. To the north and south were two platforms for the officers of the Manhattan Company&#x27;s subsidiaries, where officers and customers could meet privately in wood-paneled spaces. The walls were once decorated with three murals by Ezra Winter, depicting various scenes from the history of the Financial District; Winter&#x27;s murals have since been removed. The second floor was occupied by a Duane Reade convenience store from 2011 to 2023.

A pair of stairs on the banking room&#x27;s south wall flanks the escalators and leads up to what was originally the officers&#x27; quarters, a rectangular room with five white marble columns. This space had three doorways that led to private offices of Manhattan Company executives; the doorways to those offices were framed by round carvings symbolizing various sectors of the economy.

Stairs from the ground level led to the two basement stories, where the Manhattan Company&#x27;s vaults were located. Under the lobby was a main vault that stored the company&#x27;s own securities and funds. A safe-deposit vault for members of the public, with an door, was below the Manhattan Company&#x27;s vault.

==== Upper stories ====
On the fourth floor was the boardroom of the Manhattan Company, designed in the Georgian style as an imitation of Independence Hall&#x27;s Signers&#x27; Room. It contained several elements of the Doric order, such as columns, pilasters, and a frieze. Wooden doors and fireplaces with segmental arches were on the eastern wall, while false windows were on the western wall. The space also included a fireplace, Chippendale furniture, and a blue rug. According to the Manhattan Company&#x27;s magazine, the boardroom&#x27;s design &quot;recaptured the artistic spirit of the days of ... [the company&#x27;s] founding&quot;.

The offices of the Manhattan Company&#x27;s officers overlooked the Wall Street entrance. The offices were furnished with patterned carpets, soft chairs, and single desks, which were meant to evoke a feeling of luxury. According to &quot;Architecture and Building&quot; magazine, the executive offices&#x27; furnishings were intended as a &quot;pleasingly striking contrast to the modern severity of the usual treatment of financial district structures&quot;. The sixth floor housed a trading floor for the International Manhattan Company, Inc. All of the offices on the upper stories were served by a pneumatic tube mail system; according to Matsui, the system was built to accommodate financial tenants &quot;whose functions require rapid transfer of stocks and papers&quot;. The pneumatic-tube system delivered mail to and from terminals on the building&#x27;s mezzanine, precluding the need for messengers to use the elevators or overcrowd the lobby.

The 26th and 27th stories housed the Luncheon Club of Wall Street, a members-only private club, built upon the suggestion of William A. Starrett, the building&#x27;s general contractor. The Luncheon Club occupied a Colonial-style space designed by Matsui and Robert L. Powell, and included an entrance hall and a main dining room covered in wood, as well as private dining rooms with wallpaper. The 55th floor was entirely occupied by the Manhattan Company&#x27;s officers&#x27; club, which included a dining room. The officers&#x27; club was designed in a Colonial style with Windsor chairs, a fireplace, and a ceiling with fake wood beams. Another members-only dining club, the Rookery Club, was located on the 58th story. The Bank of Manhattan Building had an observation deck on the 69th and 70th floors, above the street; it could fit up to 100 people. The observation deck was closed to the public sometime after World War II.

== History ==
The Manhattan Company was established by Aaron Burr in 1799, ostensibly to provide clean water to Lower Manhattan. The company&#x27;s true focus was banking, and it served as a competitor to Alexander Hamilton&#x27;s Bank of New York, which previously held a monopoly over banking in New York City. The Manhattan Company was headquartered at a row house at 40 Wall Street, which was the company&#x27;s &quot;office of discount and deposit&quot;. The bank remained on the site until the present skyscraper was constructed. By the early 20th century, the company was growing quickly, having acquired numerous other banks.

=== Development ===

==== Planning ====
The idea for the current skyscraper was devised by banker George L. Ohrstrom, who began acquiring land for the building in 1928 under the auspices of 36 Wall Street Corporation. Stakeholders in the corporation included Ohrstrom and the builders, Starrett Brothers (later Starrett Corporation). In September 1928, 36 Wall Street Corporation acquired 34–36 Wall Street under a 93-year lease from the Iselin family. At the time, the syndicate hoped to build a 20-story building. By that December, Ohrstrom had purchased four buildings, with frontage along 27–33 Pine Street and 34–38 Wall Street, and controlled a total area of . The plans had been updated, and the syndicate at that point envisioned a 45-story building. In January 1929, the corporation planned a bond issue to fund the building&#x27;s construction. That March, Ohrstrom announced that H. Craig Severance would design a 47-story structure at 36 Wall Street. The corporation bought 25 Pine Street the same month.

Shortly after Severance&#x27;s original plans were announced, the skyscraper was modified to have 60 floors, which was shorter than the Woolworth Building and the then under construction Chrysler Building. Plans for a 64-story skyscraper were announced after the Manhattan Company agreed to relocate to the new building in early April 1929. By April 8, Ohrstrom and Severance had planned to make the new skyscraper the world&#x27;s tallest building. Two days later, it was announced that Severance had increased the tower&#x27;s height to with 62 floors, exceeding the heights of the Woolworth and Chrysler buildings. It was also announced that the Manhattan Company would be 36 Wall Street&#x27;s main tenant and that the new building would be known as the Bank of Manhattan Building or the Manhattan Company Building. The height of the building was made possible by the lot, which was one of the largest in the densely-developed Financial District.

The builders intended to spend large sums to reduce the construction period to one year, which would allow rental tenants to move into the building sooner. By mid-April 1929, tenants of the existing buildings on the lot had moved elsewhere. The Manhattan Company and Chrysler buildings started competing for the distinction of &quot;world&#x27;s tallest building&quot;. The &quot;Race into the Sky&quot;, as popular media called it at the time, was representative of the country&#x27;s optimism in the 1920s, fueled by the building boom in major cities. The Manhattan Company Building was revised to in April 1929, which would make it the world&#x27;s tallest. Severance then publicly claimed the title of the world&#x27;s tallest building, but the Starrett Corporation denied any allegations that the plans had been changed to beat the Chrysler Building.

==== Start of construction ====

Construction of the Manhattan Company Building began in May 1929. By that time, the syndicate developing the building was known as the 40 Wall Street Corporation, and the building was also known as 40 Wall Street. That same month, the Manhattan Company leased its lots at 40–42 Wall Street and 35–39 Pine Street to the 40 Wall Street Corporation for 93 years. Ownership would be divided among the Manhattan Company, the Iselin family, and the 40 Wall Street Corporation, with the Manhattan Company holding a plurality stake. Simultaneously, the U.S. government invited bids on the adjoining building at 28–30 Wall Street, then occupied by a federal assay office. In June 1929, the government announced that the 40 Wall Street Corporation had placed the highest bid for the lot, bringing the syndicate&#x27;s total land holding to . The assay office plot was reserved for future expansion, instead of being incorporated into the plans for the new skyscraper. The Manhattan Company moved to a temporary headquarters during construction.

Excavations for 40 Wall Street were complicated by numerous factors. There was little available space to store materials; the surrounding lots were all densely built up; the bedrock was below street level, beneath boulders and quicksand; and the previous buildings on the lot had foundations up to thick. Furthermore, the builders had a 12-month deadline, requiring them to plan the entire project backward from the planned completion date. Starrett Brothers had drawn up a detailed construction schedule for 40 Wall Street, outlining the timeline for each major construction contract. The schedule indicated that structural-steel installation would commence in June 1929 and that all work was to be completed by May 1, 1930. The project employed 24 timekeepers and auditors, who checked employees&#x27; attendance, as well as seven job runners, who delivered architectural drawings and ensured that materials were delivered.

To save money and time, the foundation of 40 Wall Street was constructed at the same time that buildings on the site were being cleared. The old Manhattan Company building was the last to be cleared. Caisson construction could not be used to excavate the site since the existing foundation consisted of heavy masonry blocks. To ensure that the foundation could adequately support the structure, temporary lighter footings were installed during the demolition of the old buildings and construction of the first 20 stories, and permanent heavy footings were installed afterward. Workers excavated the site to the underlying layer of bedrock, which extended as much as deep. They then installed several dozen hollow cylinders, each measuring wide. In addition, workers installed several hundred steel pilings, which were clustered into piers, infilled with concrete, and topped by steel caps that could accommodate structural loads of up to . The weight of the existing 12-story building on the site was used to drill the new building&#x27;s foundations into the ground. Afterward, a concrete floor was poured into the excavation, which was then enclosed with a concrete cofferdam.

==== Superstructure and completion ====
In July 1929, the builders held a ceremony where William A. Starrett, head of the Starrett Corporation, drove the first rivet into the building&#x27;s frame. Starrett received a $5 million loan that same month to finance the building. Work on 40 Wall Street progressed quickly, and the contractors completed four stories each week. The site was active 24 hours a day, with 2,300 workers working in three shifts; interior furnishing progressed as the steel frame rose. Workers used passenger elevators to transport materials, obviating the need for temporary construction cranes. Matsui described the steel frame as a &quot;web system of rigidity&quot;, with joints and diagonal beams providing both lateral bracing and wind bracing. The steel frame for 40 Wall Street was manufactured in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania; transported to Jersey City, New Jersey, using 800 railcars; shipped across the Hudson River via barge; and transported from the dock to the construction site via truck. Derricks then lifted the steel beams into place, where groups of four workers riveted them onto the frame. As the tower rose, the derricks were themselves lifted two stories at a time.

Workers then installed the tower&#x27;s facade by hanging pieces of curtain wall from the completed steel frame. Interior work proceeded simultaneously with the facade installation. The steel superstructure reached the 40th story by September 1929, when interior plasterwork began. The building topped out on November 13, 1929. By that time, the steel frame had reached above street level, the facade had been completed to the 54th story, and much of the internal furnishing had been completed. By December, rental agents Brown, Wheelock, Harris, Vought &amp; Company were leasing out the space at the Chrysler and Manhattan Company buildings, which aggregated .

The 40 Wall Street Corporation gave a $12.5 million mortgage for the building&#x27;s completion in December 1929, and the corporation planned a bond issue of an equivalent value by January 1930. The building&#x27;s roof was covered with scaffolding by March 1930, although Manhattan Company officials denied that they were trying to increase the building&#x27;s height. The work was completed one week ahead of schedule, on May 1, 1930. Several workers received craftsmanship awards in a ceremony at the end of April 1930. The building officially opened on May 26. In total, $24 million had been spent on construction. Four workers died while constructing 40 Wall Street; a similar mortality rate to other contemporary projects of similar scale. Paul Starrett, of the Starrett Corporation, said: &quot;Of all the construction work which I have handled, the Bank of Manhattan was the most complicated and the most difficult, and I regard it as the most successful.&quot;

=== Early years ===

==== Competition for &quot;world&#x27;s tallest building&quot; title ====
Prior to 40 Wall Street&#x27;s completion, architect William Van Alen obtained permission to install a long spire on the Chrysler Building and had it constructed secretly. The Chrysler Building&#x27;s spire was completed on October 23, 1929, bringing that building to , thereby greatly exceeding 40 Wall Street&#x27;s height. Disturbed by Chrysler&#x27;s victory, Shreve &amp; Lamb wrote a newspaper article claiming that their building was the tallest, since it contained the world&#x27;s highest usable floor. They stated that the observation deck at 40 Wall Street was nearly above the top floor in the Chrysler Building. 40 Wall Street&#x27;s observation deck was high, while the Chrysler Building&#x27;s observatory was high. As a result of the Chrysler Building&#x27;s spire, 40 Wall Street was the tallest building in Lower Manhattan but not the tallest in New York City.

John J. Raskob, developer of the Empire State Building (which was also designed by Shreve &amp; Lamb), also wanted to construct the world&#x27;s tallest building. The &quot;Race into the Sky&quot; was defined by at least five other proposals, although only the Empire State Building would survive the Wall Street Crash of 1929. Plans for the Empire State Building were changed multiple times; the final plan, published in December 1929, called for the building to be tall. The Empire State Building was completed in May 1931, becoming the world&#x27;s tallest building both by roof height and spire height.

Because of late changes to the plans of both 40 Wall Street and the Chrysler Building, as well as the fact that the buildings were erected nearly simultaneously, it is uncertain whether 40 Wall Street was ever taller than the Chrysler Building. John Tauranac, who wrote a book about the Empire State Building&#x27;s history, later stated that if 40 Wall Street had &quot;ever had been the tallest building, they would have had bragging rights, and if they did, I certainly never heard them&quot;. If only completed structures are counted, 40 Wall Street was the world&#x27;s tallest building for one month, from the first week of May 1930 until the opening of the Chrysler Building on May 27, 1930.

==== Early tenants and foreclosure ====
The new building housed four Manhattan Company subsidiaries: the Bank of Manhattan Trust Company, the International Acceptance Bank, the International Manhattan Company, and the Bank of Manhattan Safe Deposit Company. The Manhattan Company used the two basement levels for storage vaults; the 1st through 6th stories for bank operations; and the 55th floor for its officers&#x27; club. Among the first tenants were Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. and a private lunch club called the Wall Street Club. 40 Wall Street opened following the Wall Street Crash of 1929, and so suffered from a lack of tenants. Many of the original tenants had withdrawn their commitments to rent space in the building and, in some cases, had gone bankrupt. As a result, only half of the space in 40 Wall Street was leased during the 1930s. Office space rented for , less than half of the that the building&#x27;s owners had sought. For the first five years of the building&#x27;s existence, 40 Wall Street Corporation was able to pay the $323,200 interest on the second mortgage-bond issue.

By early 1939, 40 Wall Street Corporation had fallen behind on rent payments, ground leases, and property taxes. That May, the Marine Midland Trust Company started foreclosure proceedings against the corporation after it defaulted on &quot;payments of interest, taxes and other charges&quot;. In response, several bondholders formed a committee to protect their stakes; the committee expressed opposition to the proposed reorganization. In July 1939, the corporation filed a plan to reorganize all assets that were not covered by the mortgage loans. Marine Midland became the trustee of 40 Wall Street&#x27;s first-mortgage fee and its bonds on the lease in February 1940, supplanting the corporation. Marine Midland, acting on behalf of the bondholders, acquired the building that September in a transaction worth almost $11.5 million. &quot;The New York Times&quot; later described the building as being &quot;a monument to lost hope&quot; during that era: at the time, the building&#x27;s $1,000 debentures were being sold at $108.75 apiece. The structure as a whole was worth $1.25 million, which was less than the cost of the 43 elevators inside the building.

C. F. Noyes was hired as the building&#x27;s leasing agent at the end of 1940. One of the larger tenants during the 1940s was the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company, which in 1941 leased four floors. Other tenants included real-estate agents, lawyers, brokers, and bankers, as well as a short-film theater in 1941. More tenants came during World War II, starting with the United States Department of the Navy. By 1943, the building was 80 percent leased, and that rate increased to 90 percent a year later. After the United States Department of War leased four floors in July 1944, the building reached full occupancy for the first time in its history. Many large tenants such as Prudential Financial, Westinghouse, and Western Union signed long-term leases. After several tenants left during the late 1940s, the building was completely rented again in 1951. At the time, 40 Wall Street&#x27;s office space was renting for , a relatively high price for a building constructed before air conditioning became popular.

==== 1946 plane crash ====
On the evening of May 20, 1946, a Beechcraft C-45F Expediter airplane belonging to the United States Army Air Forces crashed into 40 Wall Street&#x27;s northern facade. The twin-engine plane was heading for Newark Airport on a flight originating at Lake Charles Army Air Field in Louisiana. It struck the 58th floor of the building at about 8:10 pm, creating a hole in the masonry. The crash killed all five aboard the plane, including a Women&#x27;s Army Corps officer, though no one in the building or on the ground was hurt. The fuselage and the wing of the splintered plane fell onto the 12th-story setback, while parts of the aircraft and pieces of brick and mortar from the building fell into the street below. Fog and low visibility were identified as the main causes of the crash, since LaGuardia Field had reported a heavy fog that reduced the ceiling to , obscuring the view of the ground for the pilot at the building&#x27;s 58th story.

The month after the crash, the owners of 40 Wall Street filed a building application with the Department of Buildings to fix the hole in the facade. This crash was the second in New York City in less than a year; an Army B-25 bomber struck the 78th floor of the Empire State Building in July 1945, also caused by fog and poor visibility. The incident prompted the Army, in June 1946, to ban planes from landing in New York City during heavy fog. The 1946 accident was the last time an airplane accidentally crashed into a building in New York City in the 20th century.

=== 1950s to 1970s ===

==== Chase relocation and Webb &amp; Knapp acquisition ====
In August 1950, the building&#x27;s owners submitted plans for an alteration of the building at a cost of $300,000. Over the following years, the building was retrofitted with air conditioning. The directors of the Manhattan Company and Chase National Bank voted in January 1955 to merge their respective companies, and Chase Manhattan Bank was created as a result of the merger. The new company was headquartered at Chase National&#x27;s previous building at 20 Pine Street, immediately north of 40 Wall Street; soon afterward, Chase constructed a building at the neighboring 28 Liberty Street to serve as its headquarters. Meanwhile, several offices as well as a bank branch remained in 40 Wall Street.

By 1956, the building&#x27;s financial situation had improved considerably, and 40 Wall Street Corporation&#x27;s $1,000 debentures were selling for $1,550. That year, real estate developer William Zeckendorf had his company Webb and Knapp buy the leaseholds for the land from 40 Wall Street Inc., Chase, and the estate of the Iselin family. Webb and Knapp also bought 32 percent of 40 Wall Street Corporation&#x27;s stock, eventually increasing their stake to two-thirds of the corporation&#x27;s shares. The firm attempted to sell 40 Wall Street in October 1957 for $15 million, but a New York Supreme Court justice enjoined the sale in November 1957 after several minority shareholders claimed the sale was illegal.

The corporation&#x27;s stockholders voted in June 1959 to sell the building for no less than $17 million. To reduce disagreements, a State Supreme Court justice ordered that an auction be held for the building. That October, stockholders held an auction for 40 Wall Street. Zeckendorf submitted the highest bid, at $18.15 million, although there was only one other bidder. At the time, 40 Wall Street was believed to be the most valuable real-estate property ever to be auctioned in New York City. Webb &amp; Knapp had spent $32 million to acquire the building; excluding the auction, the remainder of the cost was used to pay Chase and the Iselin estate.

==== City &amp; Central and Loeb, Rhoades operation ====
Webb and Knapp sold the property to the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in April 1960 for $20 million. Metropolitan Life leased the building back to Webb and Knapp for 99 years, under a leasehold that cost $1.2 million a year. Chase Manhattan was relocating to its new headquarters at 28 Liberty Street, and the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation was planning to relocate to the second through fifth floors, which Chase Manhattan was vacating. That September, Webb and Knapp sold the leasehold to British investors City &amp; Central Investments (later City Centre Properties) for $15 million. The sale was finalized in November 1960, and City &amp; Central acquired title that following month. The new operator renovated the interior and exterior. Manufacturers Hanover moved to the building in 1962, relocating $24 billion in deposits to 40 Wall Street from its old headquarters at 70 Broadway.

City Centre sold the leasehold to Loeb, Rhoades &amp; Co., 40 Wall Street&#x27;s largest tenant, in June 1966. Other major tenants at the time included Bache &amp; Co., which had rented by 1966. Manufacturers Hanover relocated many of its offices to 600 Fifth Avenue and 55 Water Street. After Loeb, Rhoades &amp; Co. merged with Shearson in 1980, the of office space occupied by Loeb, Rhoades &amp; Co. was vacated; the space was quickly leased to Morgan Guaranty and Toronto-Dominion Bank. At the time, 40 Wall Street had that was not yet rented, and office space in the Financial District was typically rented for .

=== 1980s and early 1990s ===

In 1982, the property was purchased by a German investment group headed by Walter Hinneberg. Hinneberg and two of his siblings transferred their 80 percent ownership stake to an entity named 40 Wall Street Holdings Corporation in 1992. The other two owners conveyed their combined 20 percent stake to an entity named New Scandic Wall Ltd.

==== Marcos family leasehold ====

At the end of 1982, Loeb, Rhoades &amp; Co. sold the leasehold to a holding company; the Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos and his wife Imelda would be revealed as the real buyers in 1985. According to a broker who was involved in the sale, the Marcos family&#x27;s agents, brothers Joseph J. and Ralph E. Bernstein, were initially believed to be buying the building for the wealthy Gaon family of Switzerland, as Joseph Bernstein&#x27;s wife was a member of that family. The operators planned to gild 40 Wall Street&#x27;s roof. In coded cables between the Marcos family and their alleged &quot;front&quot; in Manhattan, Gliceria Tantoco, the 40 Wall Street building was referred to using the secret code-word &quot;Bridgetown&quot;. By February 1986, 40 Wall Street&#x27;s leasehold, and three other buildings reportedly owned by the Marcoses, were placed for sale. Around that time, the Bernsteins were contemplating paying $250 million for 40 Wall Street and two of the other buildings.

After Marcos was forced out of office, the administration of his successor Corazon Aquino froze Marcos&#x27;s assets within U.S. banking channels in March 1986, and the building&#x27;s future became uncertain. Citicorp, which had placed a mortgage on the building, indicated in December 1986 that it would foreclose on the property. After the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled to block the sale of the Marcos properties that November, the Aquino administration filed a lawsuit against the Marcos estate to obtain title to the buildings. The Bernsteins alleged that they paid $235 million for 40 Wall Street, Herald Center, and the Crown Building, but the Philippine government claimed that the sale was never finalized. The Saudi arms dealer Adnan Khashoggi also claimed to be involved with the building&#x27;s purchase; he asserted that he had owned the building for several years before the Bernsteins&#x27; alleged purchase. Khashoggi was subsequently accused of helping the Marcoses hide their stakes in their buildings, although he was acquitted of all racketeering charges in relation to the properties.

Capital improvements to the building, including upgrades to its unreliable elevators, were suspended while legal proceedings were ongoing. The Aquino administration attempted in early 1989 to sell the four Marcos properties to Morris Bailey for $398 million. Federal district court judge Pierre N. Leval ordered a foreclosure sale of the Marcos properties in August 1989; the Bailey group hoped that Citigroup would name them as the preferred bidders. At the court-ordered auction, the Bernsteins submitted the winning bid of $108.6 million after another bidder, Jack Resnick &amp; Sons, refused to raise its bid of $108.55 million. The second mortgage with Citicorp comprised $60 million of this total. The Bernstein brothers paid the $1.5 million down payment, but they could not pay the remainder of the purchase price before the October 10, 1989, deadline. At the time, the Bernsteins were also involved in a bankruptcy proceeding in Curaçao; a special master there had refused to repeal a bankruptcy action that would have allowed the Bernsteins to pay the remainder of 40 Wall Street&#x27;s purchase price. This prompted a second auction of the building&#x27;s leasehold.

==== Resnick operation and further issues ====
At a second auction in November 1989, Burton Resnick of Jack Resnick &amp; Sons paid $77,000,100 for the leasehold, beating Citicorp&#x27;s bid by $100. By then, demand for real estate in Lower Manhattan had declined in the aftermath of Black Monday in 1987. Resnick&#x27;s lawyer, Howard J. Rubenstein, said his client planned to spend $30 million to $40 million renovating 40 Wall Street, although real-estate experts said the building needed closer to $50 million in renovations. Resnick decided in 1990 to spend $50 million on upgrades. The renovation would have included fire, electrical, and mechanical system replacement; renovation of the lobby; restoration of the facade and windows; and replacement of the elevators. The Resnicks were only able to upgrade the windows; they defaulted on their mortgage in 1991, and Citicorp took over the leasehold. Citicorp canceled financing for the renovation that year, citing concerns that tenants, including Manufacturers Hanover, which had moved from the lower stories of the building in 1982, might move out.

By the early 1990s, 40 Wall Street was 80 percent vacant. The building&#x27;s maintenance had declined to the point that tenants reported that they frequently waited 20 minutes for an elevator, and many interior spaces had been stripped to the steel frame. Homeless people were squatting in vacant floors because the building had limited security. The building was also seen as outdated, since it had no freight elevator, the upper stories were too small, and the office floors had large numbers of structural columns. In 1992, Citicorp prepared to sell 40 Wall Street again; the asking price was reportedly as low as $10 million. The building&#x27;s valuation had declined from $123 million in 1990 to $75 million in 1993. If 40 Wall Street&#x27;s lease were not sold and renovated before the end of 1992, the owners were entitled to exercise a clause to evict the leaseholder.

American International Group attempted to acquire Citicorp&#x27;s stake in the building for $6.5 million, but the negotiations failed in November 1992, in what &quot;Crain&#x27;s New York&quot; magazine described as a &quot;collapse of downtown real estate&quot;. Citicorp auctioned off the building in May 1993; the bank wrote down the building&#x27;s value to zero. Hong Kong firm Glorious Sun considered buying the building but ultimately decided against it. Another group from Hong Kong, the consortium Kinson Properties, agreed to lease the property, paying $8 million. Kinson planned to renovate the building for $60 million, including the lobby for $4 million and electrical and mechanical systems for $5–7 million. By the time Kinson sold the leasehold in 1995, little had been done to improve the property.

=== Trump lease ===
In July 1995, real estate developer Donald Trump signed a letter of intent to buy Kinson&#x27;s lease and spend $100 million on renovations. The leasehold was transferred that December. There have been conflicting accounts about the price of the leasehold. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that Trump purchased the leasehold for $8 million, while &quot;Barron&#x27;s&quot; cited the leasehold as having cost between $3 million and $5 million. In November 1995, Trump stated that he was buying the leasehold from Kinson for $100,000. During a 2005 episode of &quot;The Apprentice&quot;, Trump claimed he only paid $1 million for the leasehold but that the property was actually worth $400 million. Trump&#x27;s legal advisor, George H. Ross, restated this claim in a 2005 book. On a 2007 episode of CNBC&#x27;s &quot;The Billionaire Inside&quot;, Trump again claimed that he paid $1 million for the leasehold but stated the building&#x27;s value as $600 million. In 2012, it was reported that Trump paid $10 million for the leasehold.

Estimates of the building&#x27;s worth also varied. City tax assessors had valued the building at $90 million by 2000 and reported that the building was worth the same amount in 2004. While Trump estimated the building&#x27;s worth at $1 billion in 2012, an external appraisal the same year valued the building at $220 million. Trump maintained in 2013 that the building was worth $530 million. Trump&#x27;s lenders estimated that the building was worth $540 million in 2015 (though the Trump Organization gave a higher figure of $735 million), and &quot;Bloomberg News&quot; estimated the next year that 40 Wall Street was worth $550 million.

==== 1990s and 2000s ====
Trump spent $35 million refurbishing 40 Wall Street. Der Scutt Architects renovated the lobby, and the Trump Organization replaced several hundred windows, refurbished 30 elevator cabs, and added lights to illuminate the roof. He planned to convert the upper half of 40 Wall Street to residential space, leaving the bottom half as commercial space. The plan was contingent on the passage of a state law in late 1995, which granted tax exemptions to developers who renovated office buildings in New York into residential and commercial space. Trump had planned to rent out some space as studio apartments and one- to three-bedroom apartments, but real-estate experts, quoted in the &quot;New York Daily News&quot;, said the lowest 25 floors were so large that it would not be profitable to convert them to apartments. By 1997, Trump was negotiating with hotel chains to occupy the lower stories of 40 Wall Street. Among these chains was Marriott International, which proposed operating a Ritz-Carlton hotel on either ten or twelve stories. At the time, the building was about 25 percent occupied.

Trump canceled his plans to convert the upper floors to residential space, citing high costs. By 1998, almost all of the space in the building had been leased. Several large tenants, such as American Express, CNA Financial Corporation, Bear Stearns, Nomura Holdings, Country-Wide Insurance Company, Hilton Hotels &amp; Resorts, and Union Bank of California, had moved into 40 Wall Street after its renovation. The same year, Trump obtained a $125 million mortgage loan for the building from several European banks. Trump tried to sell the building in 2004, expecting offers in excess of $400 million, which did not materialize. &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote in 2005 that the building had $145 million of debt. At the time, the building was earning $32 million in rental income a year, and 40 Wall Street was still about 90 percent occupied; many tenants&#x27; leases were not scheduled to expire for several years.

==== 2010s to present ====
In early July 2011, Duane Reade opened its flagship drugstore branch inside the former banking space. 40 Wall Street Ltd. transferred its ownership stake in the building to 40 Wall Street Holdings in 2014. According to Federal Election Commission applications filed during Trump&#x27;s 2016 U.S. presidential campaign, Trump had an outstanding mortgage of over $50 million on the property. At the time, Trump leased the building for $1.65 million a year, and the Trump Organization paid $1 million annually in expenses and fees. According to &quot;Bloomberg News&quot;, several of the building&#x27;s 21st-century tenants had been accused of fraudulent activity or had been associated with people accused of such activities. Rental income from 40 Wall Street&#x27;s commercial spaces increased from $30.5 million in 2014 to $43.2 million in 2018. &quot;Forbes&quot; estimated in 2020 that Trump owed Ladder Capital $138 million for 40 Wall Street as part of a loan that was scheduled to mature in 2025.

New York prosecutors had scrutinized several of the Trump Organization&#x27;s properties by 2021, at the end of Trump&#x27;s first presidency. They found that, between 2011 and 2015, far higher values were presented to potential lenders than were reported to tax officials. The most extreme case involved 40 Wall Street, which in 2012 was cited as being worth $527 million to lenders but only $16.7 million to tax officials. By February 2023, the building had been placed on a lender watchlist because of its rising vacancy rate, which had reached 18 percent in the third quarter of 2022, and its maintenance costs, which had risen 11 percent since the mortgage was issued in 2015. Fitch Ratings downgraded the credit rating for the building&#x27;s loans in August 2023 because new tenants were slow to move into the building while old tenants relocated elsewhere. The building&#x27;s Duane Reade location closed later that year due to increased shoplifting. The loan on the property was transferred to a special servicer that November because there was a possibility that the state government&#x27;s ongoing civil investigation of the Trump Organization could result in the organization&#x27;s dissolution.

Following a January 2024 ruling in which the Trump Organization was found liable for civil fraud, New York Attorney General Letitia James said her office was prepared to seize the building if he could not pay a judgment of approximately $355 million. By that April, the building&#x27;s vacancy rate had increased to 21 percent, and the building&#x27;s mortgage loan was scheduled to come due in 2025. The building had become a tourist attraction, and &quot;The Washington Post&quot; wrote that Trump&#x27;s detractors sometimes came to the building to express their animosity. A reporter for &quot;Curbed&quot; wrote in late 2024 that 40 Wall Street was so controversial, even in the real estate industry, that few people in that industry were willing to publicly discuss the building&#x27;s finances. At the time, the retail space and several floors were vacant.

== Reception and landmark designations ==
In February 1930, the Down Town League proclaimed 40 Wall Street the best building completed in Lower Manhattan during the preceding year. &quot;Fortune&quot; magazine praised Ohrstrom in 1930, noting that &quot;[h]is &quot;piece de resistance&quot; thus far has been the shrewd and able financing of the Manhattan Company Building&quot;. Two years later, W. Parker Chase wrote that &quot;no building ever constructed more thoroughly typifies the American spirit of hustle than does this extraordinary structure&quot;. When the neighboring 28 Liberty Street was being built in 1960, &quot;Architectural Forum&quot; wrote of 40 Wall Street: &quot;Viewed from the street, the detailing of the top of this middle-aged tower becomes insignificant, but it can be said that the draftsmen in the Severance office, who spent many painstaking hours perfecting the ornamental peak more than three decades ago, have been justified at last.&quot;

Some critics have regarded the skyscraper negatively. Architecture critic Robert A. M. Stern wrote in his 1987 book &quot;New York 1930&quot; that 40 Wall Street&#x27;s proximity to other skyscrapers, including 70 Pine Street, 20 Exchange Place, 1 Wall Street, and the Downtown Athletic Club, &quot;had reduced the previous generation of skyscrapers to the status of foothills in a new mountain range&quot;. Eric Nash wrote in his book &quot;Manhattan Skyscrapers&quot; that 40 Wall Street&#x27;s impact was blunted by its location in the middle of the block, &quot;surrealistically situated next to the mighty Greek Revival Federal Hall National Memorial&quot;. A critic for &quot;Newsday&quot; wrote in 2003: &quot;It appears on few postcards, and no tourists queue to peer from its celestial ramparts. The &quot;AIA Guide to New York City&quot; does not even mention the singular ambition, pursued with almost reckless abandon, that forged its construction: to be the world&#x27;s tallest building.&quot;

On December 12, 1995, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission designated 40 Wall Street as a city landmark, noting that the Bank of Manhattan Building was historically significant for being the headquarters of the Manhattan Company and for being part of New York City&#x27;s 1929–1930 skyscraper race. Five years later, on June 16, 2000, it was added to the National Register of Historic Places, largely for the same reason as the city designation. In 2007, the building was designated as a contributing property to the Wall Street Historic District, a NRHP district.

== See also ==
* List of tallest buildings in New York City
* List of tallest freestanding steel structures
* List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan below 14th Street
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan below 14th Street
* Overseas landholdings of the Marcos family

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 40 Wall Street on The Trump Organization&#x27;s website
* The Trump Building on CTBUH Skyscraper Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218305" start="0" end="14" title="40 Wall Street" label="40 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q218305" start="25" end="39" title="40 Wall Street" label="Trump Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q218305" start="54" end="86" title="40 Wall Street" label="Bank of Manhattan Trust Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q218305" start="91" end="117" title="40 Wall Street" label="Manhattan Company Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="124" end="134" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="neo-Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="149" end="160" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597808" start="169" end="175" title="Nassau Street (Manhattan)" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018910" start="180" end="187" title="William Street (Manhattan)" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050048" start="203" end="221" title="Financial District, Manhattan" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="225" end="234" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="238" end="251" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="311" end="328" title="Manhattan Company" label="Manhattan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124694" start="359" end="377" title="H. Craig Severance" label="H. Craig Severance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828206" start="383" end="395" title="Yasuo Matsui" label="Yasuo Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q617190" start="400" end="417" title="Shreve, Lamb &amp;amp; Harmon" label="Shreve &amp;amp; Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q967276" start="437" end="470" title="New York City designated landmark" label="New York City designated landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="492" end="528" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962614" start="579" end="608" title="Wall Street Historic District (Manhattan)" label="Wall Street Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="696" end="702" title="facade" label="facade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="706" end="715" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085487" start="749" end="753" title="buff (colour)" label="buff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830791" start="796" end="804" title="Setback (architecture)" label="setbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q244556" start="831" end="839" title="spandrel" label="spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q335297" start="915" end="920" title="Pier (architecture)" label="piers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274" start="1484" end="1501" title="Chrysler Building" label="Chrysler Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="1534" end="1563" title="List of tallest buildings in the world" label="world&amp;#x27;s tallest building"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1721" end="1737" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="1846" end="1855" title="Leasehold estate" label="leasehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="2057" end="2073" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="2151" end="2163" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050048" start="2227" end="2245" title="Financial District, Manhattan" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="2249" end="2258" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018910" start="2324" end="2338" title="William Street (Manhattan)" label="William Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="2352" end="2363" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597808" start="2382" end="2395" title="Nassau Street (Manhattan)" label="Nassau Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q858689" start="2706" end="2718" title="Federal Hall" label="Federal Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q630074" start="2770" end="2784" title="48 Wall Street" label="48 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097619" start="2798" end="2812" title="55 Wall Street" label="55 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050074" start="2831" end="2848" title="28 Liberty Street" label="28 Liberty Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815111" start="2867" end="2881" title="23 Wall Street" label="23 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550859" start="2886" end="2901" title="15 Broad Street" label="15 Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q109534064" start="3229" end="3242" title="Gallatin National Bank" label="Gallatin Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105147" start="3286" end="3306" title="J. Cleaveland Cady" label="Cady, Berg &amp;amp; See"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="3392" end="3409" title="Manhattan Company" label="Manhattan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124694" start="3727" end="3745" title="H. Craig Severance" label="H. Craig Severance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828206" start="3767" end="3779" title="Yasuo Matsui" label="Yasuo Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q617190" start="3807" end="3824" title="Shreve, Lamb &amp;amp; Harmon" label="Shreve &amp;amp; Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602253" start="3896" end="3916" title="Starrett Corporation" label="Starrett Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748334" start="3938" end="3957" title="Purdy and Henderson, Engineers" label="Purdy and Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4018" end="4031" title="Morrell Smith" label="Morrell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962205" start="4037" end="4058" title="Walker &amp;amp; Gillette" label="Walker &amp;amp; Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q967276" start="4172" end="4219" title="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission" label="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="4256" end="4262" title="facade" label="facade"/>
<link wikidata="Q13604251" start="4340" end="4347" title="massing" label="massing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="4372" end="4380" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="4442" end="4464" title="classical architecture" label="classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12234854" start="4834" end="4863" title="World&amp;#x27;s tallest structures" label="world&amp;#x27;s tallest building"/>
<link wikidata="Q652452" start="5177" end="5218" title="Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower" label="Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q806742" start="5220" end="5234" title="14 Wall Street" label="14 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q217652" start="5236" end="5254" title="Woolworth Building" label="Woolworth Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q26710806" start="5256" end="5284" title="Consolidated Edison Building" label="Consolidated Edison Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q821601" start="5290" end="5332" title="Thurgood Marshall United States Courthouse" label="Thurgood Marshall United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800960" start="5350" end="5361" title="Articulation (architecture)" label="articulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="5424" end="5430" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="5458" end="5465" title="Capital (architecture)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830791" start="5856" end="5864" title="Setback (architecture)" label="setbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219955" start="5902" end="5924" title="1916 Zoning Resolution" label="1916 Zoning Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17345" start="6469" end="6475" title="dormer" label="dormer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085487" start="7006" end="7010" title="Buff (colour)" label="buff"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="7065" end="7075" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124247" start="7105" end="7109" title="Bay (architecture)" label="bays"/>
<link wikidata="Q244556" start="7238" end="7246" title="Spandrel" label="Spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724263" start="7471" end="7482" title="sash window" label="sash window"/>
<link wikidata="Q184784" start="7719" end="7728" title="Elevation (architecture)" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="7811" end="7820" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="7826" end="7834" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q858689" start="8056" end="8068" title="Federal Hall" label="Federal Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288595" start="8434" end="8447" title="Elie Nadelman" label="Elie Nadelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="8561" end="8568" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="8578" end="8583" title="Titans" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q855349" start="8611" end="8628" title="stock certificate" label="stock certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046970" start="8746" end="8771" title="Carson, Lundin &amp;amp; Shaw" label="Carson, Lundin &amp;amp; Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="9337" end="9346" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q331900" start="10229" end="10237" title="buttress" label="buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q918336" start="10640" end="10650" title="Diapering" label="diaperwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770806" start="11634" end="11642" title="Molding (decorative)" label="moldings"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="12137" end="12143" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q12511" start="12144" end="12153" title="Stairs" label="staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197297" start="12291" end="12300" title="Der Scutt" label="Der Scutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15003" start="12415" end="12424" title="escalator" label="escalator"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="12684" end="12697" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q14089752" start="12832" end="12843" title="groin vault" label="groin vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="12857" end="12864" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423431" start="13175" end="13186" title="Ezra Winter" label="Ezra Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310380" start="13338" end="13349" title="Duane Reade" label="Duane Reade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="14198" end="14206" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25045417" start="14216" end="14228" title="Independence Hall replicas and derivatives" label="an imitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="14232" end="14249" title="Independence Hall" label="Independence Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="14314" end="14325" title="Doric order" label="Doric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="14361" end="14367" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767147" start="14402" end="14416" title="segmental arch" label="segmental arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q314278" start="14528" end="14539" title="Thomas Chippendale" label="Chippendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="15248" end="15285" title="International Manhattan Company, Inc." label="International Manhattan Company, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1136075" start="15343" end="15357" title="pneumatic tube" label="pneumatic tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236680" start="15766" end="15791" title="Gentlemen&amp;#x27;s club" label="members-only private club"/>
<link wikidata="Q635443" start="16274" end="16287" title="Windsor chair" label="Windsor chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16616" end="16628" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="16649" end="16666" title="Manhattan Company" label="Manhattan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="16686" end="16696" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="16836" end="16854" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q589288" start="16862" end="16878" title="The Bank of New York Mellon" label="Bank of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="16989" end="16998" title="row house" label="row house"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17364" end="17382" title="George L. Ohrstrom" label="George L. Ohrstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q70119933" start="17704" end="17717" title="Adrian Iselin Jr." label="Iselin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="18068" end="18078" title="Bond (finance)" label="bond issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q217652" start="18420" end="18438" title="Woolworth Building" label="Woolworth Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274" start="18471" end="18488" title="Chrysler Building" label="Chrysler Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="19569" end="19598" title="List of tallest buildings in the world" label="world&amp;#x27;s tallest building"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="19722" end="19743" title="Roaring Twenties" label="optimism in the 1920s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808619" start="20775" end="20787" title="assay office" label="assay office"/>
<link wikidata="Q846451" start="22289" end="22296" title="Caisson (engineering)" label="Caisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205077" start="23257" end="23266" title="cofferdam" label="cofferdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33512475" start="23358" end="23377" title="William A. Starrett" label="William A. Starrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188440" start="24008" end="24023" title="lateral bracing" label="lateral bracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583974" start="24028" end="24040" title="wind bracing" label="wind bracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="24097" end="24120" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="24137" end="24160" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="24201" end="24213" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q686514" start="24291" end="24298" title="Derrick" label="Derrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075723" start="24772" end="24782" title="Topping out" label="topped out"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="25285" end="25295" title="bond issue" label="bond issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q706549" start="26260" end="26276" title="William Van Alen" label="William Van Alen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181821" start="27087" end="27101" title="John J. Raskob" label="John J. Raskob"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="27120" end="27141" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="27388" end="27413" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="Wall Street Crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260290" start="27940" end="27953" title="John Tauranac" label="John Tauranac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="28537" end="28566" title="International Acceptance Bank" label="International Acceptance Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856207" start="28572" end="28603" title="International Manhattan Company, Inc." label="International Manhattan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088647" start="28850" end="28873" title="Merrill Lynch &amp;amp; Co." label="Merrill Lynch &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="28964" end="28989" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="Wall Street Crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764170" start="29623" end="29651" title="Marine Midland Bank" label="Marine Midland Trust Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q231710" start="29660" end="29671" title="foreclosure" label="foreclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q702362" start="29717" end="29726" title="Default (finance)" label="defaulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378829" start="30495" end="30504" title="debenture" label="debenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="30792" end="30839" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31015" end="31027" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q742787" start="31047" end="31083" title="United States Department of the Navy" label="United States Department of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="31192" end="31223" title="United States Department of War" label="United States Department of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114414" start="31355" end="31375" title="Prudential Financial" label="Prudential Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="31395" end="31408" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q814006" start="31753" end="31779" title="Beechcraft Model 18" label="Beechcraft C-45F Expediter"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="31806" end="31835" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q466786" start="31926" end="31940" title="Newark Liberty International Airport" label="Newark Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708583" start="31968" end="31995" title="Chennault Air Force Base" label="Lake Charles Army Air Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="31999" end="32008" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918601" start="32157" end="32180" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Army Corps (United States Army)" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q319654" start="32514" end="32529" title="LaGuardia Airport" label="LaGuardia Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q502117" start="32889" end="32893" title="B-25 Mitchell" label="B-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434082" start="32901" end="32922" title="B-25 Empire State Building crash" label="struck the 78th floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="32930" end="32951" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q524629" start="33559" end="33578" title="Chase National Bank" label="Chase National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q524629" start="33642" end="33662" title="Chase Manhattan Bank" label="Chase Manhattan Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33782" end="33796" title="20 Pine Street" label="20 Pine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050074" start="33899" end="33916" title="28 Liberty Street" label="28 Liberty Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q903119" start="34218" end="34236" title="William Zeckendorf" label="William Zeckendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566992" start="34253" end="34267" title="Webb and Knapp" label="Webb and Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="34615" end="34637" title="New York Supreme Court" label="New York Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="34646" end="34654" title="injunction" label="enjoined"/>
<link wikidata="Q607131" start="35502" end="35537" title="MetLife" label="Metropolitan Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="35652" end="35661" title="leasehold" label="leasehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753088" start="35778" end="35811" title="Manufacturers Hanover Corporation" label="Manufacturers Hanover Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666534" start="36397" end="36420" title="Loeb, Rhoades &amp;amp; Co." label="Loeb, Rhoades &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q4838732" start="36515" end="36530" title="Bache &amp;amp; Co." label="Bache &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="36613" end="36629" title="600 Fifth Avenue" label="600 Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q244114" start="36634" end="36649" title="55 Water Street" label="55 Water Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110160" start="36693" end="36701" title="Shearson" label="Shearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="36812" end="36827" title="Morgan Guaranty" label="Morgan Guaranty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194832" start="36832" end="36853" title="Toronto-Dominion Bank" label="Toronto-Dominion Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251599" start="37089" end="37105" title="Walter J. Hinneberg" label="Walter Hinneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="37498" end="37514" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q285536" start="37528" end="37534" title="Imelda Marcos" label="Imelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="38459" end="38473" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="38594" end="38602" title="Citigroup" label="Citicorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="38727" end="38771" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21680456" start="39032" end="39046" title="Crown Building (Manhattan)" label="Crown Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q359381" start="39143" end="39158" title="Adnan Khashoggi" label="Adnan Khashoggi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39739" end="39752" title="Morris Bailey" label="Morris Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192376" start="39800" end="39815" title="Pierre N. Leval" label="Pierre N. Leval"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40075" end="40098" title="Jack Resnick &amp;amp; Sons" label="Jack Resnick &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q708438" start="40261" end="40273" title="down payment" label="down payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="40450" end="40457" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574832" start="40461" end="40475" title="special master" label="special master"/>
<link wikidata="Q868261" start="40975" end="40987" title="Black Monday (1987)" label="Black Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919966" start="41020" end="41040" title="Howard J. Rubenstein" label="Howard J. Rubenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q44854" start="42077" end="42086" title="squatting" label="squatting"/>
<link wikidata="Q212235" start="42679" end="42707" title="American International Group" label="American International Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138758" start="42845" end="42866" title="Crain&amp;#x27;s New York" label="Crain&amp;#x27;s New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551716" start="43001" end="43011" title="Write-off" label="wrote down"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="43552" end="43564" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863797" start="43876" end="43889" title="Barron&amp;#x27;s (newspaper)" label="Barron&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714057" start="44087" end="44101" title="The Apprentice (U.S. season 4)" label="The Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507484" start="44248" end="44262" title="George H. Ross" label="George H. Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="45113" end="45127" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197297" start="45282" end="45291" title="Der Scutt" label="Der Scutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335996" start="45815" end="45831" title="studio apartment" label="studio apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141173" start="46165" end="46187" title="Marriott International" label="Marriott International"/>
<link wikidata="Q782200" start="46216" end="46228" title="The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company" label="Ritz-Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="46517" end="46533" title="American Express" label="American Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013072" start="46535" end="46560" title="CNA Financial Corporation" label="CNA Financial Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="46562" end="46574" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295105" start="46576" end="46591" title="Nomura Holdings" label="Nomura Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q598884" start="46625" end="46652" title="Hilton Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Hilton Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442804" start="46658" end="46682" title="Union Bank of California" label="Union Bank of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310380" start="47296" end="47307" title="Duane Reade" label="Duane Reade"/>
<link wikidata="Q20121517" start="47562" end="47593" title="Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign" label="2016 U.S. presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q384660" start="48263" end="48269" title="Maturity (finance)" label="mature"/>
<link wikidata="Q110627827" start="48305" end="48316" title="New York investigations of The Trump Organization" label="scrutinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462124" start="48332" end="48350" title="the Trump Organization" label="Trump Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="48405" end="48421" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="first presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q871325" start="48962" end="48975" title="Fitch Ratings" label="Fitch Ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416749" start="49285" end="49301" title="special servicer" label="special servicer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116745419" start="49357" end="49434" title="New York civil investigation of The Trump Organization" label="state government&amp;#x27;s ongoing civil investigation of the Trump Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533414" start="49613" end="49626" title="Letitia James" label="Letitia James"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="50541" end="50548" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860271" start="50985" end="51004" title="Architectural Forum" label="Architectural Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q166567" start="51406" end="51424" title="Robert A. M. Stern" label="Robert A. M. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q262041" start="51543" end="51557" title="70 Pine Street" label="70 Pine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q212831" start="51559" end="51576" title="20 Exchange Place" label="20 Exchange Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q209017" start="51578" end="51591" title="1 Wall Street" label="1 Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303357" start="51601" end="51623" title="Downtown Athletic Club" label="Downtown Athletic Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q858689" start="51957" end="51987" title="Federal Hall National Memorial" label="Federal Hall National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="52014" end="52021" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q903708" start="52147" end="52173" title="AIA Guide to New York City" label="AIA Guide to New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="52711" end="52747" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962614" start="52873" end="52902" title="Wall Street Historic District (Manhattan)" label="Wall Street Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q838997" start="52939" end="52981" title="List of tallest buildings in New York City" label="List of tallest buildings in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q97166216" start="52984" end="53029" title="List of tallest freestanding steel structures" label="List of tallest freestanding steel structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591909" start="53032" end="53105" title="List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan below 14th Street" label="List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan below 14th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976729" start="53108" end="53184" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan below 14th Street" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan below 14th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q98099037" start="53187" end="53229" title="Overseas landholdings of the Marcos family" label="Overseas landholdings of the Marcos family"/>
<link wikidata="Q372245" start="53415" end="53420" title="CTBUH" label="CTBUH"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585020" wikidata="Q194161" url="?curid=585020" title="Aung San">
<text>Bogyoke Aung San (, ; 13 February 191519 July 1947) was a Burmese politician, independence activist and revolutionary. He was instrumental in Myanmar&#x27;s struggle for independence from British rule, but he was assassinated just six months before his goal was realized. Aung San is considered to be the founder of modern-day Myanmar and the Tatmadaw (the country&#x27;s armed forces), and is commonly referred to by the titles &quot;Father of the Nation&quot;, &quot;Father of Independence&quot;, and &quot;Father of the Tatmadaw&quot;.

Devoted to ending British Colonial rule in Burma, Aung San founded or was closely associated with many Burmese political groups and movements and explored various schools of political thought throughout his life. He was a life-long anti-imperialist and studied socialism as a student. In his first year of university he was elected to the executive committee of the Rangoon University Students&#x27; Union and served as the editor of its newspaper. He joined the Thakin Society in 1938 and served as its general secretary. He also helped establish the Communist Party of Burma in 1939 but quit shortly afterwards due to vehement disagreements with the rest of the party leadership. He subsequently co-founded the People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party (later the Burma Socialist Party) with the primary goal of Burmese independence from the British.

Shortly before the outbreak of World War II, Aung San fled Burma and went to China to solicit foreign support for Burmese independence. During the Japanese occupation of Burma, he served as the minister of war in the Japan-backed State of Burma led by Dr. Ba Maw. As the tide turned against Japan, he switched sides and merged his forces with the Allies to fight against the Japanese. After World War II, he negotiated Burmese independence from Britain in the Aung San-Attlee agreement. He served as the 5th Premier of the British Crown Colony of Burma from 1946 to 1947. He led his party, the Anti-Fascist People&#x27;s Freedom League, to victory in the 1947 Burmese general election, but he and most of his cabinet were assassinated shortly before the country became independent.

Aung San&#x27;s daughter, Aung San Suu Kyi, is a stateswoman, politician, and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. She was Burma&#x27;s State Counsellor and its 20th (and first female) Minister of Foreign Affairs in Win Myint&#x27;s Cabinet until the 2021 Myanmar coup d&#x27;état.

==Early life and education==
Aung San was born in Natmauk, Magway District, on 13 February 1915 during the British Raj. The family was considered middle-class. He was the youngest of nine siblings; he had three older sisters and five older brothers. Aung San&#x27;s name was given to him by his brother Aung Than. Aung San received his primary education at a Buddhist monastic school in Natmauk, but he moved to Yenangyaung in grade 4 because his eldest brother, Ba Win, had become the principal of the high school there.

Aung San rarely spoke before the age of eight. As a teenager, he often spent hours reading and thinking alone, oblivious to those around him. In his youth he was generally unconcerned with his appearance and clothing. In his earliest articles, published in the &quot;Opinion&quot; section of &quot;The World of Books&quot;, he opposed the ideology of Western-style individualism supported by U Thant in favour of a social philosophy based on the &quot;standardization of human life&quot;. Aung San later became friends with U Thant through their mutual friendship with U Nu.

==University years==

After Aung San entered Rangoon University in 1933, he quickly became a student leader. He was elected to the executive committee of the Rangoon University Students&#x27; Union (RUSU). He then became editor of the RUSU&#x27;s magazine &quot;Oway&quot; (Peacock&#x27;s Call). Aung San was described by contemporary students as being charismatic and keenly interested in politics.

In February 1936 he was expelled from the university, along with U Nu, for refusing to reveal the name of the author of an article he had run in the student newspaper called &quot;Hell Hound at Large&quot;, which criticized a senior university official. The expulsion led to the three-month long Second University Students&#x27; Strike, after which the university authorities reinstated Aung San and Nu.

The events of 1936 had a profound effect on the future of Aung San. Before 1936 he was not well known outside of Rangoon University, but during the student strike his name and image were published and discussed in daily newspapers, and he became known nationwide as a nationalist revolutionary and a student leader. He also served in his first student leadership positions, first as secretary of the student boycott council and second as the student representative for the government&#x27;s University Act Amendment Committee, which the government formed in response to the strike. Later in 1936, after the student strike was over, he was elected the vice president of the Rangoon University Student Union. Because of his participation in the student strike he was not able to sit for the examination in 1936, and received his Bachelor of Arts in 1937.

After his graduation Aung San began studying for a law degree. His intention at the time was to &quot;take a shot at the examinations for the Indian Civil Service... and go into politics&quot;. Along with other student leaders he founded the All Burma Student Union (later known as All Burma Federation of Student Unions) in 1937, in which he was elected general secretary. In 1938 he became the president of both the All Burma Student Union and the Rangoon University Student Union, but his pursuit of these commitments did not leave him enough time to study, and he failed his examination in 1938. After 1938 he resolved to abandon the pursuit of a conventional career and committed himself to revolutionary politics.

== &quot;Thakin&quot; revolutionary ==
In October 1938, Aung San left his law classes and entered national politics. At this point, he was anti-British and staunchly anti-imperialist. He became a &quot;Thakin&quot; (&quot;lord&quot; or &quot;master&quot;: a title often used as an informal title for Westerners in Burma; the usage by Burmese proclaimed that the Burmese people were the true masters of their country) when he joined the &quot;Dobama Asiayone&quot; (&quot;We Burmans Association&quot;). He acted as its general secretary until August 1940. While in this role, he helped organize a series of countrywide strikes that became known as the ME 1300 Revolution. The name of this movement was based on the Burmese calendar year 1300: in the Western calendar this year occurred between August 1938 and July 1939.

On 18 January 1939 the &quot;Dobama Asiayone&quot; declared its intention to use force in order to overturn the government, leading the authorities to crack down on the organization. On 23 January Police raided their headquarters at Shwedagon Pagoda, arrested Aung San, and held him in prison for fifteen days on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government, but these charges were dropped. Upon his release Aung San proposed a strategy of pursuing Burmese independence by staging countrywide strikes, anti-tax drives, and guerrilla insurgency.

In August 1939, Aung San became a founding member and the first Secretary General of the Communist Party of Burma (CPB). Aung San later claimed that his relationship with the CPB was not smooth, since he joined and left the party twice. Shortly after founding the CPB, Aung San founded a similar organization, alternatively known as either the &quot;People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party&quot; or the &quot;Burma Revolutionary Party&quot;. This party was Marxist, formed with the goal of supporting Burmese independence against the British. It survived and was reformed into the Burma Socialist Party following World War II.

Aung San was not paid for most of his work as a student or political leader, and lived for most of this time in a state of poverty. He was recognized by his peers for his strong work ethic and organizational skills, but was sometimes criticized by them for having poor public relations skills or for a perceived arrogance. He never drank alcohol and abstained from romantic relationships.

==World War II==
Following the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, Aung San helped to found another nationalist organization, the Freedom Bloc, by forming an alliance between the Dobama, the All Burma Students Union, politically active monks, and Dr. Ba Maw&#x27;s Poor Man&#x27;s Party. Dr. Ba Maw served as the &quot;anarshin&quot; (&quot;dictator&quot;) of the Freedom Bloc, while Aung San worked under him as the group&#x27;s general secretary. The group&#x27;s goals were organized around the idea of taking advantage of the war to gain Burmese independence. The organization, goals, and tactics of the Freedom Bloc were modeled on the Indian revolutionary group &quot;Forward Bloc&quot;, whose leader, Subhas Chandra Bose, was in regular contact with Ba Maw. In 1939, Aung San was briefly arrested on the grounds of conspiring to overthrow the government by force, but was released after seventeen days. Upon his release Aung San proposed a strategy of pursuing Burmese independence by staging countrywide strikes, anti-tax drives, and guerrilla insurgency.

In March 1940, he attended an Indian National Congress Assembly in Ramgarh, India, along with other &quot;Thakins&quot;, including Than Tun and Ba Hein. While there, Aung San met many leaders of the Indian independence movement, including Jawaharlal Nehru, Mahatma Gandhi, and Subhas Chandra Bose. When Aung San returned to Burma, he found the Burmese government had issued a warrant for his arrest, and the arrest of many other leaders of the &quot;Thakins&quot; and the Freedom Bloc, due to those organizations&#x27; efforts to organize a revolution against the British, at least partially with Japanese support.

Besides his other warrants, the district superintendent of Henzada, a man named &quot;Xavier&quot;, had issued a reward of 500 rupees for anyone who could capture Aung San. Some of Aung San&#x27;s colleagues advised him to go to the Shanghai International Settlement and make contact with communist agents there, but he was in a hurry to leave and was unable to find passage on a ship travelling to that city. On 14 August 1939, Aung San and another &quot;Thakin&quot; colleague, Hla Myaing, boarded the Norwegian cargo ship &quot;Hai Lee&quot; to Xiamen, China. Neither Aung San nor Hla Myaing gave their real names, identifying themselves as &quot;Tan Luang Shun&quot; and &quot;Tan Su Taung&quot;. They wandered the city for several weeks with no precise plan and little money, until they were intercepted by Japanese secret police who convinced them to go to Japan instead. The pair left for Tokyo via Taiwan and arrived in Japan on 27 September 1940.

=== Formation of the Thirty Comrades ===
In May 1940 Japanese intelligence officers led by Suzuki Keiji had arrived in Yangon posing as journalists in order to gather information and to seek the cooperation of local parties for the intended Japanese invasion of Burma, occupying an office at 40 Judah Ezekiel Street for that purpose. Among their network of local collaborators they made close connections with the &quot;Thakins&quot;, of which Aung San was a leading member. The familiarity of Japanese intelligence with prominent political actors in Burma ensured that they were aware of Aung San&#x27;s activities by the time he arrived in Japanese-occupied China.

Aung San spent the rest of 1940 in Tokyo, learning the Japanese language and political ideology. At the time he wrote that he was opposed to Western individualism and that he intended to create an authoritarian state modelled on Japan with &quot;one state, one party, [and] one leader&quot;. While in Japan he dressed in a Japanese Kimono and adopted a Japanese name, &quot;Omoda Monji&quot;. During this time the &quot;Blue Print for a Free Burma&quot; was drafted. This document has been attributed to Aung San, though its authorship is disputed.

In February 1941 Aung San, working with Japanese intelligence, left Hla Myaing in Bangkok and secretly re-entered Burma and began efforts to contact and recruit additional Burmese agents to work with the Japanese. He entered the colony secretly through the port of Bassein, changed into a longyi, and booked a train to Rangoon using a pseudonym. Within weeks he had recruited thirty of his old revolutionary colleagues and smuggled them out of the country via Japanese intelligence networks. These &quot;Thirty Comrades&quot; were taken to the Japanese-occupied island of Hainan for further training. Aung San was twenty-five, the third-oldest of the group. While training on Hainan all thirty of the men took pseudonyms beginning with the word &quot;Bo&quot;, meaning &quot;officer&quot;, which had become a title used by Westerners in Burma. Aung San took the nom de guerre &quot;Bo Teza&quot; (&quot;Teza&quot; means &quot;fire&quot;). The Thirty Comrades trained for six months on Hainan with Suzuki Keiji and other Japanese officers. Aung San, Ne Win, and Setkya all received special training, since the Japanese intended to place them in senior positions in the Burmese government following the Japanese conquest of the territory.

=== Japanese invasion and wartime administration ===
Between November and December 1941 Aung San and his party were successful in recruiting approximately 3,500 Burmese volunteers from the Siam-Burma border to serve in their army. On 28 December 1941, Aung San and the rest of the Thirty Comrades formally inaugurated the Burma Independence Army in Bangkok. The event involved the &quot;thwe thauk&quot; (&quot;blood drinking&quot;) ceremony, a tradition inherited from the Burmese aristocracy. The participants collected their blood from a cut in their arms, mixing the participants&#x27; blood together with alcohol in a silver bowl, and drinking it while pledging eternal comradeship and loyalty. Three days later the BIA entered Burma behind the invading Japanese Fifteenth Army. The BIA left most of the fighting to the Japanese Army but occupied the areas behind Japanese lines after the British had retreated. The arrival of BIA units in many areas of Burma was followed by escalating communal violence, especially against Karen people and others who held privileged positions and whom they believe to have oppressed the Buddhist Burmese during the British administration. The violence lasted for several weeks until the Japanese Army intervened.

The capital of Burma, Rangoon, fell to the Japanese as part of the Burma Campaign in March 1942. The BIA formed an administration for the country under &quot;Thakin&quot; Tun Oke that operated in parallel with the Japanese military administration until the Japanese disbanded it. In July, the disbanded BIA was re-formed as the Burma Defense Army (BDA). Aung San was made a colonel and put in charge of the force. He was later invited back to Japan, and was presented with the Order of the Rising Sun by Emperor Hirohito.

On 1 August 1943, the Japanese held an independence ceremony in Rangoon, in which they formally granted Burma independence on condition that it would be under a wartime administration for the duration of the war. Burma was also required to declare war on the Allies. The Japanese had planned to make Aung San the leader of the country, but in the end they were more impressed with Dr. Ba Maw, and made him the leader instead, giving him virtually dictatorial control under their direction. Aung San was made the second most powerful person in the government. The government was modelled after Japan, and intentionally eschewed democratic principles and patterns of government. The army, still under the control of Aung San, took their motto, &quot;One Blood, One Voice, One Command&quot; at this time. It is still the official motto of the Burmese military.

As the tide of war turned against Japan, Aung San was increasingly skeptical of Japan&#x27;s ability to win the war and made plans to organize an anti-Japanese uprising in Burma, secretly forming the &quot;Anti-Fascist People&#x27;s Freedom League&quot; in August 1944. He organized a secret meeting in Bago between the Burma National Army, the Communist Party of Burma, and the People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party (which later reformed into the Burma Socialist Party). After this meeting, Aung San&#x27;s forces began to secretly store supplies in preparation of their fight against the Japanese. In late March 1945, as Allied forces advanced towards Rangoon, Aung San led the BNA in a parade in front of Government House in Rangoon, after which they were sent by the Japanese to the front. A few days later, on 27 March, the BNA switched sides and attacked the Japanese instead. 27 March came to be commemorated as Resistance Day, until the military regime renamed it &quot;Tatmadaw (Armed Forces) Day&quot;.

After the Burmese army began the attack on the Japanese, it was renamed the &quot;Patriotic Burmese Forces&quot; and its command structure was divided into eight different regions. Aung San was given command of the first region, comprising the areas of Prome, Henzada, Tharrawaddy, and Insein. His designated political advisor was Thakin Ba Hein, a Communist Party leader. On 30 March, the Allied commander in Southeast Asia, Louis Montbatten, formally recognized the Burmese army as &quot;an Allied force&quot;.

The Burmese National Army continued to harass the Japanese throughout the remainder of the war. When Allied forces retook Rangoon on 2 May 1945, the BNA were symbolically sent into the city two days before any other soldiers. The Allies helped to arm Aung San&#x27;s forces somewhat after their defection, supplying the BNA with 3,000 small arms.

Aung San first met with General Bill Slim on 16 May 1945, appearing unexpectedly in Slim&#x27;s camp in the uniform of a Japanese major general. At the meeting Aung San stated his intentions to ally with the British until the Japanese had been driven out of Burma, and agreed to incorporate his forces into Slim&#x27;s British-led army. When Slim asked Aung San whether he was taking a risk by unexpectedly coming to his camp in the uniform of a Japanese officer and adopting a bold attitude, Aung San answered that he was not, &quot;because you are a &quot;British&quot; officer.&quot; Slim later wrote that Aung San had made a good impression in the meeting.

==Post World War II==

World War II ended on 12 September 1945. Following the end of the war the Burma National Army was renamed the Patriotic Burmese Forces (PBF), and then gradually disarmed by the British as the Japanese were driven out of various parts of the country.

The leaders of the Patriotic Burmese Forces, while disbanded, were offered positions in the Burma Army under British command according to the Kandy conference agreement with Lord Louis Mountbatten in Ceylon in September 1945. Aung San was not invited to negotiate, since the British Governor General, Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith, was debating whether he should be put on trial for his role in the public execution of a Muslim headman in Thaton during the war. Aung San was never tried or faced any consequence for the execution of the village headman. The delegates agreed that the new Burmese army would be composed of 5,000 of Aung San&#x27;s Japanese-trained Bamar soldiers, and 5,000 British-trained soldiers, most of whom were either Chin, Kachin, or Karen. Aung San wrote to U Seinda in Arakan, saying that he supported U Seida&#x27;s guerrilla fight against the British, but that he would cooperate with them for tactical reasons. After the Kandy Conference, he reorganized his formally disbanded soldiers as a paramilitary organization the People&#x27;s Volunteer Organization (PVO), which continued to wear uniforms and drill in public. The PVO was personally loyal to Aung San and his party rather than the government. By 1947, the PVO had over 100,000 members. In January 1946 a victory festival was held in the Kachin capital of Myitkyina. Governor Dorman-Smith was invited to attend, but neither Aung San nor anyone from his party were, due to &quot;their connection with the Burma Independence Army&quot;.

In an audacious move, Aung San turned himself in for the execution of the village headman. As arresting him would mean a nationwide armed rebellion by the PVO, Dorman-Smith was replaced by a new Governor General of Burma, Sir Hubert Rance. Rance agreed to recognize and negotiate directly with Aung San, possibly to distance them both from the Communist Party of Burma. He also agreed to appoint Aung San to the position of counselor for defense on the Executive Council (a provisional cabinet made in lieu of the upcoming Burmese national election). On 28 September 1946, Aung San was appointed to the even higher position of deputy chairman, making him effectively the 5th Prime Minister of the British-Burma Crown Colony. Aung San had at first worked closely with the Communist Party of Burma, but after they began criticizing him for working with the British he banned all communists from his Anti-Fascist People&#x27;s Freedom League on 3 November 1946.

=== Aung San-Attlee agreement and the Panglong Conference ===
Aung San was to all intents and purposes Prime Minister, although he was still subject to a British veto. British Prime Minister Clement Attlee invited Aung San to visit London in 1947 in order to negotiate the conditions of Burmese independence. At a press conference during a stopover in Delhi, while on the way to meet Attlee in London, he stated that the Burmese wanted &quot;complete independence&quot; and not dominion status, and that they had &quot;no inhibitions of any kind&quot; about &quot;contemplating a violent or non-violent struggle or both&quot; in order to achieve it. He concluded that he hoped for the best, but was prepared for the worst. He arrived in Britain by air in January 1947 along with his deputy Tin Tut, who he considered his brightest official. Attlee and Aung San signed their agreement on the terms of Burmese independence on 27 January: following the Burmese election in 1947 Burma would join the British Commonwealth (like Canada and Australia), though its government would have the option to leave; its government would control the Burmese Army once Allied armies had withdrawn; a constitutional assembly would be drawn up as soon as possible, with the resulting constitution presented to the British parliament as soon as possible; and Britain would nominate Burma&#x27;s entrance into the newly founded United Nations. The agreement was not unanimous: two other delegates who attended the conference, U Saw and Thakin Ba Sein, refused to sign it, and it was denounced in Burma by Aung San&#x27;s critics, including Than Tun and Thakin Soe. No delegates representing Burma&#x27;s ethnic minorities were present, and both Karen and Shan leaders sent messages warning that they would not consider any agreement signed at the conference legally binding to their communities.

Two weeks after the signing of the agreement with Britain, Aung San signed an agreement at the second Panglong Conference on 12 February 1947, with leaders representing the Shan, Kachin, and Chin peoples. In this agreement these leaders agreed to join a united independent Burma, under the condition that they would have &quot;full autonomy&quot; and the right to secede in 1958, after ten years. Karen leaders were not consulted and were not a part of the agreement. They hoped for a separate Karen State within the British Empire. The date of the signing of the Panglong Agreement has been celebrated in Burma as &quot;Union Day&quot;, even though Ne Win effectively dissolved any agreement with Burma&#x27;s minority communities following his coup in 1962.

The general election held in April 1947 was not ideal; the Karens, Mon, and most of Aung San&#x27;s other political opponents boycotted the process. Since they ran virtually unopposed, every delegate in Aung San&#x27;s party was elected. In the end Aung San&#x27;s AFPFL won 176 out of the 210 seats in the Constituent Assembly, while the Karens won 24, the Communists 6, and the Anglo-Burmans 4. In July, Aung San convened a series of conferences at Sorrenta Villa in Rangoon to discuss the rehabilitation of Burma.

Following the 1947 election Aung San began to form his own cabinet. In addition to ethnic Burmese statesmen like himself and Tin Tut, he also persuaded the Karen leader Mahn Ba Khaing, the Shan chief Sao Hsam Htun, and the Bamar leader U Razak (who was of Tamil ancestry) to join his cabinet. No Communists were invited to participate.

==Assassination==
In the final years of the British administration of Burma, Aung San became good friends with the penultimate Governor of Burma, Colonel Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith, an Anglo-Irishman with whom he would regularly discuss his personal difficulties. In early 1946, approximately a year before his death, Aung San complained to Dorman-Smith that he felt melancholic, that he did not feel close to his old friends in the Burmese military, that he had many enemies, and that he was worried that someone would attempt to assassinate him soon.

A little after 10:30 AM on 19 July 1947, a single army jeep carrying gunmen in military fatigues drove into the courtyard of the Secretariat Building, where Aung San was having a meeting with his new cabinet. There was no wall or gate protecting the government building, and although Aung San had been warned that someone may have been plotting to kill him the sentries guarding the building did not challenge or stop the car in any way. Four men from the car, armed with three Tommy Guns, a Sten gun, and grenades, ran up the stairs towards the council chamber, shot the guard standing outside, and burst into the council chamber. The gunmen shouted, &quot;Remain seated! Don&#x27;t move!&quot; Aung San stood up and was immediately shot in the chest, killing him. The gunmen sprayed the area where he was standing with gunfire for approximately thirty seconds, killing four other council members immediately and mortally wounding another three. Only three in the room survived.

In addition to Aung San, eight other people were killed, seven of whom were also politicians. Thakin Mya was a minister without portfolio who had been a student leader and a close friend of Aung San. Ba Choe, the minister of information, had been the editor of a prominent nationalist journal. Abdul Razak, a Tamil Muslim, the minister of education, had been a headmaster. Ba Win, the minister of trade, was Aung San&#x27;s older brother. Mahn Ba Khaing, the minister of industry, was one of the few Karen politicians not to have boycotted involvement in the new government. Sao Sam Htun, the minister of the Hill Regions, was a Shan prince who had taken an active lead in convincing the other ethnic minorities to join Burma in becoming independent. Ohn Maung was a deputy minister in the ministry of transportation who had just entered the conference room to deliver a report before the assassination. Abdul Razak&#x27;s 18-year-old bodyguard, Ko Htwe, was killed before the gunmen entered the room.

=== Aftermath ===
Burma&#x27;s last pre-World War II Prime Minister, U Saw (who had himself lost an eye surviving an assassination attempt in late 1946), was arrested for the murders the same day. U Saw was subsequently tried and hanged for his responsibility in the assassination, but there have been many other claims of responsibility from multiple parties ever since Aung San&#x27;s death. Some claimed that a rogue faction in the British intelligence service was responsible.

Besides Aung San, most of his cabinet, and U Saw, there were a number of other assassinations and attempted assassinations carried out against other men who had been close to Aung San at that time. Two of these included Aung San&#x27;s English lawyer, Frederick Henry, who was murdered in his house, and F. Collins, a private detective who was investigating Aung San&#x27;s assassination. According to General Kyaw Zaw, these murders were evidence that somebody was trying to cover up their involvement in the assassination.
In September 1948, nine months after Burma&#x27;s independence, somebody assassinated Tin Tut, who had been one of Aung San&#x27;s closest advisors and who at the time was Burma&#x27;s first foreign minister, by throwing a grenade into his car. The assassins were never caught and nobody was ever charged with his murder.

=== British involvement ===
A theory that the British were involved in Aung San&#x27;s assassination was investigated in a documentary broadcast by the BBC on the 50th anniversary of the assassination in 1997. What did emerge in the course of the investigations at the time of the trial was that several low-ranking British officers had sold firearms to a number of Burmese politicians, including U Saw. Shortly after U Saw&#x27;s conviction, Captain David Vivian, a British Army officer, was sentenced to five years&#x27; imprisonment for supplying U Saw with weapons. Vivian was freed from prison when Karen soldiers captured Insein Prison in May 1949. According to General Kyaw Zaw he then lived with the Karen people in Kawkareik until 1950, when he traveled back to Thailand and then to England, where he lived until his death in 1980. Little information about his motives was revealed either during or after the trial.

Kin Oung, the son of the deputy police inspector who arrested U Saw, claimed that U Saw bought the arms found at his house from the black market after they had been sold by British soldiers, not by the soldiers directly. Kin Oung claimed that the arms, before being smuggled into the black market, were in the process of being transported to Singapore in preparation for their withdrawal from Burma, so U Saw&#x27;s possession of these weapons was not necessarily evidence of British complicity in Aung San&#x27;s murder but rather the greed of the individual soldiers. He identified the officer responsible for selling the arms as Major Lance Dane, but claimed that Dane and his associates were later &quot;secretly released&quot; after being imprisoned. Kin Oung claimed that the name of one of Aung San&#x27;s assassins was &quot;Yan Gyi Aung&quot;.

==Ancestry==
Aung San&#x27;s parents were U Phar and Daw Su. U Phar was a lawyer who was described by others as introverted and reserved. According to Aung San, U Phar studied law and passed his bar exam third in his class of 174, but after his education ended he never went on to work as a lawyer, instead focusing on doing business. U Phar died at the age of 51, when Aung San was in 8th grade.

Aung San&#x27;s paternal grandmother was Daw Thu Sa, whose family traced their lineage from the royal family of the Pagan Kingdom through its last king, Narathihapate. Daw Thu Sa had several cousins who had worked within the government of the last Burmese kingdom. One of her cousins, Bo Min Yaung, had been the royal treasurer during the reign of King Mindon. King Mindon awarded Bo Min Yaung the title of &quot;Mahar Min Kyaw Min Htin&quot;, an honorary title similar to knighthood given to those who are not close relatives of the Burmese royal family. He had a reputation for having a gentle and soft personality.

Bo Min Yaung had a younger brother of the same name who had a great impact on Aung San&#x27;s patriotic outlook. The younger Bo Min Yaung was remembered by Daw Thu Sa as being popular in his hometown for his handsomeness, strength, writing ability, and swordsmanship, which he practiced every day. King Mindon employed him in diplomatic service, and by the reign of Burma&#x27;s last king, Thibaw, he had been appointed to administer the region of Myo Lu Lin, close to the northern side of the Pegu Mountain Range in Upper Burma. After learning of King Thibaw&#x27;s abdication and subsequent exile to the British Raj, following the brief Third Anglo-Burmese War in 1885, Bo Min Yaung became angry, and made up his mind to resist the British. The rebellion failed. After his refusal to surrender, he was captured and executed by the British.

Some sources have reported Bo Min Yaung&#x27;s relationship to Aung San differently, claiming that he was Aung San&#x27;s paternal grandfather, rather than his paternal grandmother&#x27;s cousin.

==Legacy==
For his work towards Burmese independence and uniting the country, Aung San is revered as the architect of modern Burma and a national hero.

A Martyrs&#x27; Mausoleum was built at the foot of the Shwedagon Pagoda in 1947, and 19 July was designated Martyrs&#x27; Day, a public holiday. Aung San&#x27;s original mausoleum was destroyed by the blast on 9 October 1983 when the President of South Korea, Chun Doo-hwan was nearly assassinated by North Korean agents. Another monument was built in its place. Within months of Aung San&#x27;s assassination, on 4 January 1948, Burma was granted independence. By August 1948, a civil war began between the Burmese military and various insurgents, including communists and ethnic militias. The internal conflict within Myanmar continues to the present day.

Aung San&#x27;s name had been invoked by successive Burmese governments since independence, until the military regime in the 1990s tried to eradicate all traces of Aung San&#x27;s memory. Nevertheless, several statues of him adorn the former capital Yangon and his portrait still has a place of pride in many homes and offices throughout the country. Scott Market, Yangon&#x27;s most famous market, was renamed Bogyoke Market in his memory, and Commissioner Road was retitled Bogyoke Aung San Road after independence. These names have been retained. Many other towns and cities in Burma have thoroughfares and parks named after him. In the decades following Aung San&#x27;s assassination many people came to view him as a symbol of democratic reform; during the 8888 Uprising in 1988 against the military dictatorship, many protesters carried posters of Aung San as symbols of their movement. Many people at the time saw Aung San as a symbol of what Burma could have been, but was not at the time: prosperous, democratic, and peaceful.

In 1962 the Burmese military, led by Ne Win, overthrew the civilian government in a coup and instituted military rule. The Burmese military justified the legitimacy of their government partially by citing the legacy of Aung San in leading the country in WWII, when he was both a military and political leader. Following his coup Ne Win used official statements and propaganda to promote the idea that, as the leader of the armed forces and a member of the Thirty Comrades, he was the sole legitimate successor of Aung San.

Banknotes featuring Aung San were first produced in 1958, ten years after his assassination. The practice continued until the uprising in 1988, when the government replaced his picture with scenes of Burmese life, possibly in an attempt to decrease the popularity of his daughter, Aung San Suu Kyi. In 2017 the Myanmar parliament voted 286–107 in favor of reinstating Aung San&#x27;s image. The new 1,000-kyat notes bearing Aung San&#x27;s image were produced and released to the public on 4 January 2020, a date chosen to mark the 72nd anniversary of Independence Day.

==Family==

While he was War Minister in 1942, Aung San met and married Khin Kyi, and around the same time her sister met and married Thakin Than Tun, the Communist leader. Aung San and Khin Kyi had four children.

After Aung San&#x27;s assassination his widow was appointed Burma&#x27;s ambassador to India, and the family moved abroad.

Aung San&#x27;s youngest surviving child, Aung San Suu Kyi, was only two years old when Aung San was assassinated. She is a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, served as State Counsellor of Myanmar, was the first female Myanmar Minister of Foreign Affairs, and is the leader of the National League for Democracy (NLD) political party. Aung San&#x27;s oldest son, Aung San Oo, is an engineer working in the United States who has disagreed with his sister&#x27;s political activities. Aung San&#x27;s second son, Aung San Lin, died at age eight, when he drowned in an ornamental lake in the grounds of the family&#x27;s house.

Aung San&#x27;s youngest daughter, Aung San Chit, born in September 1946, died on 26 September 1946, the same day Aung San got into Governor&#x27;s Executive council, a few days after her birth. Aung San&#x27;s wife Daw Khin Kyi died on 27 December 1988.

==Names of Aung San==
* Name at birth: Htein Lin ()
* As student leader and a &quot;thakin&quot;: Aung San ()
* Nom de guerre: Bo Teza ()
* Japanese name: Omoda Monji ()
* Resistance period code name: Myo Aung (), U Naung Cho ()
* Contact code name with General Ne Win: Ko Set Pe ()

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===

* Houtman, Gustaaf. &quot;Aung San&#x27;s Lan-Zin, the Blue Print and the Japanese Occupation of Burma&quot;. In Kei Nemoto (ed). &quot;Reconsidering the Japanese military occupation in Burma (1942–45)&quot;. Tokyo: Tokyo University of Foreign Studies. Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa (ILCAA). 30 May 2007. pp. 179–227. , Retrieved 23 August 2020.
* Lintner, Bertil. &quot;Burma in Revolt: Opium and Insurgency Since 1948&quot;. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books. 2003.
* Lintner, Bertil. &quot;The Rise and Fall of the Communist Party of Burma&quot;. Cornell Southeast Asia Program Publication. 1990
* Maung Maung. &quot;Aung San of Burma&quot;. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff for Yale University. 1962.
* Nay Eain. &quot;The Political Leaders Whose Names Will Live Forever&quot;. Yangon: Myo Myanmar. 2014. 
* &quot;North Korea&#x27;s History of Foreign Assassinations and Kidnappings&quot; . &quot;BBC News&quot;. 14 February 2017. Retrieved 19 September 2020.
* Rogers, Benedict. &quot;Burma: A Nation at a Crossroads&quot;. Great Britain: Random House. 2012.
* Smith, Martin. &quot;Burma: Insurgency and the Politics of Ethnicity.&quot; London and New Jersey: Zed Books. 1991.
* South, Ashley. &quot;Ethnic Politics in Burma: States of Conflict&quot;. New York: Routelage. 2009.
* Stewart, Whitney. &quot;Aung San Suu Kyi: Fearless Voice of Burma&quot;. Twenty-First Century Books. 1997. 
* Thant Myint-U. &quot;The River of Lost Footsteps: A Personal History of Burma&quot;. London: Faber and Faber Limited. 2008.
* Ye Mon and Myat Nyein Aye. &quot;Martyr&#x27;s Mausoleum Gets and Upgrade&quot; . &quot;Myanmar Times&quot;. 17 June 2016. Retrieved 14 November 2020.
* Zaw Zaw Htwe. &quot;Gen. Aung San Returns to Myanmar Banknotes After 30-Year Absence&quot; . &quot;The Irrawaddy&quot;. 7 January 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2020.
==External links==
* Aung San&#x27;s resolution to the Constituent Assembly regarding the Burmese Constitution, 16 June 1947.
* Kin Oung. &quot;Eliminate the Elite – Assassination of Burma&#x27;s General Aung San &amp; his six cabinet colleagues.&quot; Uni of NSW Press. Special edition – Australia 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q865714" start="0" end="7" title="Burmese honorifics" label="Bogyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q194161" start="8" end="16" title="Aung San" label="Aung San"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="142" end="149" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="188" end="200" title="British rule in Burma" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q728190" start="343" end="351" title="Tatmadaw" label="Tatmadaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="435" end="455" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="558" end="579" title="British Raj" label="British Colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="801" end="810" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185947" start="906" end="945" title="University of Yangon" label="Rangoon University Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233111" start="1003" end="1017" title="Thakins" label="Thakin Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q777074" start="1092" end="1116" title="Communist Party of Burma" label="Communist Party of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999345" start="1298" end="1319" title="Burma Socialist Party" label="Burma Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q704358" start="1616" end="1630" title="State of Burma" label="State of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q713427" start="1642" end="1648" title="Ba Maw" label="Ba Maw"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="1855" end="1861" title="Attlee" label="Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q852152" start="1890" end="1938" title="Prime Minister of Burma" label="5th Premier of the British Crown Colony of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q574639" start="1980" end="2021" title="Anti-Fascist People&amp;#x27;s Freedom League" label="Anti-Fascist People&amp;#x27;s Freedom League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999438" start="2041" end="2070" title="1947 Burmese general election" label="1947 Burmese general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q36740" start="2195" end="2211" title="Aung San Suu Kyi" label="Aung San Suu Kyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="2247" end="2264" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q23747483" start="2296" end="2312" title="State Counsellor (Myanmar)" label="State Counsellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294392" start="2345" end="2372" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Myanmar)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023642" start="2376" end="2385" title="Win Myint (politician, born 1951)" label="Win Myint"/>
<link wikidata="Q105180889" start="2411" end="2440" title="2021 Myanmar coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2021 Myanmar coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261159" start="2493" end="2500" title="Natmauk" label="Natmauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732567" start="2502" end="2517" title="Magway District" label="Magway District"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2550" end="2561" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185041" start="2855" end="2866" title="Yenangyaung" label="Yenangyaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171152" start="2906" end="2912" title="Ba Win" label="Ba Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264" start="3358" end="3365" title="U Thant" label="U Thant"/>
<link wikidata="Q316384" start="3535" end="3539" title="U Nu" label="U Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185947" start="3587" end="3605" title="University of Yangon" label="Rangoon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q316384" start="4008" end="4012" title="U Nu" label="U Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661231" start="5344" end="5364" title="Indian Civil Service" label="Indian Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379353" start="5484" end="5522" title="All Burma Federation of Student Unions" label="All Burma Federation of Student Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233111" start="6125" end="6131" title="Thakin" label="Thakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233111" start="6365" end="6380" title="Dobama Asiayone" label="Dobama Asiayone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131842401" start="6577" end="6592" title="1300 Revolution" label="1300 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239498" start="6637" end="6658" title="Traditional Burmese calendar" label="Burmese calendar year"/>
<link wikidata="Q464535" start="6977" end="6993" title="Shwedagon Pagoda" label="Shwedagon Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q777074" start="7384" end="7408" title="Communist Party of Burma" label="Communist Party of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999345" start="7870" end="7891" title="Burma Socialist Party" label="Burma Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7902" end="7914" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13070242" start="8445" end="8457" title="Freedom Bloc" label="Freedom Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q713427" start="8566" end="8572" title="Ba Maw" label="Ba Maw"/>
<link wikidata="Q13065434" start="8580" end="8601" title="Poor Man&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Poor Man&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452315" start="8989" end="9001" title="All India Forward Bloc" label="Forward Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="9023" end="9042" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="9410" end="9434" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026876" start="9447" end="9454" title="Ramgarh Cantonment" label="Ramgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="9619" end="9635" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="9637" end="9651" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="9657" end="9676" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185131" start="10055" end="10062" title="Hinthada" label="Henzada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170587" start="10229" end="10262" title="Shanghai International Settlement" label="Shanghai International Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="10544" end="10550" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q665124" start="10808" end="10830" title="Kenpeitai" label="Japanese secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q11648888" start="11044" end="11056" title="Suzuki Keiji" label="Suzuki Keiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q870103" start="12436" end="12443" title="Pathein" label="Bassein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642739" start="12460" end="12466" title="longyi" label="longyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538498" start="12675" end="12690" title="Thirty Comrades" label="Thirty Comrades"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="12743" end="12749" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q315522" start="13220" end="13226" title="Ne Win" label="Ne Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027248" start="13731" end="13754" title="Burma Independence Army" label="Burma Independence Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="13758" end="13765" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q702313" start="14168" end="14191" title="Fifteenth Army (Japan)" label="Japanese Fifteenth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="14234" end="14247" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q271790" start="14439" end="14451" title="Karen people" label="Karen people"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995" start="14686" end="14693" title="Yangon" label="Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14695" end="14715" title="Japanese conquest of Burma#Japanese capture of Rangoon" label="fell to the Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="14731" end="14745" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q818600" start="15141" end="15164" title="Order of the Rising Sun" label="Order of the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="15176" end="15184" title="Hirohito" label="Hirohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q728190" start="16027" end="16043" title="Tatmadaw" label="Burmese military"/>
<link wikidata="Q574639" start="16252" end="16293" title="Anti-Fascist People&amp;#x27;s Freedom League" label="Anti-Fascist People&amp;#x27;s Freedom League"/>
<link wikidata="Q800122" start="16349" end="16353" title="Bago, Myanmar" label="Bago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866494" start="16750" end="16766" title="Ministers&amp;#x27; Building" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q728190" start="17020" end="17028" title="Tatmadaw" label="Tatmadaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q691747" start="17309" end="17314" title="Pyay" label="Prome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185131" start="17316" end="17323" title="Hinthada" label="Henzada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710820" start="17325" end="17336" title="Tharrawaddy, Myanmar" label="Tharrawaddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037306" start="17342" end="17348" title="Insein Township" label="Insein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13070265" start="17387" end="17401" title="Thakin Ba Hein" label="Thakin Ba Hein"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="17482" end="17498" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Louis Montbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q335033" start="17942" end="17959" title="William Slim, 1st Viscount Slim" label="General Bill Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q203197" start="18996" end="19001" title="Kandy" label="Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="19028" end="19050" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Lord Louis Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="19054" end="19060" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q427394" start="19159" end="19180" title="Reginald Dorman-Smith" label="Reginald Dorman-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209391" start="19289" end="19295" title="Thaton" label="Thaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q503963" start="19514" end="19519" title="Bamar people" label="Bamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143462" start="19591" end="19595" title="Chin people" label="Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346380" start="19597" end="19603" title="Kachin people" label="Kachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271790" start="19608" end="19613" title="Karen people" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40632742" start="19645" end="19651" title="Arakan" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062370" start="20193" end="20202" title="Myitkyina" label="Myitkyina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324041" start="20599" end="20611" title="Hubert Rance" label="Hubert Rance"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="20859" end="20866" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="21524" end="21538" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="21685" end="21690" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="21811" end="21826" title="dominion status" label="dominion status"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529120" start="22123" end="22130" title="Tin Tut" label="Tin Tut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="22329" end="22349" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="22739" end="22753" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519553" start="22951" end="22959" title="Than Tun" label="Than Tun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034885" start="22964" end="22974" title="Thakin Soe" label="Thakin Soe"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="23066" end="23070" title="Shan people" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042513" start="23310" end="23329" title="Panglong Conference" label="Panglong Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350095" start="23950" end="23966" title="1962 Burmese coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="his coup in 1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999438" start="23969" end="24008" title="1947 Burmese general election" label="The general election held in April 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="24036" end="24039" title="Mon people" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="24276" end="24296" title="Constituent Assembly" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734687" start="24656" end="24670" title="Mahn Ba Khaing" label="Mahn Ba Khaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876233" start="24723" end="24730" title="U Razak" label="U Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="24743" end="24748" title="Tamils" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="24894" end="24899" title="British Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611705" start="24951" end="24968" title="Governor of Burma" label="Governor of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="24970" end="24977" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q427394" start="24978" end="25003" title="Reginald Dorman-Smith" label="Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="25008" end="25019" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866494" start="25506" end="25526" title="Ministers&amp;#x27; Building" label="Secretariat Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q269593" start="25855" end="25864" title="Thompson submachine gun" label="Tommy Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q211782" start="25869" end="25873" title="Sten" label="Sten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709370" start="26452" end="26462" title="Thakin Mya" label="Thakin Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937160" start="26469" end="26495" title="minister without portfolio" label="minister without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837045" start="26558" end="26565" title="Ba Choe" label="Ba Choe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424386" start="26571" end="26594" title="Information minister" label="minister of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876233" start="26652" end="26663" title="U Razak" label="Abdul Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018482" start="26685" end="26706" title="minister of education" label="minister of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171152" start="26731" end="26737" title="Ba Win" label="Ba Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115952" start="26743" end="26760" title="Commerce minister" label="minister of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734687" start="26797" end="26811" title="Mahn Ba Khaing" label="Mahn Ba Khaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812509" start="26817" end="26837" title="Industry minister" label="minister of industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420846" start="26933" end="26945" title="Sao Sam Htun" label="Sao Sam Htun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081113" start="27109" end="27118" title="Ohn Maung" label="Ohn Maung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424127" start="27304" end="27311" title="Ko Htwe" label="Ko Htwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566406" start="27430" end="27435" title="U Saw" label="U Saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="28843" end="28846" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="29158" end="29170" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389900" start="29295" end="29309" title="Karen conflict" label="Karen soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549105" start="29319" end="29332" title="Insein Prison" label="Insein Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380013" start="29415" end="29424" title="Kawkareik" label="Kawkareik"/>
<link wikidata="Q907666" start="30666" end="30674" title="Bar examination" label="bar exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q888574" start="30985" end="30998" title="Pagan Kingdom" label="Pagan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q574724" start="31022" end="31035" title="Narathihapate" label="Narathihapate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062422" start="31112" end="31132" title="Konbaung dynasty" label="last Burmese kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13071318" start="31154" end="31166" title="Bo Min Yaung" label="Bo Min Yaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q388338" start="31187" end="31196" title="treasurer" label="treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q574358" start="31217" end="31228" title="Mindon Min" label="King Mindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q470986" start="31878" end="31884" title="Thibaw Min" label="Thibaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q491905" start="31982" end="32001" title="Pegu Range" label="Pegu Mountain Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936648" start="32005" end="32016" title="Upper Burma" label="Upper Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="32094" end="32105" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209946" start="32127" end="32150" title="Third Anglo-Burmese War" label="Third Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26256318" start="32683" end="32706" title="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Mausoleum" label="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q464535" start="32736" end="32752" title="Shwedagon Pagoda" label="Shwedagon Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777736" start="32789" end="32806" title="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Day" label="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="32928" end="32939" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14362" start="32941" end="32954" title="Chun Doo-hwan" label="Chun Doo-hwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494418" start="32959" end="32978" title="Rangoon_bombing" label="nearly assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="32982" end="32993" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q852088" start="33161" end="33170" title="Internal conflict in Myanmar" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q870075" start="33751" end="33765" title="Bogyoke Market" label="Bogyoke Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q274365" start="34102" end="34115" title="8888 Uprising" label="8888 Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750235" start="34136" end="34157" title="Military rule in Burma" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750235" start="34481" end="34494" title="Military rule in Burma" label="military rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q36740" start="35182" end="35198" title="Aung San Suu Kyi" label="Aung San Suu Kyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363019" start="35212" end="35230" title="Assembly of the Union" label="Myanmar parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015989" start="35453" end="35469" title="Independence Day (Myanmar)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012101" start="35544" end="35552" title="Khin Kyi" label="Khin Kyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566393" start="35606" end="35621" title="Thakin Than Tun" label="Thakin Than Tun"/>
<link wikidata="Q36740" start="35853" end="35869" title="Aung San Suu Kyi" label="Aung San Suu Kyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="35935" end="35952" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q23747483" start="35973" end="36000" title="State Counsellor of Myanmar" label="State Counsellor of Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294392" start="36023" end="36058" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Myanmar)" label="Myanmar Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q849603" start="36085" end="36114" title="National League for Democracy" label="National League for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821906" start="36166" end="36177" title="Aung San Oo" label="Aung San Oo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233111" start="36769" end="36775" title="Thakins" label="thakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315522" start="36947" end="36953" title="Ne Win" label="Ne Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895694" start="37392" end="37407" title="Bertil Lintner" label="Lintner, Bertil"/>
<link wikidata="Q586850" start="37648" end="37659" title="Maung Maung" label="Maung Maung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="37943" end="37951" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925980" start="38438" end="38451" title="Thant Myint-U" label="Thant Myint-U"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585022" wikidata="Q2653975" url="?curid=585022" title="Hartwick College">
<text>Hartwick College is a private liberal arts college in Oneonta, New York. The institution&#x27;s origin is rooted in the founding of Hartwick Seminary in 1797 through the will of John Christopher Hartwick. 

In 1927, the Seminary moved to expand into a four-year college and was offered land by the city of Oneonta to move to its current location. The college has 1,103 undergraduate students from 30 states and 22 countries, 187 faculty members, and a student-faculty ratio of 11:1.

==History==
Hartwick College traces its history to the will of Lutheran minister John Christopher Hartwick, who died in 1796. The following year, in 1797, the executors of his will decided to establish a seminary in his name. The first student graduated in 1803, and in 1816 the New York State Legislature incorporated the school—the first Lutheran seminary in America—as a classical academy and theological seminary in Hartwick, near Cooperstown. The college&#x27;s ties to the Lutheran Church ended in 1968, and it now carries no religious affiliation. 

The school moved to its present location in Oneonta in 1928, when the Seminary&#x27;s trustees voted to close it and incorporate there as a four-year college. The college was granted a permanent charter from the New York Board of Regents in 1931. 

The land for the campus was donated by the City of Oneonta. Bresee Hall, today the oldest building on campus, was designed by noted architect John Russell Pope and built in 1928. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2004. 

In 2016, the college secured more than $34 million through its latest capital campaign, exceeding the original goal of $32 million.

==Academics==

Hartwick College offers 45 courses of study leading to a Bachelor of Arts or Bachelor of Science degree. Additionally, it offers 11 minors; pre-professional programs in law, medicine, engineering and allied health professions; and five cooperative programs in engineering, law, business, and physical and occupational therapy. Students can also choose a concentration within their major.

The pre-engineering program at Hartwick has cooperative agreements with both Columbia University and Clarkson University that allow students to spend three years at Hartwick and two years at one of the other schools studying engineering. Successful completion brings a bachelor&#x27;s degree from Hartwick and an engineering degree from Clarkson or Columbia.

Hartwick&#x27;s three-year bachelor&#x27;s degree program allows qualified students to receive a degree in three years, as opposed to the traditional four. Since its launch in 2009, the program has sparked national interest for cost savings and quality.

The Liberal Arts in Practice curriculum merges traditional liberal arts study, personalized teaching, and experiential learning. Hartwick encourages students to gain real-world experience through internships, volunteer work, and job shadowing. Hartwick assists in networking and job-shadowing programs in career locations such as Boston, New York City, and other local venues

Hartwick College is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. The nursing program is accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education and the American Chemical Society approves the Bachelor of Science degree program in chemistry.
===January term===
Every year in January, many Hartwick students participate in international courses taught by Hartwick faculty. Nearly every off-campus program is open to new students and scholarships are available.

== Presidents ==

# Charles Myers (1926–1929)
# Charles W. Leitzell (1929–1939)
# Henry Arnold (1939–1953) – first layperson to head college
# Miller A.F. Ritchie (1953–1959)
# Frederick M. Binder (1959–1969)
# Adolph G. Anderson (1968–1977)
# Philip S. Wilder, Jr. (1977–1992)
# Richard Detweiler (1992–2003)
# Richard P. Miller, Jr. (2003–2008)
# Margaret L. Drugovich (2008–2022)
# Darren Reisberg (2022–2023) 
# James H. Mullen, Jr. (Since December 2023) – interim

==Rankings==

In 2021, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked Hartwick College 146th out of 223 schools in its National Liberal Arts College Rankings. In 2013, U.S. News &amp; World Report also ranked Hartwick 21st among all U.S. colleges and universities for the percentage of students who study abroad.

Hartwick College is ranked 59th for liberal arts colleges on Payscale.com&#x27;s 2016–17 list of highest-paid graduates.

&quot;Business Insider&quot; recognized Hartwick as No. 13 in their 2015 &quot;50 Most Underrated Colleges in America&quot; ranking for graduate earning potential. In 2013, the college also placed No. 274 out of a list of 501 colleges and universities across the nation in its Complete Ranking Of America&#x27;s 501 Smartest Colleges.

&quot;Forbes Magazine &quot;ranked Hartwick No. 501 overall in the 2016 Forbes ranking of the best colleges and universities in the nation; public and private colleges and universities included.

In &quot;Washington Monthly’s&quot; 2019 College Rankings, Hartwick is ranked No. 130 out of 214 liberal arts colleges in the nation.

==Student life==
Hartwick offers student-run activities through more than 60 clubs and organizations that cover a wide variety of topics. The student governing body, Student Senate, oversees the constitutions and budgets of every club. There are a variety of honor societies and a variety of special-interest clubs ranging from academics to extracurricular activities. The Hartwick College Activities Board (HCAB) and SUNY Oneonta&#x27;s student activities board host the downtown OH Fest street festival/concert each year for families and college students.

Greek Life at Hartwick College is based in a rich history dating back more than 80 years. During this time fraternities and sororities have been a valuable segment of the college experience. Fraternities include: Alpha Sigma Phi, Tau Kappa Epsilon, Phi Mu Alpha, and Kappa Sigma; sororities include: Alpha Omicron Pi, Theta Phi Alpha, local sorority Gamma Phi Delta, and local sorority Phi Sigma Phi.

Many Hartwick class events are organized by the Student Alumni Association (’Wick S.A.A.), including the OozeFest mud volleyball tournament, freshman sundae, sophomore barbecue, junior pig roast, and senior banquet. The campus newspaper is &quot;Hilltops&quot;, which is published weekly. Columns include Minds of the Roundtable, Athlete of the Week, The Comic Book Corner, and DSquared. Hartwick also operates a student-run radio station, WRHO 89.7 FM.

===Pine Lake Environmental Campus===

Hartwick College acquired the Pine Lake Environmental Campus in 1971. Pine Lake provides Hartwick students with opportunities for hands-on research, academic study, and responsible environmental stewardship and self-discovery. It offers a residential alternative to the main campus residence halls.

The campus has 11 buildings on over 300 preserved acres, including eight cabins that are used as student housing during the school year.

The Vaudevillian, an arched building, is used for movies, contra dances, indoor festivals and other events. Science courses that are taught at Pine Lake often use the R.R. Smith Field Station, which has a small classroom area, a computer lab area, and two lab rooms. Living at the environmental campus is an option for Hartwick students.

Boats and kayaks can be borrowed and used on the lake during warmer months. Pine Lake&#x27;s facilities are available to Hartwick staff, faculty, families and guests, as well as public members. There is an extensive trail system around the lake. The Pine Lake Club installed a disc golf course with nine baskets between the lake and the back field near the Holton Memorial Trail.

Pine Lake is open to the public through membership and summer rentals.

===Table Rock Trail System===

Hartwick College&#x27;s main campus features an extensive trail system spanning approximately ten miles, open to students, college employees, and the public. Managed by the Hartwick Trails Committee, these trails offer opportunities for hiking and mountain biking. Students have the opportunity to engage in hiking and wellness courses that utilize the trail system. Additionally, they can design research projects that are based on the trail system, and earn service hours by assisting with trail maintenance. The trails serve as a platform for sustainability initiatives and provide a valuable resource for outdoor recreation and education at Hartwick College.

== Athletics ==
Hartwick&#x27;s mascot is Swoop the Hawk. The school&#x27;s colors are Wellesley Blue and White.

The college is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), competing at the Division III level, and is a member of the Empire 8 Conference.

The college discontinued D1 women&#x27;s water polo in February 2018. Men&#x27;s volleyball and women&#x27;s flag football will be added as varsity sports in 2025–26.

Hartwick&#x27;s men&#x27;s soccer team won the NCAA Division I National Title in 1977.


===Men&#x27;s sports===
* Basketball
* Cross country
* Football
* Indoor track and field
* Lacrosse
* Outdoor track and field
* Soccer
* Swimming and diving
* &quot;Volleyball (in 2025–26)&quot;
===Women’s sports===
* Basketball
* Cross country
* Equestrian
* Field hockey
* &quot;Flag football (in 2025–26)&quot;
* Indoor track and field
* Lacrosse
* Outdoor track and field
* Soccer
* Swimming and diving
* Tennis
* Volleyball
==Notable alumni==
*Scott Adams &#x27;79, creator of &quot;Dilbert&quot; and author
* Isaac Newton Arnold 1832, lawyer, politician, abolitionist. Attended Hartwick Seminary. 
*Frederick H. Belden &#x27;32 (1909-1979), Tenth Episcopal Bishop of Rhode Island
*John Bluem &#x27;74, former professional soccer player (Tampa Bay Rowdies), college coach (Fresno State and Ohio State) and broadcaster (Columbus Crew)
*Jason Boltus &#x27;09, Quarterback for the Tampa Bay Storm of the Arena Football League
*Mike Burns &#x27;93, former professional soccer player
*Charles D. Cook &#x27;56 (1935–2001), former New York State senator
*Peter Daempfle &#x27;92, author
*Maxwell Jacob Friedman, professional Wrestler
*Stephen L. Green &#x27;60, Chairman of SL Green Realty Corp, the largest landlord in NYC.
*Tyler Hemming &#x27;07, professional soccer player (Toronto FC midfielder)
*Harold E. Hyde &#x27;33, tenth President of Plymouth State University (NH) 
*Matt Lawrence, professional soccer player
* David H. Long &#x27;83, CEO of Liberty Mutual Group 
*Dave Lemanczyk, Major League baseball player 
*Clarence MacGregor, former justice of the New York Supreme Court and United States representative (1919–1928)
*Michael Maren &#x27;77, former journalist and current filmmaker.
*Harold Clark Martin &#x27;37, 14th President of Union College (NY) 
*Ian McIntyre &#x27;96, head coach of the Syracuse Orange men&#x27;s soccer team
*Cyrus Mehri &#x27;83, noted Washington DC–based anti-discrimination lawyer 
*Glenn &quot;Mooch&quot; Myernick &#x27;77, professional soccer player and coach
*Craig Potter &#x27;07, professional Scottish footballer (soccer)
*John A. Quitman, 10th and 16th governor of Mississippi, and U.S. representative from Mississippi; attended Hartwick Seminary.
*Rory Read &#x27;83, former COO of Dell
*Andrew Sambrook &#x27;00, professional soccer player (Gillingham FC, Rushden &amp; Diamonds, Grays Athletic)
*James L. Seward &#x27;73, New York state senator
*Craig Slaff &#x27;82, award-winning aviation artist
*Tom Wisner, folk musician
*Nadya Zhexembayeva &#x27;01, co-founder and chief reinvention officer, WE EXIST Reinvention Agency

==References==
== External links ==
* Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2653975" start="0" end="16" title="Hartwick College" label="Hartwick College"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="22" end="29" title="private college" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="30" end="50" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019805" start="54" end="71" title="Oneonta, New York" label="Oneonta, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653975" start="132" end="149" title="Hartwick College" label="Hartwick Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226077" start="178" end="203" title="John Christopher Hartwick" label="John Christopher Hartwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="547" end="555" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226077" start="565" end="590" title="John Christopher Hartwick" label="John Christopher Hartwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="833" end="841" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837802" start="904" end="912" title="Hartwick, New York" label="Hartwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025016" start="919" end="930" title="Cooperstown, New York" label="Cooperstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019805" start="1085" end="1092" title="Oneonta, New York" label="Oneonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873659" start="1253" end="1278" title="New York Board of Regents" label="New York Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961844" start="1350" end="1361" title="Bresee Hall" label="Bresee Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q973881" start="1432" end="1449" title="John Russell Pope" label="John Russell Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2152" end="2171" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q931865" start="2176" end="2195" title="Clarkson University" label="Clarkson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="2749" end="2761" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303245" start="3105" end="3149" title="Middle States Commission on Higher Education" label="Middle States Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152700" start="3192" end="3234" title="Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education" label="Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="3243" end="3268" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q43954564" start="3899" end="3920" title="Margaret Drugovich" label="Margaret L. Drugovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="4049" end="4077" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156560" start="4396" end="4415" title="Payscale.com" label="Payscale.com&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146980" start="5542" end="5554" title="SUNY Oneonta" label="SUNY Oneonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412277" start="5896" end="5911" title="Alpha Sigma Phi" label="Alpha Sigma Phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33498885" start="5913" end="5930" title="Tau Kappa Epsilon" label="Tau Kappa Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181548" start="5932" end="5944" title="Phi Mu Alpha" label="Phi Mu Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367086" start="5950" end="5961" title="Kappa Sigma" label="Kappa Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735091" start="5983" end="5999" title="Alpha Omicron Pi" label="Alpha Omicron Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783537" start="6001" end="6016" title="Theta Phi Alpha" label="Theta Phi Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520299" start="6033" end="6048" title="Gamma Phi Delta Sorority" label="Gamma Phi Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955046" start="6525" end="6529" title="WRHO" label="WRHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="8648" end="8688" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="8714" end="8726" title="NCAA Division III" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374023" start="8757" end="8765" title="Empire 8" label="Empire 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="9062" end="9072" title="College basketball" label="Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="9075" end="9088" title="Cross country running" label="Cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="9091" end="9099" title="College football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146604" start="9127" end="9135" title="College lacrosse" label="Lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q367288" start="9164" end="9170" title="College soccer in the United States" label="Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q692853" start="9317" end="9330" title="Flag football" label="Flag football"/>
<link wikidata="Q457923" start="9485" end="9496" title="Scott Adams" label="Scott Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q726431" start="9524" end="9531" title="Dilbert" label="Dilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120845" start="9551" end="9570" title="Isaac Newton Arnold" label="Isaac Newton Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653975" start="9620" end="9637" title="Hartwick Seminary" label="Hartwick Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008617" start="9641" end="9660" title="Frederick H. Belden" label="Frederick H. Belden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222273" start="9723" end="9733" title="John Bluem" label="John Bluem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972199" start="9779" end="9796" title="Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93)" label="Tampa Bay Rowdies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026919" start="9814" end="9826" title="Fresno State" label="Fresno State"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711980" start="9831" end="9841" title="Ohio State Buckeyes men&amp;#x27;s soccer" label="Ohio State"/>
<link wikidata="Q457163" start="9860" end="9873" title="Columbus Crew" label="Columbus Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162071" start="9876" end="9888" title="Jason Boltus" label="Jason Boltus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="9942" end="9963" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378920" start="9965" end="9975" title="Mike Burns (soccer)" label="Mike Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="10006" end="10012" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076641" start="10021" end="10036" title="Charles D. Cook" label="Charles D. Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173516" start="10090" end="10104" title="Peter Daempfle" label="Peter Daempfle"/>
<link wikidata="Q61102628" start="10123" end="10145" title="Maxwell Jacob Friedman" label="Maxwell Jacob Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609728" start="10170" end="10186" title="Stephen L. Green" label="Stephen L. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q942729" start="10261" end="10274" title="Tyler Hemming" label="Tyler Hemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q327238" start="10313" end="10323" title="Toronto FC" label="Toronto FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205857" start="10381" end="10406" title="Plymouth State University" label="Plymouth State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790850" start="10414" end="10427" title="Matthew Lawrence (footballer)" label="Matt Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q22006365" start="10458" end="10471" title="David H. Long" label="David H. Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516450" start="10489" end="10509" title="Liberty Mutual" label="Liberty Mutual Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229175" start="10512" end="10526" title="Dave Lemanczyk" label="Dave Lemanczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095483" start="10559" end="10577" title="Clarence MacGregor" label="Clarence MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="10601" end="10623" title="New York Supreme Court" label="New York Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="10642" end="10656" title="United States House of Representatives" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832519" start="10670" end="10683" title="Michael Maren" label="Michael Maren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567748" start="10784" end="10797" title="Union College" label="Union College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982308" start="10805" end="10817" title="Ian McIntyre (soccer)" label="Ian McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9169796" start="10846" end="10879" title="Syracuse Orange men&amp;#x27;s soccer" label="Syracuse Orange men&amp;#x27;s soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35489545" start="10886" end="10897" title="Cyrus Mehri" label="Cyrus Mehri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531091" start="10963" end="10995" title="Glenn Myernick" label="Glenn &amp;quot;Mooch&amp;quot; Myernick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181336" start="11044" end="11056" title="Craig Potter (footballer, born 1984)" label="Craig Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q441838" start="11110" end="11125" title="John A. Quitman" label="John A. Quitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366944" start="11237" end="11246" title="Rory Read" label="Rory Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="11271" end="11275" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758494" start="11277" end="11292" title="Andrew Sambrook" label="Andrew Sambrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="11331" end="11344" title="Gillingham FC" label="Gillingham FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138515" start="11346" end="11368" title="Rushden &amp;amp; Diamonds" label="Rushden &amp;amp; Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q625130" start="11370" end="11384" title="Grays Athletic" label="Grays Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150335" start="11387" end="11402" title="James L. Seward (New York)" label="James L. Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027872" start="11437" end="11448" title="Craig Slaff" label="Craig Slaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q125150737" start="11490" end="11500" title="Tom Wisner" label="Tom Wisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q27733959" start="11517" end="11535" title="Nadya Zhexembayeva" label="Nadya Zhexembayeva"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585024" wikidata="Q5585109" url="?curid=585024" title="Gordon England">
<text>Gordon England may refer to:

* Gordon R. England (born 1937), American industrialist and government official
* Eric Gordon England (1891–1976), British pioneer aviator
* Gordon England (coachbuilder), a British coachbuilding company</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q323508" start="32" end="49" title="Gordon R. England" label="Gordon R. England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386600" start="112" end="131" title="Eric Gordon England" label="Eric Gordon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585113" start="171" end="200" title="Gordon England (coachbuilder)" label="Gordon England (coachbuilder)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="585027" wikidata="Q5100846" url="?curid=585027" title="Chinese musicology">
<text>Chinese musicology is the academic study of traditional Chinese music. This discipline has a very long history. Traditional Chinese music can be traced back to around 8,000 years ago during the Neolithic age. The concept of music, called &quot;yue&quot; (), stands among the oldest categories of Chinese thought; however, in historical sources, it does not receive clear definition until the writing of the &quot;Classic of Music&quot; (lost during the Han dynasty). Different musical traditions have influenced it throughout its history, dating back to the Xia and Shang dynasties.

==Music scales==
The first musical scales were derived from the harmonic series. On the Guqin (a traditional instrument) all of the dotted positions are equal string length divisions related to the open string like 1/2, 1/3, 2/3, 1/4, 3/4, etc. and are quite easy to recognize on this instrument. The Guqin has a scale of 13 positions all representing a natural harmonic position related to the open string.

The ancient Chinese defined, by mathematical means, a gamut or series of 十二律 (Shí-èr-lǜ), meaning &quot;twelve &quot;lü&quot;,&quot; from which various sets of five or seven frequencies were selected to make the sort of &quot;do re mi&quot; major scale familiar to those who have been formed with the Western Standard notation. The twelve &quot;lü&quot; approximate the frequencies known in the West as the chromatic scale, from A, then B-flat, through to G and A-flat.

==Scale and tonality==

Most Chinese music uses a pentatonic scale, with the intervals (in terms of &quot;lü&quot;) almost the same as those of the major pentatonic scale. The notes of this scale are called &quot;gōng&quot; 宮, &quot;shāng&quot; 商, &quot;jué&quot; 角, &quot;zhǐ&quot; 徵 and &quot;yǔ&quot; 羽. By starting from a different point of this sequence, a scale (named after its starting note) with a different interval sequence is created, similar to the construction of modes in modern Western music.

Since the Chinese system is not an equal tempered tuning, playing a melody starting from the &quot;lü&quot; nearest to A will not necessarily sound the same as playing the same melody starting from some other &quot;lü&quot;, since the wolf interval will occupy a different point in the scale. The effect of changing the starting point of a song can be rather like the effect of shifting from a major to a minor key in Western music. The scalar tunings of Pythagoras, based on 2:3 ratios (8:9, 16:27, 64:81, etc.), are a western near-parallel to the earlier calculations used to derive Chinese scales.

Putting the highlighted scales from the above image into musical notation gives:

Yu scale [yellow]
&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
\relative c&quot; {
 \time 5/4
 \omit Score.TimeSignature
 a c d e g
&lt;/score&gt;

Shang scale [red]
&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
\relative c&quot; {
 \time 5/4
 \omit Score.TimeSignature
 b cis e fis a
&lt;/score&gt;

Gong scale [green]
&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
\relative c&quot; {
 \time 5/4
 \omit Score.TimeSignature
 d e fis a b
&lt;/score&gt;

Jue scale [orange]
&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
\relative c&quot; {
 \time 5/4
 \omit Score.TimeSignature
 eis gis ais cis dis
&lt;/score&gt;

Zhi scale [blue]
&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
\relative c {
 \time 5/4
 \omit Score.TimeSignature
 g a c d e
&lt;/score&gt;

== Interactions with the world before the 20th century ==
After being invented in the pre-Qin era, Chinese music was closely influenced by and influenced other cultures. In the ancient period, music was often associated with various factors, such as singing and dancing. It was a comprehensive art form, conveying themes including production, sacrifice, and anticipation for a better life. After China entered a slave society from a primitive society, the class division produced an occupational division of labor, and the initial stage of professional musicians appeared. Music was also used as a technique for the ruling class to show their power and social status.

Due to the restriction of China&#x27;s geographical location, social development, and other conditions, music communication with the outside world first occurred in the east, south, and west of China. Early exchanges occurred among the Japanese, Korean, southwestern, and northern minorities. After the Han dynasty, China had a vast territory and prosperous economy, which laid the foundation for music communication between China and India, the Middle East, and other countries.

=== Xia and Shang dynasty ===
During the Xia dynasty, frontier nationalities came to the court to perform music and dance. In the Shang dynasty, there were local noble children coming from neighboring regions to study, and the content includes martial arts and music.

=== Zhou dynasty ===
As the Zhou dynasty replaced the Shang dynasty, music culture was improved unprecedentedly. The court collected and organized the existing music, established a musical hierarchy based on application, built music institutions, and conducted musical education. &quot;Yayue&quot; (雅樂) was established for rituals and ceremonies. At the same time, the Zhou emperors and its aristocracy incorporated foreign music into sacrificial ceremonies and feast performances. This promoted the inflow of music from surrounding areas.

=== Qin and Han dynasty ===
The Qin and Han dynasties had frequent contacts with Xiongnu (匈奴) in the north and music exchanges with the Western regions. For example, in the Han dynasty, the music of the ethnic minorities in the northwest was combined with the music of the Han dynasty to form the trumpeting music of early China. New instruments such as the Qiang flute (羌笛), the Pipa (琵琶), the Jia (笳), the Jiao (角), the Konghou (箜篌) were imported. One of the representative works of national cultural exchange is the Guqin song Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute (胡笳十八拍). In addition, the Han music bureau recorded &quot;Song of the Harp,&quot; (箜篌引) which originated in Korea (see the external link section).

Buddhism was introduced to China from Tianzhu (today&#x27;s India) around the 1st century AD (Han dynasty). In the following centuries, religious believers often incorporated Buddhist content into folk music to appeal to their followers and propagate their teachings.

From the end of the Western Han dynasty, the turbulence of history stimulated the ethnic minorities in the northwest to migrate south. As a result, Xianbei, Xiliang, Qiuzi, and Goryeo music were further integrated with the Han music of the Central Plains. Instruments including Waist drum (腰鼓), Capricorn drum (羯鼓), Gong, Quxiang pipa (曲项琵琶), and Five-stringed pipa (五弦琵琶) were introduced into the Central Plains.

=== Sui and Tang dynasty ===
The unification of the Sui and Tang dynasties and the deepening of the relationship between different ethnic groups provided favorable conditions for the further integration of music culture. From the fall of the Eastern Han dynasty to the establishment of the Sui dynasty, there were migration of Han people from the Central Plains to the south; and frequent wars, regime changes, internal migration of ethnic minorities in the North. The political and social turmoil significantly accelerated the decline of &quot;elegant music&quot; and the cultural exchanges between the Han nationality and other ethnic groups inside and outside China, especially in the Western regions, including Xinjiang, Central Asia, West Asia, and ancient India.

A particular category called Yan music refers to the music of palace parties in East Asia. A large portion of Yan&#x27;s music, which includes vocal music, instrumental music, dance, and opera, is foreign. The internationalized Tang dynasty incorporated various foreign music, such as Indian, Korean, and Middle Eastern music, into its court music. During that period, there was immigration to the Korean peninsula and Japan. Influenced deeply by the tributary systems, these countries also sent oversea students and diplomats to China to bring back advanced music knowledge and other culture.

=== Yuan and Ming and Qing dynasty ===
During the Yuan, Ming, and Qing Dynasties, China had extensive musical interaction with the world. During this period, the Chinese brought their own music to the world and drew inspiration from foreign music. During the Ming dynasty, Chinese emperors presented musical instruments of &quot;yayue&quot; (雅樂) to the Goryeo and Joseon Dynasties, indicating that musical exchanges between China and Korea had reached a significant level. However, &quot;yayue&quot; was not revived in Joseon for some reason. In addition, ancient Korean folk music also absorbed elements of ancient Chinese music, and their similarities largely contributed to the fusion and exchange of musical styles between the two countries. However, Korean folk music also retains its inherent national characteristics, giving it a unique charm in musical style.

Among the many Chinese instruments introduced to the Ryukyu, the &quot;sanshin&quot; (三弦) was given special attention. This instrument was not only widely used in the Ryukyu Kingdom but was also copied and made by Japanese instrument makers. In addition, the Ryukyu Kingdom also absorbed the Chinese opera art form and developed a unique form of musical performance called &quot;kumi odori&quot; (クミヲゥドゥイ). This performance form is based on Sanshin&#x27;s music, combines elements of poetry, music, and dance, and has a solid national style and exotic flavor.

In Japan, kabuki is a comprehensive variety of art combining foreign and local arts, and it has a long production history, which absorbed the essence of Chinese song, dance, and drama in its development to form a unique artistic style. In Kabuki, the performers often use some techniques from opera, such as makeup, costumes, and postures, all of which reflect the importance of Chinese culture in Kabuki. In conclusion, Chinese music, opera, dance, and other art forms profoundly influenced Japan&#x27;s cultural development and promoted the exchange and integration of the two cultures.

In China, Western missionaries introduced Chinese music to Europe and European music to China. Because of their profound musical attainments, the Western missionaries could play various Western musical instruments and had an in-depth study and understanding of music theory. The early Qing emperors Shunzhi (順治) and Kangxi (康熙) both trusted and valued the learning of the Western missionaries, especially Kangxi, who made outstanding contribution to the exchange of music and culture.

The Kangxi Emperor learned music theory and other knowledge from many Catholic missionaries. These missionaries introduced European knowledge of music theory to China in an entire and systematical manner. During the Kangxi period, two books, &quot;Lülü Zuanyao&quot; (律呂纂要) written by Xu Risheng and &quot;Lülü Zhengyi — Continuation&quot; (律呂正義·續編), became the earliest formal introduction of European music theory knowledge in Chinese literature. These two books explained European music&#x27;s fundamental theories and practical techniques in an in-depth, easy-to-understand manner.

Chinese musical culture interacted with European musical culture through the efforts of the Kangxi Emperor and the Western missionaries. During the early Qing dynasty, a large number of European envoys to China brought pipe organs and clavichords into China as tributes. Over time, these instruments gained popularity in court and society, becoming a vital part of musical events.

At the same time, the French missionary Joseph-Marie Amiot, who came to China in the latter half of the 18th century, also made significant contributions to Chinese music. He introduced Chinese music theory systematically to France and Europe and wrote many articles explaining this knowledge in detail. In particular, he translated the Chinese scholar Li Guangdi&#x27;s &quot;Guyue Jingzhuan&quot; (古樂經傳, Interpretation of Ancient Chinese Music Classics) which aroused great interest among the Enlightenment pioneers in Europe at the time and brought more people to the field of Chinese music.

The &quot;sheng&quot; (笙), a Chinese free-reed mouth organ, was exported to Europe by Amiot. This instrument gained widespread acceptance and popularity in Europe and quickly led to the invention of three new, more popular instruments: the harmonica, the accordion, and the reed organ. The invention of these three instruments brought new elements and techniques to European musical culture.

== Interactions with the world after the 20th century ==
The twentieth century saw numerous successes and challenges for Chinese music due to people&#x27;s changing perceptions of music culture. Modern Chinese music during and after this age not only relied on traditional Chinese music but also absorbed the advantages and skills of Western music. Chinese people&#x27;s attitudes toward music have altered throughout this age of communication and integration, and the general public acknowledges its worth and spiritual significance.

=== Before People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) ===
In the early 20th century, Chinese and Western music cultures slowly merged, driven by the external forces of art, to create a new style of Chinese music that was based on both cultures. Then, it was not until March 2, 1930, when the &quot;League of Left-Wing Writers&quot; was founded and its corresponding music criticism and music social activities, that the development of Chinese music entered the next stage.

One main change in the early 20th century happens in music education. In the pre-revolutionary ages, musicians did not have a high social status and they did not have a formal, standard way of training due to the Confucian ideology. Most of the content was taught orally and via rote practice. In the late 1800s and early 1900s, the introduction of western music theory and instruments also influenced how traditional music is taught. The National Music Conservatory (the Shanghai Conservatory of Music today) was founded in 1927, and soon became a role model for other music programs in China. The conservatory introduced a systematic way of training in Chinese music, including using printed music and building a universal standard for scoring and tuning.

From 1930 to the founding of PRC, music made great progress under the strong drive of political utilitarian purpose. People call for &quot;national salvation&quot;, in the face of this politics, all social resources should be unreservedly for the service. This notion of music criticism is condensed in Chairman Mao Zedong&#x27;s Speech at the Yan&#x27;an Forum on Literature and Art, published in May 1942. This work is also the most important work of music criticism and music practice from the early to long period after the formation of New China.

In the same period, while the politicians were making manifestos, musicians started to write Chinese music for western music instruments. Take piano for example, in 1934 the Chinese composer He Luting wrote a piece for piano called &quot;A Shepherd’s Flute,&quot; which later became famous internationally. As a student at the National Music Conservatory, He Luting wrote this piece for a composition competition in Shanghai. A recording of this music is shared as an external link for readers to get a feeling of this style (see the external link section). An example shows how important the piano, a Western instrument, is for modern Chinese music that during the Cultural Revolution when most Western music instruments were banned, the piano was among the allowed instruments for the so-called &quot;Model opera&quot; at that time.

=== After People&#x27;s Republic of China and Before Reform and Opening Up ===
Chinese musical creations during the founding years of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, from 1949 to 1976, continue to serve the political utilitarian purpose, yet have new advancements due to a unified China. Institutional change gave academic research a rather stable atmosphere, Chinese music was open to the whole society, and the whole society had access to all kinds of musical sources. During this time, Chinese music started to slowly gain popularity outside. For instance, New China places a high value on participating in the World Youth Festival, putting together a competent team to choose the most representative repertoire and creative backbone to do so. China took part in seven World Youth Festivals consecutively during the course of the 14-year period from the second World Youth Festival in 1949 to the eighth World Youth Festival in 1962. Each festival&#x27;s Chinese art Troupe performances feature fresh highlights that showcase the globe the distinctive charm of New China&#x27;s music while fervently advancing literature, art, and people&#x27;s diplomacy.

The invention of the Chinese orchestra is another great advancement. Ensembles are not new in Chinese music history, as large-scale ensembles are often used in important rituals or at the court. However, the Chinese orchestra based on the Western orchestra model first appeared in the 20th century, as the Shanghai-based musician Zheng Zhiwen&#x27;s attempt to enlarge the size of traditional &quot;Jiangnan Sizhu&quot; (江南絲竹) ensembles and to compose music for each specific section. His idea was not popular in his time, but it laid the foundation for the modern Chinese orchestra. Different from monophonic traditional Chinese music of traditional ensembles, most pieces composed for a modern Chinese orchestra are polyphonic. More importantly, after the foundation of the PRC, the instruments of the Chinese orchestra were tuned to be equal-tempered, the same as Western instruments, rather than following the traditional sonic system introduced before.

=== After Reform and Opening Up ===
The next period was marked by the reform and opening up that ushered in a significant turning point for Chinese music. It is when China and foreigners frequently interacted with each other; it can be called the &quot;new traditional&quot; music period of China. We can divide the academic music research in China over this time into three stages: Chinese vision, global vision, and global vision under the Chinese vision.

A significant point in this period is the meeting &quot;Forum of Young and middle-aged music Theorists&quot; held in 1986, which was an excellent discussion of liberating the mind and pioneering the Chinese musicology circle after the reform and opening up. The core topic of the conference is Chinese music theory, researching how to face the contemporary international new literary trend, and how to apply the academic vision to the global field of music theory research. Since then, tremendous changes have taken place in the academic vision of musicology research in China, and new methods and achievements of musicology research in foreign countries have become the focus of the music community.

After this, the academic outlook on musicology research in China has significantly changed, and the music community is now concentrating on cutting-edge techniques and international musicology research accomplishments. As an example of this time period, in 2000, composer Dun Tan (谭盾) wrote the famous music piece Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon (卧虎藏龙), which mixed traditional Chinese instruments, such as Erhu (二胡) and Pipa (琵琶), with Western orchestral instruments (see the external link section). At the same time, the boundary of music research is continually expanding, and it naturally interacts with and exchanges ideas with other social humanities disciplines, improving the meaning of musicology and raising that subject&#x27;s status.

== Sources ==

== References ==
== External links ==
* More details and recorded examples.
* https://youtu.be/bIWh1MHqTeQ Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute (胡笳十八拍)
* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5N4cDt3Ukrg The Song of Harps (箜篌引)
* https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=S5AjtMNnWf0 Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon (卧虎藏龙)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5100846" start="0" end="18" title="Chinese musicology" label="Chinese musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q277393" start="56" end="69" title="Chinese music" label="Chinese music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976613" start="413" end="429" title="Classic of Music" label="Classic of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="611" end="624" title="musical scale" label="musical scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q263961" start="648" end="663" title="harmonic series (music)" label="harmonic series"/>
<link wikidata="Q723720" start="672" end="677" title="Guqin" label="Guqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q716377" start="1071" end="1080" title="Shí-èr-lǜ" label="Shí-èr-lǜ"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="1240" end="1245" title="scale (music)" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="1294" end="1319" title="Musical notation" label="Western Standard notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="1514" end="1530" title="pentatonic scale" label="pentatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1942" end="1947" title="Musical mode#Modern modes" label="modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="2009" end="2023" title="equal tempered" label="equal tempered"/>
<link wikidata="Q996490" start="2209" end="2222" title="wolf interval" label="wolf interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="2368" end="2373" title="major key" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="2379" end="2388" title="minor key" label="minor key"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="2429" end="2439" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="3440" end="3447" title="pre-Qin" label="pre-Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3766" end="3779" title="Slavery" label="slave society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409498" start="3787" end="3804" title="Urgesellschaft" label="primitive society"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4259" end="4264" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="4269" end="4274" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q858804" start="4304" end="4314" title="Ethnic minorities in China" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="4326" end="4337" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q277393" start="4448" end="4453" title="Music of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q531426" start="4458" end="4463" title="Music of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4469" end="4480" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="4545" end="4556" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="4634" end="4647" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="4748" end="4760" title="Chinese martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="4801" end="4813" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="4827" end="4840" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056301" start="5059" end="5064" title="Yayue" label="Yayue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="5346" end="5349" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="5354" end="5357" title="Han dynasty" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="5395" end="5402" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="5487" end="5498" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q858804" start="5517" end="5534" title="Ethnic minorities in China" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="5587" end="5598" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="5678" end="5683" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685124" start="5694" end="5698" title="Pipa" label="Pipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q796273" start="5709" end="5712" title="Hujia" label="Jia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60517" start="5736" end="5743" title="Konghou" label="Konghou"/>
<link wikidata="Q723720" start="5833" end="5838" title="Guqin" label="Guqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032518" start="5844" end="5875" title="Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute" label="Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5934" end="5950" title=":zh:箜篌引" label="Song of the Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179625" start="6062" end="6069" title="Tianzhu (India)" label="Tianzhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="6199" end="6207" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="6313" end="6332" title="Western Han dynasty" label="Western Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q858804" start="6375" end="6392" title="Ethnic minorities in China" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="6441" end="6448" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q994451" start="6450" end="6457" title="Western Liang (Sixteen Kingdoms)" label="Xiliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328546" start="6459" end="6464" title="Qiuzi" label="Qiuzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="6470" end="6476" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="6533" end="6547" title="Zhongyuan" label="Central Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742599" start="6571" end="6581" title="Yaogu" label="Waist drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685124" start="6615" end="6627" title="Pipa" label="Quxiang pipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685124" start="6640" end="6658" title="Pipa" label="Five-stringed pipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="6691" end="6705" title="Zhongyuan" label="Central Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="6760" end="6763" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="6768" end="6772" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="6950" end="6969" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="6998" end="7009" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="7055" end="7069" title="Zhongyuan" label="Central Plains"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7253" end="7266" title=":zh:雅乐" label="elegant music"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="7423" end="7431" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="7433" end="7445" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="7447" end="7456" title="Western Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7507" end="7516" title=":zh:燕樂" label="Yan music"/>
<link wikidata="Q685884" start="7621" end="7632" title="vocal music" label="vocal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="7634" end="7652" title="Instrumental" label="instrumental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="7654" end="7659" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="7665" end="7670" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="7706" end="7718" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="7876" end="7892" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="7897" end="7902" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006438" start="7929" end="7946" title="Tributary system of China" label="tributary systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="8123" end="8127" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="8129" end="8133" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="8139" end="8143" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="8332" end="8344" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056301" start="8402" end="8407" title="yayue" label="yayue"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="8426" end="8432" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="8437" end="8443" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="8507" end="8512" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="8592" end="8598" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="8644" end="8654" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="8995" end="9001" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709639" start="9013" end="9020" title="sanshin" label="sanshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28025" start="9109" end="9123" title="Ryukyu Kingdom" label="Ryukyu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="9156" end="9161" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28025" start="9201" end="9215" title="Ryukyu Kingdom" label="Ryukyu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q737994" start="9234" end="9247" title="Chinese opera" label="Chinese opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656133" start="9321" end="9331" title="kumi odori" label="kumi odori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709639" start="9383" end="9390" title="Sanshin" label="Sanshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="9426" end="9432" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="9513" end="9519" title="kabuki" label="kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q737994" start="9939" end="9944" title="Chinese opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="9995" end="10000" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="10111" end="10123" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="10247" end="10259" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="10354" end="10366" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="10378" end="10382" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q310453" start="10392" end="10399" title="Shunzhi Emperor" label="Shunzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="10409" end="10415" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="10473" end="10485" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="10498" end="10504" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="10583" end="10597" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q311547" start="10649" end="10657" title="Catholicity" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="10658" end="10670" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="10678" end="10690" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="10724" end="10736" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="10795" end="10801" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="10982" end="10994" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="11258" end="11272" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="11289" end="11301" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="11320" end="11324" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="11385" end="11395" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q191823" start="11401" end="11411" title="clavichord" label="clavichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="11427" end="11434" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="11577" end="11587" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q725600" start="11588" end="11606" title="Jean Joseph Marie Amiot" label="Joseph-Marie Amiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="11742" end="11754" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11773" end="11779" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q11095476" start="11901" end="11911" title="Li Guangdi" label="Li Guangdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="12043" end="12056" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q849052" start="12154" end="12159" title="Sheng (instrument)" label="sheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q725600" start="12230" end="12235" title="Jean Joseph Marie Amiot" label="Amiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="12384" end="12393" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="12399" end="12408" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="12418" end="12428" title="Pump organ" label="reed organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="12871" end="12884" title="Western (genre)" label="Western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q847728" start="13366" end="13393" title="League of Left-Wing Writers" label="League of Left-Wing Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="13755" end="13773" title="Confucianism" label="Confucian ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994526" start="14014" end="14044" title="Shanghai Conservatory of Music" label="Shanghai Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="14228" end="14241" title="Sheet music" label="printed music"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="14292" end="14298" title="Musical tuning" label="tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14330" end="14333" title="PRC" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="14613" end="14623" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="14997" end="15002" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q550868" start="15045" end="15054" title="He Luting" label="He Luting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994526" start="15181" end="15208" title="Shanghai Conservatory of Music" label="National Music Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="15520" end="15539" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q756324" start="15657" end="15668" title="Revolutionary opera" label="Model opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="15743" end="15764" title="Chinese economic reform" label="Reform and Opening Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q249093" start="16309" end="16329" title="World Festival of Youth and Students" label="World Youth Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100854" start="16876" end="16893" title="Chinese orchestra" label="Chinese orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="17094" end="17111" title="Classical music" label="Western orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191683" start="17254" end="17268" title="Jiangnan sizhu" label="Jiangnan Sizhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137211" start="17454" end="17464" title="Monophony" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="17573" end="17583" title="Polyphony" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="17631" end="17634" title="China" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="17694" end="17708" title="Equal temperament" label="equal-tempered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="18508" end="18529" title="Chinese economic reform" label="reform and opening up"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011523" start="18617" end="18629" title="Contemporary music" label="contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q314176" start="19247" end="19254" title="Tan Dun" label="Dun Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q726306" start="19380" end="19384" title="Erhu" label="Erhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685124" start="19394" end="19398" title="Pipa" label="Pipa"/>
</links>
</doc>
