<doc id="980836" wikidata="Q10125" url="?curid=980836" title="Andy Murray">
<text>Sir Andrew Barron Murray (born 15 May 1987) is a British former professional tennis player and coach. He was ranked as the world No. 1 in men&#x27;s singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) for 41 weeks, including as the year-end No. 1 in 2016. Murray won 46 ATP Tour-level singles titles, including three majors at the 2012 US Open, 2013 Wimbledon Championships, and 2016 Wimbledon Championships. He also won two gold medals at the Summer Olympics, the 2016 ATP World Tour Finals, 14 Masters 1000 events, and contested a total of eleven major finals.

Originally coached by his mother Judy alongside his older brother Jamie, Murray moved to Barcelona at age 15 to train at the Sánchez-Casal Academy. He began his professional career around the time Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal established themselves as the two dominant players in men&#x27;s tennis. Murray had immediate success on the ATP Tour, making his top 10 debut in 2007 at age 19. By 2010, Murray and Novak Djokovic had joined Federer and Nadal in the Big Four, the group of players who dominated men&#x27;s tennis for most of the 2010s. Murray initially struggled against the rest of the Big Four, losing his first four major finals (three to Federer and one to Djokovic). He made his breakthrough in 2012 by defeating Federer to win the London Olympics and defeating Djokovic to win the US Open, becoming the first British major singles champion since Virginia Wade in 1977. He then beat Djokovic to win Wimbledon in 2013, the first home champion at the men&#x27;s event since Fred Perry in 1936.

Murray had his career-best season in 2016, when he made three major finals, winning Wimbledon. He defended his title at the 2016 Rio Olympics to become the only player, male or female, to win two Olympic gold medals in singles. Murray also became world No. 1 for the first time in 2016, and clinched the year-end No. 1 ranking by winning the Tour Finals title over Djokovic. After 2016, he struggled with a hip injury that required major surgery, and fell out of the top 100 in 2018. Upon his return, Murray won a tour title at the 2019 European Open and rose back to the top 50. He retired from the sport after the 2024 Paris Olympics.

Murray was an all-court player who excelled in particular at defence, returning serve and constructing points. He was generally regarded as possessing one of the most consistent two-handed backhands on the ATP Tour. Murray is credited with re-establishing the United Kingdom as a leading force in men&#x27;s tennis for the first time since the early 20th century. He and his brother led the Great Britain Davis Cup team to a title in 2015. Murray has been outspoken on issues of equality, and became only the second top-10 player in the history of the ATP Tour to have a female coach when he hired Amélie Mauresmo in 2014. Shortly following his playing career, Murray took up a coaching partnership with his former rival Djokovic for the 2025 Australian Open.
==Early and personal life==
Andy Murray was born in Glasgow, Scotland, the son of Judy Murray () and William Murray. His maternal grandfather, Roy Erskine, was a professional footballer in the late 1950s. Murray is a supporter of Hibernian Football Club, one of the teams his grandfather represented, and Arsenal Football Club. Murray began playing tennis at the age of three, when his mother Judy took him to play on the local courts. He played in his first competitive tournament at age five and by the time he was eight he was competing with adults in the Central District Tennis League. Murray&#x27;s elder brother, Jamie, is also a professional tennis player.

Murray grew up in Dunblane and attended Dunblane Primary School. Both he and his brother were present during the 1996 Dunblane school massacre, when Thomas Hamilton killed 16 children and a teacher before shooting himself; Murray took cover in a classroom. Murray says he was too young to understand what was happening and is generally reluctant to talk about it in interviews, but in his autobiography &quot;Hitting Back&quot; he states that he attended a youth group run by Hamilton and his mother gave Hamilton lifts in her car. Murray later attended Dunblane High School.

Murray&#x27;s parents split up when he was 10, with the boys living with their father while being mentored in tennis by their mother. He believes this could be the reason behind his competitive spirit. At 15, he was asked to train with Rangers Football Club at their School of Excellence, but declined, opting to focus on his tennis career. He then decided to move to Barcelona, Spain. There he trained on the clay courts of the Sánchez-Casal Academy, coached by Pato Alvarez, and also spent time studying at the Schiller International School. Murray described this time as &quot;a big sacrifice&quot;. His parents had to pay £40,000 for his 18-month stay. In Spain, he trained with Emilio Sánchez, former world No. 1 doubles player.

Murray was born with a bipartite patella, a condition in which the kneecap remains as two separate bones instead of fusing together in early childhood. It was not diagnosed until he was aged 16. He has been seen holding his knee due to the pain caused by the condition and has withdrawn from tournaments because of it.

In February 2013, Murray bought Cromlix House hotel near Dunblane for £1.8 million. The hotel had been closed since 2012, but Murray reopened it in April 2014. Later that month Murray was awarded the freedom of Stirling and received an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Stirling in recognition of his services to tennis.

Murray began dating Kim Sears, daughter of player-turned-coach Nigel Sears, in 2005. Their engagement was announced in November 2014, and they married on 11 April 2015 at Dunblane Cathedral. The couple previously lived in Oxshott, Surrey, but in 2022, moved to nearby Leatherhead. The newly constructed house will accommodate their young family, consisting of their son and three daughters; the youngest, a girl, was born in March 2021.

Murray has been repeatedly vocal in his support for women players and coaches. He is also a vocal supporter of LGBT+ rights and supports same-sex marriage. In June 2020, he also lent his support to the Black Lives Matter movement, when he and fellow players took a knee during the Schroders Battle of the Brits exhibition tournament.

==Junior career==
Leon Smith, Murray&#x27;s tennis coach from 11 to 17, described Murray as &quot;unbelievably competitive&quot;, while Murray attributes his abilities to the motivation gained from losing to his older brother Jamie. In 1999 Murray was a champion in the Orange Bowl, an international tournament for junior players, winning in the 12-year-old category.

In January 2001, Murray participated in the Petits As tournament, an event for players under 14, and it was here that he began his rivalry with Novak Djokovic, beating him 6–0, 6–1 in the quarterfinals. In the semis, Murray overcame Mischa Zverev, but lost the final to Russia&#x27;s Alexandre Krasnoroutskiy. He then led the British team to victory in the European Winter Cup and won a title in Telford, finishing the season as the No. 2 in the ETA ranking for U14s, only behind Djokovic.

In July 2003, Murray started out on the Challenger and Futures circuit. In his first tournament, he reached the quarter-finals of the Manchester Challenger. In September, Murray won his first senior title by taking the Glasgow Futures event. He also reached the semi-finals of the Edinburgh Futures event.

For the first six months of 2004, Murray had a knee injury and could not play. In July 2004, Murray played a Challenger event in Nottingham, where he lost to future Grand Slam finalist Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the second round. Murray then went on to win Futures events in Xàtiva and Rome.

In September 2004, he won the Junior US Open and was selected for the Davis Cup World Group play-off match against Austria later that month; however, he was not selected to play. Later that year, he won BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year.

As a junior, Murray reached as high as No. 6 in the world in 2003 (and No. 8 in doubles). In the 2004-instated combined rankings, he reached No. 2 in the world.

===Junior Slam results===
* Australian Open: –
* French Open: SF (2005)
* Wimbledon: 3R (2004)
* US Open: W (2004)

==Professional career==
===2000s===
====2005: Turning professional====
Murray began 2005 ranked No. 407, but whilst in South America in January he injured his back and was forced to take three months off.

In March, he became the youngest Briton to play in the Davis Cup. Murray turned professional in April and was given a wild card entry to a clay-court tournament in Barcelona, the Open SEAT, where he lost in three sets to Jan Hernych. In April, Murray parted acrimoniously from his coach Pato Alvarez, complaining about his negative attitude. Murray then reached the semi-finals of the boys&#x27; French Open, where he lost in straight sets to Marin Čilić.

Mark Petchey became Murray&#x27;s coach. Given a wild card to Queen&#x27;s, Murray progressed past Santiago Ventura in straight sets for his first ATP match win. Following a second-round win against Taylor Dent, he lost to former Australian Open champion Thomas Johansson in the third round in three sets after cramping and twisting his ankle. Following his performance at Queen&#x27;s, Murray received a wild card for Wimbledon. Ranked No. 312, Murray became the first Scot in the Open Era to reach the third round of the men&#x27;s singles tournament at Wimbledon. In the third round, Murray lost to 2002 Wimbledon finalist David Nalbandian due to cramping and fatigue, having led two sets to love.

Murray won Challenger events on the hard courts of Aptos and Binghamton, New York. At Cincinnati, he lost in three sets to then-No. 4, Marat Safin. With a wild card entry, Murray beat Andrei Pavel in the first round of the US Open, where he recovered from down two sets to one to win his first five-set match. However, he lost in the second round to Arnaud Clément in five sets. Murray was again selected for the Davis Cup match against Switzerland. He lost in straight sets to Stanislas Wawrinka. Murray made his first ATP final at the Thailand Open where he lost to No. 1 Roger Federer in straight sets.

Murray beat Tim Henman in their first meeting, at the Basel Swiss Indoors in the first round, and reached the quarter-finals.

Murray completed the year ranked No. 64 and was named the 2005 BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year.

====2006: First ATP title and British No. 1====
The 2006 season saw Murray compete on the full circuit for the first time and split with his coach Mark Petchey and team up with Brad Gilbert.

At San Jose in February, Murray defeated a top ten player for the first time, Andy Roddick. Murray went won the title beating No. 11 Lleyton Hewitt. As a result, Murray became the British No. 1 later that month, ending Tim Henman&#x27;s seven-year run. Murray was now world No. 42, Greg Rusedski No. 43, and Tim Henman No. 49. Rusedski regained his British No. 1 status on 15 May for eight weeks.

Murray suffered a straight sets defeat at the Australian Open, to Juan Ignacio Chela in the first round and to Gaël Monfils at the French Open, in five sets. Murray reached the fourth round for the first time at both Wimbledon (beating 3rd seed Andy Roddick in the 3rd round) and the US Open.

Murray played in Davis Cup ties against Serbia, Israel and Ukraine. Murray missed the opening singles matches before losing the doubles as Britain lost their tie against Serbia. During the tie with Israel, Murray won his rubber and lost the doubles before pulling out with a neck injury before the reverse singles, as Britain lost the tie. Against Ukraine, Murray won both his singles rubbers, but lost the doubles, as Britain won the tie.

At the Masters, Murray lost in the first round in Miami, Monte Carlo and Rome. Murray went out of the tournaments in Indian Wells and Hamburg in the second round. Murray reached his first Masters semi-final in Toronto at the Rogers Cup, losing to Richard Gasquet.

At Cincinnati, Murray became only one of two players, alongside Rafael Nadal, to defeat Roger Federer in 2006, breaking the Swiss star&#x27;s 55 match winning streak on hard courts. He lost two rounds later to Andy Roddick, but broke into the top 20 for the first time. In the final two Masters events in Madrid and Paris, Murray exited both tournaments at the last-16 stage ending his season, with losses to Novak Djokovic and Dominik Hrbatý. Murray was a finalist at the Legg Mason Tennis Classic. Playing doubles with his brother in Bangkok the pair reached the final. After the French Open, where Murray was injured again, he revealed that his bones hadn&#x27;t fully grown, causing him to suffer from cramps and back problems. He finished the year ranked 17.

====2007: Ascending to the top 10====
Murray reached the fourth round of the Australian Open, where he lost a five-set match against No. 2, Rafael Nadal.

Following the Miami Masters, where he reached the semi-finals, Murray reached the No. 10 ranking on 16 April.

The British No. 1 sustained tendon damage during his first round match at the German Open in Hamburg. Murray was up 5–1 when he hit a forehand from the back of the court and snapped the tendons in his wrist, leaving him out of action from 15 May until 7 August, thereby missing Wimbledon. During this rest period, Murray rose to No. 8, but by 7 August, he had dropped to No. 14.

Murray suffered a third round loss at the US Open. At the Masters tournaments, Murray reached the semi-finals of Indian Wells and Miami. At Rome and Cincinnati, Murray exited in the first round whilst going out in the second in Canada. In the final two masters tournaments, Murray exited in the third round in Madrid and he went out in the quarter-finals of Paris. Murray won titles in San Jose and St. Petersburg. He also reached the final of tournaments in Doha and Metz, finishing the season ranked 11th in the world.

In November, Murray split with his coach Brad Gilbert and added a team of experts along with Miles Maclagan, his main coach.

====2008: First major final and Masters titles====

In 2008, Murray suffered a first round loss at the Australian Open to eventual runner-up Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, and a third round loss at the French Open to Nicolás Almagro. Murray then made his first Grand Slam quarter-final at Wimbledon before making his first final at the US Open. In the fourth round at Wimbledon, Murray defeated Frenchman Richard Gasquet in five sets after trailing two-sets-to-love, a match that garnered excitement and attention in the British press. He then lost in straight sets to the eventual champion, Rafael Nadal. During the tournament in New York, Murray claimed his first win over Nadal. That victory meant that he became the first player from Britain since Greg Rusedski in 1997 to reach a major final. In his first Grand Slam final Murray suffered a straight sets loss to Federer. At the Beijing Olympics, Murray suffered one of the worst defeats of his career, losing his first round singles match to No. 77 Yen-hsun Lu of Taiwan in straight sets. That abject defeat was still on his mind in a BBC interview five years later – despite an intervening Olympic gold medal and a head-to-head win – when he met the same player (now ranked No. 75) in the second round of Wimbledon 2013.

In the Masters tournaments, Murray went out in round four in Indian Wells and the first round of Miami. In the clay Masters Murray made the third round of Monte Carlo and Hamburg and the second of Rome. On the American hard court swing Murray made the semi-finals of Toronto before winning his first Masters shield in Cincinnati. He added another shield to his collection in Madrid; before losing in the quarter-finals of Paris. Now at No. 4 in the world, Murray qualified for the first time for the Masters Cup. He played well in defeating an injured Federer but lost to Davydenko in the semi-finals. Murray ended 2008 ranked No. 4. Murray also won tournaments in Doha, Marseille and St Petersburg.

====2009: world No. 2 and two Masters titles====
At the Qatar Open in Doha, Murray beat Andy Roddick in straight sets in the final. At the Australian Open, Murray made it to the fourth round, losing to Fernando Verdasco. Murray won Rotterdam, defeating No. 1, Nadal in three sets. Murray lost in the final to Nadal at Indian Wells, but won a week later in Miami over Djokovic for another masters title.

Murray beat No. 9, Nikolay Davydenko at Monte Carlo, the first time he had beaten a top ten player on clay, though he lost to Nadal in the semi-finals. Murray was upset in round two of Rome by qualifier Juan Mónaco, and he reached the quarter-finals of Madrid, losing to Juan Martín del Potro. During this time Murray achieved the highest ever ranking of a British male in the Open Era when he reached the No. 3 ranking on 11 May 2009. Murray reached the quarter-finals of the French Open, but was defeated by Fernando González in four sets.

Murray won a title for the first time on grass at Queen&#x27;s and became the first British winner of the tournament since 1938. In the final Murray beat James Blake. At Wimbledon, against Stanislas Wawrinka, Murray&#x27;s fourth round match was the first match to be played entirely under Wimbledon&#x27;s retractable roof. This also enabled it to be the then latest finishing match ever at Wimbledon, a record he would go on to eclipse three years later. However Murray lost a tight semi-final to Andy Roddick.

At Montreal, he beat del Potro in three sets to take the title and overtook Nadal in the rankings. He held the number two position until the start of the US Open. Murray followed the Masters win playing at the Cincinnati Masters, where he lost to Federer. At the US Open, Murray was hampered by a wrist injury and suffered a straight-sets loss to Čilić. Murray won both his singles matches, and lost at doubles in the Davis Cup against Poland, but then missed six weeks with a wrist injury.

In November, Murray won at Valencia, but bowed out in round two of the Paris Masters. To end the season, Murray did not make it out of the round robin at the World Tour Finals in London. He ended the year ranked 4.

===2010s===

====2010: Australian Open final====

At the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Murray lost in the quarter-finals to Robin Söderling in straight sets. Murray lost his first match at the 2010 Sony Ericsson Open to Mardy Fish, afterwards saying that his mind hadn&#x27;t been fully on tennis. Murray lost his first match at Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters to Philipp Kohlschreiber. He and Ross Hutchins lost in the doubles to the Bryan brothers on a champions tie-breaker. Murray reached the third round in the Rome Masters, and the quarter-finals at the Madrid Masters, losing both times to David Ferrer.
At the French Open he lost in straight sets to Tomáš Berdych in the fourth round. In London, Murray progressed to the third round, where he lost to Mardy Fish in a tie-breaker for his second defeat by him in the year. At Wimbledon, Murray progressed to the semi-finals, losing to Nadal in straight sets. In July, Murray and his coach Maclagan split, and Murray replaced him with Àlex Corretja.

At 2010 Farmers Classic, Murray lost in the final to Sam Querrey in three sets. In Canada, Murray became the first player since Andre Agassi in 1995 to defend the Canadian Masters. Murray defeated Nadal and then Federer in straight sets, ending his eight-month title drought. At Cincinnati, Murray first complained about the speed of the court, and then in a quarter-final match with Fish, Murray complained that the organisers refused to put the match on later in the day. With temperatures reaching 33 °C in the shade, Murray won the first set in a tie-breaker but began to feel ill due to the heat. He lost the second set, but forced a final-set tie-breaker, before Fish won. After losing to Stanislas Wawrinka in the third round of the US Open, questions about Murray&#x27;s conditioning arose, as he called the trainer out twice during the match.

At China Open in Beijing, Murray reached the quarter-finals, losing to Ivan Ljubičić. Murray then won the Shanghai Rolex Masters beating Roger Federer in straight sets. He did not drop a set throughout the event. At Valencia he lost in the second round to Juan Mónaco. However, in doubles, Murray partnered his brother Jamie Murray to the final, where they beat Mahesh Bhupathi and Max Mirnyi. The victory was Murray&#x27;s first doubles title and the second time he had reached a final with his brother.

Murray reached the quarter-finals at the BNP Paribas Masters losing to Gaël Monfils in three sets. At the Tour finals in London, Murray went 2–1 in round robin play before facing Nadal in the semi-final. They battled for over three hours, before Murray fell to the Spaniard in a final-set tie-breaker, bringing an end to his season. He ended the year ranked 4 for the third consecutive year.

====2011: Consistency and two more Masters====
At the Australian Open, Murray met former champion Novak Djokovic in the final and was defeated in straight sets. In Rotterdam, he was defeated by Marcos Baghdatis in the first round. Murray reached the semi-finals of the doubles tournament with his brother Jamie. Murray lost to qualifiers in the first rounds at the Masters Series events in Indian Wells and Miami, after which he split with coach Àlex Corretja.

Murray returned to form at Monte Carlo, but lost to Nadal in the semi-finals. Murray sustained an elbow injury before the match and subsequently withdrew from Barcelona due to the injury. Murray lost in the third round at the Mutua Madrileña Madrid Open, but made it to the semi-finals of the Rome Masters, where he lost to Novak Djokovic.

At the French Open, he lost in his first semi-final at Roland Garros, against Rafael Nadal.

Murray defeated Jo-Wilfried Tsonga to win his second Queen&#x27;s Club title. At Wimbledon, Murray lost in the semi-final to Nadal, despite taking the first set. At the Davis Cup tie between Great Britain and Luxembourg, Murray led the British team to victory. Murray was the two-time defending 2011 Rogers Cup champion, but lost in the second round to South African Kevin Anderson. He won the 2011 Western &amp; Southern Open after Novak Djokovic retired due to injury. At the US Open, Murray battled from two sets down to win a five-set second-round encounter with Robin Haase, but lost in the semi-finals to Rafael Nadal in four sets. This was the first time in his career that Andy had reached the quarter-finals, or better, at all four slams in a calendar year.

Murray won the Thailand Open. At the Japan Open he beat Rafael Nadal for the first time in 2011 in three sets. Murray then won the doubles with his brother Jamie, becoming the first person in the 2011 season to capture both singles and doubles titles at the same tournament. Murray then successfully defended his Shanghai Masters crown with a straight-sets victory over David Ferrer in the final. At the ATP World Tour Finals, Murray lost to David Ferrer in straight sets and withdrew from the tournament after the loss with a groin pull. Murray ended the year ranked 4, behind Djokovic, Nadal, and Federer, for the fourth consecutive year.

====2012: Olympic Gold, US Open champion====
With Ivan Lendl as his new full-time coach, Murray won Brisbane beating Alexandr Dolgopolov in the final. In doubles, he lost in the quarter-finals against Jürgen Melzer and Philipp Petzschner. After an exhibition tournament, Murray reached the semi-finals of the 2012 Australian Open, where he lost to Novak Djokovic in a four-hour-and 50-minute match.

At Dubai, Murray beat Djokovic in the semi-finals, but lost the final to Roger Federer. After an early defeat at the BNP Paribas Open, Murray made the final of the Miami Masters, losing to Djokovic. Murray then had quarter-final losses at the Monte Carlo Masters and Barcelona Open, and a third round loss at the Italian Open. Murray battled back spasms throughout the French Open, and in the quarter-finals, he was beaten by David Ferrer.

Murray lost in the opening round of Queen&#x27;s to No. 65 Nicolas Mahut. At Wimbledon, Murray set the then record for the latest finish at the championships when he completed a four-set victory over Marcos Baghdatis at 23:02 BST (surpassed by one minute by the 2018 men&#x27;s singles semi-finals). Murray beat Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the semi-final in four sets to become the first male British player to reach the Wimbledon final since Bunny Austin in 1938. In the final, he lost to Federer in four sets.

Murray returned to Wimbledon to compete in the London 2012 Summer Olympics. He and brother Jamie Murray lost in round one to Austria (Jürgen Melzer and Alexander Peya) in three sets. In the mixed doubles, Murray and Laura Robson lost in the final to the Belarusian top seeds (Victoria Azarenka and Max Mirnyi) in three sets, gaining a silver medal. In singles, Murray lost only one set and beat Federer in the final for the loss of just 7 games. Murray became the first British man to win the Olympic singles gold medal in tennis since Josiah Ritchie in 1908.
Murray retired early in the Rogers Cup due to a knee injury, and was beaten by Jérémy Chardy at Cincinnati in straight sets.

At US Open, he beat Milos Raonic in straight sets in round four, and then in the quarter-finals, had to come from a set and two breaks down against Marin Čilić to prevail in four. In the semi-finals, he defeated Tomáš Berdych in almost four hours, to reach his second consecutive Grand Slam final. Murray beat Djokovic in five sets, becoming the first British man to win a Grand Slam final since Fred Perry in 1936, and the first Scottish-born player to win a Grand Slam final since Harold Mahony in 1896. The win would also set several records for Murray: the longest tiebreak in US Open final history at 12–10 in the first set, it made Murray the first man ever to win an Olympic gold medal and the US Open in the same year, and it tied with the 1988 US Open final (in which Murray&#x27;s coach Lendl competed) as the longest final in the tournament&#x27;s history. By defeating Djokovic in the final, Murray achieved his 100th Grand Slam career match win. The victory made Murray part of the &quot;Big Four&quot; according to many pundits and contemporaries, including Novak Djokovic.

Murray lost in the semi-finals of the Japan Open to Milos Raonic in three sets. In the doubles he and his brother Jamie lost in the quarter-finals to Leander Paes and Radek Štěpánek. At Shanghai, Murray beat Roger Federer in the semi-finals in straight sets. After failing to capitalise on five match points, Murray eventually lost the final to Djokovic in three sets, bringing to an end his 12–0 winning streak at the competition.
When Nadal pulled out of both the Paris Masters and the year-end championships, Murray finished the year at No. 3. At the &quot;BBC Sports Personality of the Year&quot; Murray was voted third, ahead of Mo Farah. Murray won the World Breakthrough of the Year at the Laureus World Sports Awards.

Murray was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2013 New Year Honours for services to tennis.

====2013: Wimbledon champion and back surgery====

Murray won Brisbane beating Grigor Dimitrov in the final in straight sets. At the Australian Open he prevailed in 5 sets against Federer in the semis (his first Grand Slam win over Roger). With this victory, each member of the Big Four (Federer, Nadal, Djokovic and Murray) had beaten the other three at the majors. Murray was eventually defeated in four sets by Djokovic. Murray became only the second man in the Open Era to achieve three runner-up finishes at the Australian Open, the other being Stefan Edberg.

At Indian Wells, Murray lost in the quarter-finals to Juan Martín del Potro in three sets. In the Miami final against David Ferrer, Murray faced match point in the decider at 5–6, but won on a third-set tiebreaker to win his second Miami Masters title, and overtook Roger Federer into second place in the rankings, ending a near-decade long time period in which either Federer or Rafael Nadal were ranked in the top two. Murray briefly fell back to No. 3, following a third round defeat by Stanislas Wawrinka in Monte-Carlo, but soon reclaimed the No. 2 ranking. Murray lost in the quarter-finals in Madrid to Tomáš Berdych in straight sets.

At Rome, Murray retired due to a hip injury during his second round match against Marcel Granollers on his 26th birthday. This left Murray with only eleven days to be fit for the start of the French Open.

Murray withdrew from Roland Garros with a back injury. He made his comeback at Queen&#x27;s, where he came from behind to beat Marin Čilić in three sets to claim his third title at Queen&#x27;s Club.

Going into Wimbledon, Murray had not lost a match on grass since the previous year&#x27;s final. Murray made it through to his tenth consecutive Grand Slam quarter-final. For the seventh time in his career, Murray had to come back from a deficit of two sets to come through in five sets against Fernando Verdasco, then beat 24th seed Jerzy Janowicz in four sets (dropping the first) to make it through to his second consecutive Wimbledon final, and third consecutive major final against Novak Djokovic.

Despite the Serb being the favourite to win the title throughout the Championships, Murray overcame Djokovic in a straight sets match that lasted over three hours, to become the first British winner of the men&#x27;s singles title since Fred Perry in 1936 and to extend his winning streak on grass to 18 matches.

At the US Open, Murray entered a Grand Slam tournament as defending champion for the first time and reached the quarter-finals at a major for the 11th straight tournament. In the last 8, Murray lost to Stanislas Wawrinka in straight sets, ending Murray&#x27;s streak of four consecutive major finals. The Great Britain Davis Cup team played their World Group Play-off tie on clay against Croatia, where Murray beat 16-year-old Borna Ćorić in straight sets. He and Colin Fleming beat Ivan Dodig and Mate Pavić in the doubles, and Murray then sealed Britain&#x27;s return to the World Group by defeating Dodig in straight sets.

Following the Davis Cup, Murray&#x27;s season was cut short by his decision to undergo surgery, in order to sort out the lower back problems that had caused him problems since the early stages of the previous season. Following the conclusion of the 2013 season, Murray was voted the 2013 BBC Sports Personality of the Year.

====2014: 30th career title and out of top 10====

At Qatar Murray beat Mousa Shanan Zayed in straight sets in 37 minutes without dropping a game, but was defeated in three sets by No. 40 Florian Mayer in the second round, despite being a set and a break up.

At Australian Open, Murray went out in four sets in the quarters to Roger Federer, ending his streak of four consecutive Australian Open semi-finals. As a result of losing before the final, Murray fell to No. 6, falling out of the top 5 for the first time since 2008.

In the Davis Cup World Group first round Great Britain faced United States. Murray won both of his ties against Donald Young and Sam Querrey, helping Britain to their first Davis Cup quarter-final since 1986. Murray lost in the quarter finals of Rotterdam, to Marin Čilić and the semis of Mexican Open in Acapulco, to Grigor Dimitrov (in a three-setter).

At Indian Wells, Murray lost in round four to Milos Raonic in three sets. Murray and Jonathan Marray lost in round two of the doubles to Alexander Peya and Bruno Soares. Murray split with coach Ivan Lendl. At Miami, Murray lost to Djokovic in the quarter-finals. In the Davis Cup quarter-finals against Italy, he beat Andreas Seppi, he and Colin Fleming won the doubles and he lost to Fabio Fognini in straight sets (Great Britain lost the deciding final rubber).

At Madrid after his opening win over Nicolas Almagro, he dedicated the victory to former player Elena Baltacha. He then lost to qualifier Santiago Giraldo in the next round. Murray then reached the quarter-finals of Rome where he lost to No. 1 Rafael Nadal in a tight match in which he had been up a break in the final set. At the French Open, Murray edged out 28th seed Philipp Kohlschreiber 12–10 in the final set in round three (the first time Murray had ever gone beyond 7–5 in a deciding set). He then beat Fernando Verdasco and Gaël Monfils in a five set quarter-final, which saw Murray rise to No. 5 and equal his best ever French Open by reaching the semi-finals. He lost to Nadal in straight sets, winning only 6 games. Murray then appointed former women&#x27;s world No. 1, and two-times slam titlist, Amélie Mauresmo as his coach in a &#x27;historic move&#x27; which made Mauresmo the first woman to coach a top male tennis player.

At Wimbledon Grigor Dimitrov ended his 17 match winning-streak on Wimbledon grass (including the 2012 Olympics) with a straight sets win in the quarter finals, meaning Murray failed to reach the semi-finals for the first time since 2008. After his defeat at the Championships, Murray dropped to No. 10, his lowest ranking since 2008.

Murray reached back-to-back quarter-finals at the Canadian Open and Cincinnati Masters, losing to eventual champions Jo Wilfried Tsonga, after being a break up in the decider, and Roger Federer, after being two breaks up in the second set, respectively. He made it to the quarter-finals of the 2014 US Open, losing to Novak Djokovic, after earning his first top ten win of the year in the previous round against Jo Wilfried Tsonga. This was the first season since 2009 where Murray failed to reach a grand slam final. As a consequence Murray fell outside of the top 10 rankings for the first time since June 2008.

At Shenzhen Open Murray reached his first final of the season, breaking a drought of 14 months. In the final, after saving five championship points in the second set tie break against Tommy Robredo, Murray won the title in three sets, Robredo&#x27;s drop in fitness ultimately proving decisive. At Beijing, he reached the semi-finals before losing to Djokovic in straight sets. He lost in the third round at the Shanghai Masters to David Ferrer despite being a set up. In Vienna he beat Ferrer in three sets for his second title of the season, and the 30th of his career. Murray defeated Ferrer again in the semi-finals of Valencia to move into his third final in five weeks. In a repeat of the Shenzhen Open final, Murray again saved five championship points as he overcame Tommy Robredo in three sets. Murray then reached the quarter-finals of the Paris Masters, where he lost to Djokovic in his 23rd match in 37 days. However, his win over Dimitrov in the third round had already guaranteed him a spot at the ATP World Tour Finals.

At the ATP World Tour Finals, Murray lost his opening round robin match to Kei Nishikori but won his second match against Milos Raonic. He lost his final group match against Federer in straight sets and only won one game against him, marking his worst defeat since losing to Djokovic in the 2007 Miami Masters, eliminating him from the tournament.

At the end of the season, Murray mutually agreed on a split with training partner Dani Vallverdu and fitness coach Jez Green.

====2015: Davis Cup champion, world No. 2====
At the Australian Open he beat Nick Kyrgios and Tomáš Berdych to reach his fourth final at the tournament (three of which were against Djokovic) and the eighth grand slam final of his career. He lost the final to Novak Djokovic in four sets, but returned to the top four in the world rankings for the first time in 12 months.

At Rotterdam Murray lost in the quarter-finals to Gilles Simon. At Dubai he lost in the quarters to 18-year-old Borna Ćorić. At Davis Cup World Group in Glasgow against the United States he won both his matches against Donald Young and John Isner, allowing Great Britain to progress to the quarter-finals 3–2.

Murray then reached the semi-finals of Indian Wells, overtaking Tim Henman&#x27;s record of 496 career wins to have the most career wins for a British man in the Open Era. However, he suffered a 6th consecutive defeat to Djokovic in straight sets. Murray then reached the final of Miami, recording his 500th career win. He lost the final to Djokovic in three sets. Murray added Jonas Björkman to his coaching staff in March initially on a five-week trial.

Murray won his first ATP clay court title at the 2015 BMW Open, defeating Philipp Kohlschreiber to become the first Briton since Buster Mottram in 1976 to win a tour level clay court event. At Madrid he beat Rafael Nadal in straight sets in the final for his first ever clay court Masters title. The win was Murray&#x27;s first over Nadal, Federer or Djokovic since Wimbledon 2013, and his first over Nadal on clay.

At Italian Open, he withdrew due to fatigue. Murray then reached his third semi-final at the French Open, losing to Djokovic in five sets and ending his 15 match winning streak on clay. To start his grass court campaign, Murray went on to win a record-tying fourth Queen&#x27;s Club title, defeating the big serving Kevin Anderson in straight sets in the final. At the 2015 Wimbledon Championships, Murray dropped only two sets before a semi-final clash with Roger Federer which he lost in straight sets, gaining only one break point in the match.

In Great Britain&#x27;s Davis Cup quarter-final tie against France at Queen&#x27;s, Murray beat Jo-Wilfried Tsonga and then he and his brother Jamie won the doubles, beating Tsonga and Nicolas Mahut in four sets. He then beat Simon in the fourth rubber in four sets, which resulted in Great Britain reaching their first Davis Cup semi-final since 1981.

At Citi Open, he lost his first match, losing to No. 53 Teymuraz Gabashvili in a final set tiebreak, despite serving for the match. In doubles, he partnered Daniel Nestor, losing in the first round to the fourth seeds, Rohan Bopanna and Florin Mergea, in three sets.

Murray won Montreal, beating Tsonga and Nishikori in the quarter-finals and semi-finals. He then won the final against Djokovic in three sets. This broke his eight-match, two-year losing streak against Djokovic. He also overtook Federer to become the world No. 2. In doubles, he and Leander Paes beat Chardy and Anderson, before losing to Murray&#x27;s brother Jamie and John Peers in two sets – the first time the Murray brothers had competed against each other in a Tour-level match.

At Cincinnati, Murray lost to defending champion Roger Federer in straight sets, and after Federer went on to win the tournament, this result saw Murray return to the No. 3 ranking. At the US Open, Murray beat Nick Kyrgios in four sets and Adrian Mannarino in five sets after being two sets down, equaling Federer for winning eight matches from two sets to love down. He then beat Thomaz Bellucci in straight sets but lost in the fourth round to Kevin Anderson in four sets. This ended Murray&#x27;s five-year run of 18 consecutive Grand Slam quarter-finals (not counting his withdrawal from the 2013 French Open) since his third round loss to Stan Wawrinka in the 2010 US Open.

Facing Australia in the semi-finals of the Davis Cup World Group in Glasgow, Murray won both his singles rubbers in straight sets, against Thanasi Kokkinakis and Bernard Tomic. He and his brother Jamie won in five sets against Sam Groth and Lleyton Hewitt, the results guiding Great Britain to the Davis Cup final for the first time since 1978 with a 3–2 win over Australia.

After losing in the semi-finals of the Shanghai Masters to Djokovic in straight sets, Murray reached the finals of the Paris Masters. After a three set win over Richard Gasquet, he joined Novak Djokovic, Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal as the only players to reach the semi-finals (or better) at all nine of the ATP World Tour Masters 1000 tournaments, and also ensured that he compiled his best match record in a single
season. He lost the final to Djokovic in straight sets.

At ATP World Tour Finals, Murray went out in the round-robin stage, after defeating David Ferrer and losing to Rafael Nadal and Stan Wawrinka. However, after Federer failed to win the tournament, he finished the season ranked No. 2 for the first time.

In the Davis Cup final, Murray beat Ruben Bemelmans in straight sets, played on indoor clay courts at Ghent. With brother Jamie he won in four sets over Steve Darcis and David Goffin, and then Murray beat Goffin to ensure a 3–1 victory for Great Britain, their first Davis Cup title since 1936 and their tenth overall. Murray also became only the third person since the current Davis Cup format was introduced to win all eight of his singles rubbers in a Davis Cup season, after John McEnroe and Mats Wilander.

====2016: Wimbledon title, Olympic gold, No. 1====

At Australian Open he reached his fifth Australian Open final beating Milos Raonic in the semis, but lost in the final to Novak Djokovic in straight sets. He became the second man in the Open Era (after Ivan Lendl) to lose five Grand Slam finals at one event, and the only one not to have won the title. In February, Murray appointed Jamie Delgado as an assistant coach. Murray then played at 2016 Davis Cup defeating the Japanese Taro Daniel and Kei Nishikori in the first round. At 2016 Indian Wells Masters he lost to Federico Delbonis in the third round. At Miami he lost to Grigor Dimitrov in the third round.

At Monte Carlo Murray lost in the semi finals to eventual champion Rafael Nadal despite winning the first set. At 2016 Mutua Madrid Open Murray beat Rafael Nadal. In the final he lost to Novak Djokovic in three sets. This loss dropped Murray from second to third in the ATP rankings. Shortly afterwards Mauresmo and Murray issued a joint statement announcing that they had &quot;mutually agreed&quot; to end their coaching partnership.
Murray regained his number two ranking after he won the 2016 Internazionali BNL d&#x27;Italia for his 1st title of the season and 36th overall. He beat Djokovic in straight sets. This was his first win over Djokovic on clay and became the first British player since Virginia Wade in 1971 to win the title and the first British man since George Patrick Hughes in 1931. At French Open he beat Richard Gasquet in four sets to set up a semi-final clash against defending champion Stanislas Wawrinka. Murray defeated Wawrinka in four sets to become the first male British player since Bunny Austin in 1937, to reach a French Open final. He lost to Djokovic in four sets.

In June Ivan Lendl returned to his former role as Murray&#x27;s coach. At Queen&#x27;s in the final he was down a set and a break to Milos Raonic, but he won a record 5th Queen&#x27;s Club Championships. At the 2016 Wimbledon Championships Murray beat 12th seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in five sets in the quarter-final and 10th seed Tomáš Berdych in straight sets to reach his third straight major final. In the final on 10 July, Murray defeated Raonic in straight sets to win his second Wimbledon title and third major title overall. His Wimbledon crown was his 3rd title of the season and 38th career Tour title.

At Rio Olympic Games he became the first player, male or female, to win two consecutive gold medals in the tennis singles events by beating Juan Martín del Potro in the final, which lasted over four hours. Murray then entered the US Open and lost to sixth seed Kei Nishikori in five sets despite holding a two sets to one lead.
At Davis Cup semi-final in Glasgow against Argentina he lost to Juan Martín del Potro in five sets and he and his brother Jamie beat del Potro and Leonardo Mayer in four sets. He then beat Guido Pella in straight sets, though Great Britain lost the tie. Murray then won the China Open for his fifth title of 2016 and 40th career tour title. He defeated Grigor Dimitrov in straight sets. Murray then won Shanghai defeating Roberto Bautista Agut in straight sets.

Murray brought his win streak to 15 consecutive match wins by winning the Erste Bank Open for his seventh tour title of the 2016 season. He beat Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, for his third title in succession. The result saw Murray win seven titles in a single season for the first time in his career, and move to solo 15th on the all-time list of singles titles in the Open Era, breaking a tie with former world No. 1 Stefan Edberg.

Murray entered the Paris Masters knowing that in the event of Djokovic not reaching the final, winning the title would be enough to see him crowned world No. 1 for the first time. Djokovic lost to Marin Cilic and Raonic withdrew before the start of their semi final match, giving Murray a walkover. As a result, Murray became the first British man to reach No. 1 since the introduction of the rankings in 1973. Murray then defeated John Isner in the final in three sets to win his fourth consecutive tournament and first Paris Masters title. In November 2016, Murray reached the final of the ATP World Tour Finals for the first time before winning against Novak Djokovic in two sets, thus reaching year-end No. 1 and in doing so, became the first player to win a Grand Slam, the ATP World Tour Finals, the men&#x27;s singles at the Olympic Games and a Masters 1000 title in the same calendar year. The International Tennis Federation recognised Murray as their men&#x27;s 2016 ITF men&#x27;s world champion, the first time Murray had achieved this honour.

====2017: Injury and hiatus====

Murray was knighted in the 2017 New Year Honours for services to tennis and charity, making him the UK&#x27;s youngest knight, at 29. Murray reached the final of the Qatar Open, but lost to Novak Djokovic in three sets despite saving three championship points. At the 2017 Australian Open he lost in the fourth round against Mischa Zverev in four sets.

At Dubai he won his only tournament of the year, beating Fernando Verdasco in straight sets, despite almost losing in the quarter-finals to Philipp Kohlschreiber where Murray had to save seven match points. The next week, he suffered a shock defeat in the second round of the Indian Wells Masters to Vasek Pospisil.

After missing a month due to an elbow injury, Murray returned to compete in the Monte-Carlo Masters in April, losing out in the third round to Albert Ramos-Vinolas. He then competed in Barcelona where he was beaten by Dominic Thiem in the semi-finals. Murray lost to Borna Coric in the third round of Madrid, and to Fabio Fognini in second round of Rome. In the 2017 French Open quarter-finals he beat Kei Nishikori in four sets, but lost in the semi-finals to Stan Wawrinka in five sets.

As the five-time champion at Queens, Murray pledged his prize money to the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire, however he was defeated in straight sets by Jordan Thompson in the first round. Despite concerns over a lingering hip injury, he returned to Wimbledon as the defending champion and was defeated in the quarter-final by Sam Querrey in five sets.

Murray missed the Canadian Open and the Cincinnati Masters due to his hip injury, which led to him losing his No. 1 ranking to Rafael Nadal. His injury then forced him to withdraw from the US Open and he did not play again in 2017. As a result of his inactivity, his ranking fell sharply to No. 16, his lowest ranking since May 2008. Murray returned to the court to play a charity match against Federer in Glasgow and expressed his hope to return to the tour in Brisbane. The following week, he and Ivan Lendl announced that they had mutually ended their coaching arrangement for a second time.

====2018: Hip surgery, return to tour====
In March, Murray lost his British No. 1 ranking for the first time since 2006, to Kyle Edmund. Later that month, Murray said he was making progress after several days of playing at the Mouratoglou Tennis Academy in Nice after posting pictures of himself practising against Aidan McHugh, a British junior player, on Instagram. He then announced he would play his first ATP tournament since hip surgery at the Rosmalen Grass Court Championships in June, although he later withdrew saying he was not quite ready and wanted to be 100%. He returned at Queen&#x27;s and lost to Nick Kyrgios in the first round in three sets. He was given a wildcard for the Eastbourne International, where he beat Stan Wawrinka in the first round before losing to Kyle Edmund in the second. He withdrew from Wimbledon with a &quot;heavy heart&quot; a day before the tournament, saying it was too soon to play five-set matches. As a result of this withdrawal, he dropped to 839th in the ATP rankings, his newest low ranking since he first entered the ATP rankings on 21 July 2003.

At Washington, a three-set victory over Marius Copil in the third round lasted until just past 3:00 AM local time; Murray wept after the conclusion of the match, overcome with emotion. He then withdrew from the tournament and the Canadian Open the following week to continue his recovery and to focus on the Cincinnati Masters for which he was awarded a wildcard. He lost in the first round to Lucas Pouille in three sets.

Murray made his grand slam return at the US Open where he beat James Duckworth in four sets. However, he was unable to progress further, losing in the second round to Spain&#x27;s Fernando Verdasco in four sets.

He entered the Shenzhen Open as a wildcard and beat Zhizhen Zhang and David Goffin. He lost to Fernando Verdasco in the quarter-finals in straight sets. Murray had been due to play at the China Open the following week, but, after suffering a slight ankle problem, he decided to end his season early to ensure he would be fit for the following year.

====2019: Surgery, first title in two years====
At Brisbane he won his first round match against James Duckworth in straight sets but admitted post-match that he did not know how long he would be able to play top-class tennis. Murray was defeated in the next round by Daniil Medvedev.

On 11 January, at a press conference just before the 2019 Australian Open, an emotional Murray announced that he could possibly retire from professional tennis due to struggling physically for a &quot;long time&quot;, particularly with his hip injury. He said that he had been suffering with hip pain on a daily basis, and that it caused him to struggle with tasks like putting his shoes and socks on. He said that the Australian Open could be his final tournament, stating: &quot;I&#x27;m not sure I can play through the pain for another four or five months&quot;. Active and retired tennis players, including Juan Martín del Potro, Kyle Edmund, Billie Jean King and the other members of the &#x27;Big Four&#x27; paid tribute to Murray upon his announcement.

At the Australian Open Murray lost his opening match against 22nd seed Roberto Bautista Agut in a four-hour, five-setter. At its conclusion, a video montage of tributes featuring other top players Roger Federer, Novak Djokovic, Sloane Stephens and Caroline Wozniacki played in deference to his impending retirement. In his post-match interview, he stated that he was considering a second hip surgery, and had not yet ruled out a return to the sport upon recovering from the operation.

Bob Bryan urged Murray to have the &quot;Birmingham hip resurfacing (BHR)&quot; operation he underwent in August 2018, involving a cobalt-chrome metal cap being placed over the femur with a matching metal cup in the acetabulum (a conservative bone-saving alternative to a traditional Total Hip Replacement). Bryan informed Murray that the BHR would improve his quality of life and may help him return to the professional tennis tour. On 29 January, Murray announced on Instagram that he had undergone hip resurfacing surgery in London and hoped that it would &quot;be the end of my hip pain.&quot; On 7 March, Murray stated in an interview that he was now free of pain in his hip as a result of the surgery and may return to playing competitive tennis, but that he would not rush his comeback.

On 16 May 2019, Murray received his knighthood from Prince Charles at Buckingham Palace, two years after he was awarded the honour.

Murray returned to the professional tennis circuit in June, entering the doubles at Queen&#x27;s Club Championships alongside Feliciano Lopez. They beat top seeds Juan Sebastián Cabal and Robert Farah in straight sets and defending champions John Peers and Henri Kontinen in the semi-finals. They beat Rajeev Ram and Joe Salisbury in the final. Following the win, Murray stated that his &quot;hip felt great&quot; and that &quot;there was no pain.&quot; At Wimbledon men&#x27;s doubles he and Pierre-Hugues Herbert were eliminated in the second round, while Murray and Serena Williams lost in the third round of mixed doubles to Bruno Soares and Nicole Melichar.

In his first singles match since the Australian Open, Murray lost to Richard Gasquet in the first round Cincinnati in straight sets. In the quarter-final of the Cincinnati doubles, Murray and Feliciano López met Jamie Murray and Neal Skupski in only the second match between the siblings in their senior careers; Jamie and Skupski won in three sets to progress, with Andy stating afterwards that he would now concentrate his efforts on returning to the singles tour. At 2019 Winston-Salem Open, he lost to Tennys Sandgren in the first round. Murray played the 2019 Rafa Nadal Open Banc Sabadell Challenger, the first time he had competed on the Challenger Tour since 2005. In the first round of the event, Murray defeated Imran Sibille to record his first singles victory since his hip surgery. He lost to Matteo Viola in the third round.

Murray won the European Open, beating Stan Wawrinka in the final. In November 2019, he represented Great Britain for the first time since 2016, however, he was only able to play one rubber in Great Britain&#x27;s run to the Davis Cup semi-finals.

At the end of November, a television documentary, &quot;Andy Murray: Resurfacing&quot;, was released on the Amazon Prime platform, detailing Murray&#x27;s various attempts to overcome his hip injury.

===2020s===

====2020: First top 10 win in three years====
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, numerous tournaments on the 2020 ATP Tour were either cancelled or rescheduled for later in the year.
Murray&#x27;s first ATP tournament of 2020 was at the Western &amp; Southern Open in August in which he entered as a wildcard. He beat world No. 7 Alexander Zverev in the second round, his first victory over a top-10 player in over three years. He lost his third round match to Milos Raonic in straight sets.

In his first round match at the spectator-less US Open Murray came back from two down to narrowly defeat Yoshihito Nishioka in five sets. In the second round he lost in straight sets to the 15th seed Felix Auger-Aliassime.

He then entered the French Open as a wildcard but was defeated in the first round in straight sets by Stan Wawrinka.

Murray&#x27;s last tournament of the year was the Bett1Hulks Indoors where he received a wildcard and lost in the first round to Fernando Verdasco in straight sets.

====2021: Wimbledon third round====
Murray&#x27;s first tournament of the season was the 2021 Open Sud de France where, as a wildcard, he lost in the first round. In March, he competed at the 2021 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament in Rotterdam as a wildcard where he lost in the second round against Andrey Rublev.

Murray was largely inactive during the next three months due to a groin injury. He returned to singles play as a wildcard at the Queen&#x27;s Club Championships where he lost to Matteo Berrettini in straight sets. At Wimbledon he received a wildcard. He lost in the third round to Denis Shapovalov.

Having withdrawn from singles due to quadriceps strain, at Olympic men&#x27;s doubles Murray and Joe Salisbury reached the quarter-finals beating Nicolas Mahut and Pierre-Hugues Herbert and Kevin Krawietz and Tim Pütz before losing to Marin Čilić and Ivan Dodig.

As a wild card at the 2021 Western &amp; Southern Open, Murray lost to Hubert Hurkacz in the second round. At the 2021 Winston-Salem Open, Murray entered as a wildcard again and won in straight sets against Noah Rubin, before losing to Frances Tiafoe. At the US Open, he lost to Stefanos Tsitsipas in five sets in the first round. The match was controversial, with Murray accusing Tsitsipas of cheating, in reference to an eight-minute bathroom break that was had by Tsitsipas during the match.

Murray reached the quarterfinal of the Moselle Open as a wildcard losing to Hubert Hurkacz. Murray lost as a wildcard in the round of 16 to the 2nd seed and eventual champion Casper Ruud at the 2021 San Diego Open. He received another wildcard for Indian Wells, where he reached the third round and was beaten by Alexander Zverev. He then reached the second round of the European Open as a wildcard after a 3-hour and 45 minute marathon win against Frances Tiafoe. He lost in the second round to Diego Schwartzman in straight sets.
At the Vienna Open, Murray entered as a wildcard and upset world No. 10 Hubert Hurkacz in the first round in three sets to claim his first top 10 victory of the year, but fell in straight sets to Carlos Alcaraz the following round. At the 2021 Stockholm Open, he reached the quarterfinals as a wildcard, defeating World No. 10 Jannik Sinner for his second top 10 win in two weeks and for the season and the 104th in his career.

====2022: First ATP final since 2019====
After a first round loss as a wildcard at the Melbourne Summer Set to Facundo Bagnis, Murray reached the final as a wildcard at the Sydney Tennis Classic, losing to Aslan Karatsev.

At the 2022 Australian Open (as a wildcard) Murray lost in the second round in straight sets to Taro Daniel.

He ended his trial period with new coach Jan de Witt and received a wildcard to play Rotterdam. He lost to Félix Auger-Aliassime in the second round. He also hired Dani Vallverdu as his replacement coach. Murray entered the Qatar Open as a wildcard, and lost to Roberto Bautista Agut 6–0 6–1, being served a bagel for the first time since his loss to Novak Djokovic at the 2015 Miami Open final.

At Dubai as a wildcard, he lost to Jannik Sinner in straight sets. After his stint with Vallverdu ended, Murray re-hired Ivan Lendl as his coach, who he had worked with twice before. At Indian Wells as a wildcard, he beat Taro Daniel in three sets, marking his 700th tour win, but he lost in the second round to Alexander Bublik in straight sets. At Miami as a wildcard, Murray lost in straight sets to world No. 2 Daniil Medvedev in the second round.

At Madrid in April he beat Dominic Thiem and Denis Shapovalov and then lost to Novak Djokovic (their first match in five years). Murray later withdrew from the match due to a stomach illness, giving Djokovic a walkover.

At Stuttgart, Murray won his first match against a top 5 player since 2016 by beating top seed and world No. 5 Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets. He then beat Nick Kyrgios in straight sets to reach the final, where he lost to Matteo Berrettini in three sets. As a result, Murray&#x27;s ranking rose to No. 47, entering the top 50 for the first time since 2018.

At Wimbledon, Murray lost in the second round to 20th seed John Isner. At Hall of Fame Open he reached the quarterfinal before losing to the third seed, Alexander Bublik.

Murray had a first-round loss at the Citi Open to Mikael Ymer, as well as a first-round loss to Taylor Fritz, at the Canadian Open as a wildcard. At Cincinnati, he lost in the second round to Cameron Norrie.

At the 2022 US Open he lost in the third round to Matteo Berrettini.

====2023: Three Challenger titles====
At the 2023 Australian Open, Murray&#x27;s match against Thanasi Kokkinakis lasted 5 hours and 45 minutes, the longest in Murray&#x27;s career up until this point and the second longest in the tournament history. He lost to 24th seed Roberto Bautista Agut in the third round.

He received wildcards for the 2023 Qatar ExxonMobil Open in Doha, in which he reached the final but was defeated by Daniil Medvedev in straight sets, and the 2023 Dubai Tennis Championships equaling the record of 53, for most wildcards received for a player since 1990, of former player Tommy Haas, who retired in 2017. At the Indian Wells Masters and Miami Open, Murray lost in the third and first rounds, respectively.

In his European clay court season, Murray lost in the first rounds at the Monte-Carlo Masters and Madrid Masters. He next played the Aix-en-Provence Challenger in France, where he defeated first seed Tommy Paul in the final in three sets to clinch his first title since 2019. However, he withdrew from the French Open to begin his preparations for the grass season.

Murray began his grass court season with the 2023 Surbiton Trophy Challenger 125 as a wildcard, where he clinched his second title of the season after defeating Jurij Rodionov in the final. His winning streak continued at the 2023 Nottingham Open, another home Challenger 125, where he won the final, beating Arthur Cazaux.

At Wimbledon, he lost in the second round to Stefanos Tsitsipas and at the US Open, he lost at the same stage to Grigor Dimitrov.

====2024: Retirement, coaching Novak Djokovic====
At the 2024 Dubai Tennis Championships he recorded his 500th hardcourt win over Denis Shapovalov.
Murray ruptured ligaments in his left ankle during his third-round defeat to Tomas Machac at the Miami Open in March. He opted against having surgery and returned to action in May at an ATP Challenger event in Bordeaux, France, where he lost his second-round match to Gregoire Barrere in straight sets. He had first-round defeats in both singles and doubles at the French Open.

At Queen&#x27;s where he also received a wildcard, Murray played the 1000th match of his career, with a win over Alexei Popyrin in three sets. He joined Djokovic, Nadal, Fernando Verdasco and Richard Gasquet as the fifth active player to complete the milestone. However, he suffered yet another injury setback as he had on-court treatment to his back and hip before retiring during the first set of his second round match against Jordan Thompson, which ended up being the last professional singles match of his career.

Murray pulled out of the singles event at the 2024 Wimbledon Championships on the day he was supposed to play his first round match against Tomáš Macháč. This was due to the back injury he sustained at Queen&#x27;s. Instead, he played in doubles with brother Jamie Murray and was set to play in the mixed doubles with fellow Brit and former US Open champion Emma Raducanu before the latter withdrew due to a wrist injury, thus making the former his last ever Wimbledon match as a professional. On 23 July 2024, Murray announced that he would retire from active professional tennis after the 2024 Paris Olympics, concluding a career spanning nearly two decades. Subsequently, he withdrew from the singles event in the Olympics, deciding to participate only in the doubles event with Dan Evans. He made it to the quarterfinals before losing to third seeds Americans Taylor Fritz and Tommy Paul and officially ended his career in August 2024.

Since his retirement, Murray has taken up golf and participated in the BTJA Mike Dickson Golf Day in October 2024, where he picked up his first golf trophy.

On November 23, 2024, it was announced via social media that Murray had been hired by his longtime rival Djokovic to serve as his head coach ahead of Djokovic&#x27;s 2025 season.

== Rivalries ==
=== Murray vs. Djokovic ===

Novak Djokovic and Murray met 36 times with Djokovic leading 25–11. Djokovic leads 5–1 on clay, 20–8 on hard courts, and Murray leads 2–0 on grass. The two are almost exactly the same age, with Murray being only a week older than Djokovic. They went to training camp together, and Murray won the first match they ever played as teenagers. The pair met 19 times in finals, with Djokovic leading 11–8. Ten of the finals were at ATP Masters 1000 events, where they are tied at 5–5. They met in seven major finals: The 2011 Australian Open, the 2012 US Open, the 2013 Australian Open, the 2013 Wimbledon Championships, the 2015 Australian Open, the 2016 Australian Open, and the 2016 French Open. Djokovic won in Australia all four times and at the French Open, Murray emerged as the victor at the US Open and Wimbledon.

They also played a nearly five-hour-long semifinal match in the 2012 Australian Open, in which Djokovic won 7–5 in the fifth set after Murray led two sets to one. Murray and Djokovic met again in 2012 at the London 2012 Olympic Games, with Murray winning in straight sets. During the final of the 2012 Shanghai Masters, Murray held five championship points in the second set, however Djokovic saved each of them and went on to win the title, ending Murray&#x27;s 12–match winning streak at the event. The three set matches they played in Rome and Shanghai in 2011 and 2012 respectively were voted the ATP World Tour Match of the Year for each respective season. Due to the tight competition between 2008 and 2013, many saw this as the emerging rivalry. Djokovic went on to dominate the rivalry after the 2013 Wimbledon final, winning 13 of their last 16 matches. In 2016, Murray suffered his fourth loss (his fifth total) in the final of the Australian Open from Djokovic, followed by another defeat in the French Open final, where Djokovic won his first Roland Garros title and completed the Career Grand Slam. Murray and Djokovic met in the final at the year&#x27;s end final of the ATP World Tour Finals for the first time in their rivalry, where the winner would be granted the year-end No. 1 status. Djokovic dropped only one set en route to the final, but lost in straight sets to Murray, who finished the year at No. 1 and became the first British player to achieve this feat.

=== Murray vs. Federer ===
Murray and Roger Federer met 25 times with Federer leading 14–11. Federer leads 12–10 on hard courts and 2–1 on grass, having never met on clay. They met six times at the Grand Slam tournament level, with Federer leading 5–1. After Federer won the first professional match they played, Murray led the first half of the rivalry, with an 8–5 lead in 2010. The second half of the rivalry was dominated by Federer, who leads 9–3 since 2011, and led their overall rivalry since the 2014 ATP World Tour Finals. Federer leads 5–3 in finals, having won each of their Grand Slam final meetings at the 2008 US Open, the 2010 Australian Open, and the 2012 Wimbledon Championships. Murray leads 6–3 in ATP 1000 tournaments and 2–0 in finals. They met five times at the ATP World Tour Finals, with Murray winning in Shanghai in 2008 and Federer coming out victorious in London in 2009, 2010, 2012, and in 2014.

In August 2012, Murray met Federer in the final of the London 2012 Olympics at Wimbledon Centre Court, just four weeks after the 2012 Wimbledon Final, in which Federer had defeated Murray to win his record-tying 7th title at the All-England Club. Murray defeated Federer in straight sets to win the gold medal, denying Federer a Career Golden Slam. In 2013 Murray beat Federer for the first time in a major in the semifinals of the Australian Open, prevailing in five sets after Federer had come back twice from a set down. Their last major meeting was at the 2015 Wimbledon Championships semifinals, where a dominant Federer defeated Murray. Murray is one of only three players to have recorded 10 or more victories over Federer. Their last meeting took place at the 2015 Cincinnati Masters semifinals, with Federer winning the match in two close sets, recording his fifth consecutive victory over Murray.

=== Murray vs. Nadal ===
Murray played against Rafael Nadal on 24 occasions starting in 2007, with Nadal leading 17–7. Nadal leads 7–2 on clay, 3–0 on grass and 7–5 on hard courts. The pair often met at Grand Slam level, with nine out of their 24 meetings coming in the majors, with Nadal leading 7–2 (3–0 at Wimbledon, 2–0 at the French Open, 1–1 at the Australian Open and 1–1 at the US Open). Eight of these nine appearances were at the quarterfinal and semifinal level. They never met in a major final, however, Murray leads 3–1 in ATP finals, with Nadal winning at Indian Wells in 2009 and Murray winning in Rotterdam the same year, Tokyo in 2011, and at Madrid in 2015.

Murray lost three consecutive major semifinals to Nadal in 2011 from the French Open to the US Open. At the semifinal stage of the 2014 French Open, Nadal triumphed in a dominant straight sets win for the loss of just 6 games. In one of their last meetings, Murray beat Nadal for the first time on clay, and the first time in a Masters 1000 final, at the Madrid Open in 2015. Murray fell to Nadal in the semifinals of the 2016 Monte Carlo Masters, despite taking the first set. Three weeks later they met again at the semifinals of the 2016 Madrid Open, with Murray winning.

=== Murray vs. Wawrinka ===
Murray and Stan Wawrinka played 23 times with Murray leading 13–10. Murray leads 9–4 on hard courts and 3–0 on grass courts while Wawrinka leads 6–1 on clay courts. They also met eight times in the majors, with Wawrinka leading 5–3. They contested some close matches and one of their most notable meetings was in the 2009 Wimbledon fourth round, which Murray won in five sets; this was the first men&#x27;s match to be played under the Wimbledon roof, having the latest finish for a Wimbledon match at the time. Wawrinka beat Murray in four sets at the 2010 US Open and ended Murray&#x27;s title defence at the 2013 US Open quarterfinals, but lost as defending champion to Murray in the semifinals of the 2016 French Open.

== Playing style ==

Murray had an all-court game with an emphasis on defensive baseline play, and in 2009 professional tennis coach Paul Annacone stated that Murray &quot;may be the best counterpuncher on tour today.&quot; His strengths included groundstrokes with low error rate, the ability to anticipate and react, and his transition from defence to offence with speed, which enabled him to hit winners from defensive positions. Murray also had one of the best two-handed backhands on the tour, while he primarily used his more passive forehand and a sliced backhand to let opponents play into his defensive game before playing more offensively. Tim Henman stated in 2013 that Murray may have the best lob in the game. Murray&#x27;s tactics often involved passive exchanges from the baseline. He was capable of injecting sudden pace into his groundstrokes to surprise his opponents who were used to the slow rally. Murray was one of the top returners in the game, often able to block back fast serves with his excellent reach and ability to anticipate.

Murray is known for having been one of the most intelligent tacticians on the court, often constructing points. Other strengths in his game included his drop shot and net game. As he played predominantly from the baseline, he usually approached the net to volley when finishing points more quickly. Murray was most proficient on a fast surface, like grass, where he won eight singles titles including the Wimbledon Championships and the 2012 Olympic Gold Medal, although hard courts were his preferred surface. He worked hard since 2008 on improving his clay court game, ultimately winning his first clay titles during 2015 at Munich and Madrid, as well as reaching his first French Open final during 2016. While Murray&#x27;s serve was a major weapon for him, with his first serve reaching speeds of 130 mph or higher on some occasions and winning him many free points, it could become inconsistent when hit under pressure, especially with a more vulnerable and slower second serve. Since the 2011 season, under Ivan Lendl&#x27;s coaching, Murray played a more offensive game and also worked to improve his second serve, forehand, consistency and mental game which were all crucial to his further success.

== Endorsements and equipment ==
In 2009, German manufacturer Adidas and Murray signed a five-year deal worth £10 million. This included wearing their range of tennis shoes. The contract with Adidas allowed Murray to keep his shirt sleeve sponsors Shiatzy Chen, Royal Bank of Scotland and Highland Spring. Before he was signed by Adidas in late 2009, he wore Fred Perry apparel. At the end of their contract Adidas decided not to re-sign with Murray, and he began a four-year partnership with Under Armour in December 2014, reportedly worth $25 million. Murray signed with Castore for the 2019 season which Murray called his last deal before announcing his retirement. Murray used Head rackets, and appeared in advertisements for the brand. In the final few months of his career, Murray switched to a Yonex racket.

== Coaches ==
Murray&#x27;s coach has changed through the years: Leon Smith (1998–2004), Pato Álvarez (2003–2005), Mark Petchey (2005–2006), Brad Gilbert (2006–2007), Miles Maclagan (2007–2010), Àlex Corretja (2010–2011), Ivan Lendl (2011–2014, 2016–2017, 2022–2023), , Jonas Björkman (2015), Jamie Delgado (2016–2021). In 2022 he was briefly coached by Dani Vallverdu; Ivan Lendl was his coach from March 2022 until November 2023.

== Charitable work ==
Murray is a founding member of the Malaria No More UK Leadership Council and helped launch the charity in 2009 with David Beckham. Murray also made a short public service announcement for the charity to help raise awareness and funds. Murray has also taken part in several charity tennis events, including the Rally for Relief events before the 2011 Australian Open.

In June 2013, Murray teamed up with former British No. 1 Tim Henman for a charity doubles match against Murray&#x27;s coach and eight-time grand slam champion Ivan Lendl, and No. 6 Tomáš Berdych. The event named Rally Against Cancer was organised to raise money for Royal Marsden Cancer Charity after his best friend and fellow British player Ross Hutchins was diagnosed with Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma. Following his victory at the tournament, Murray donated his entire prize money pot to the charity.

In June 2014, following the death of Elena Baltacha from liver cancer, Murray featured in an event known as &#x27;Rally for Bally&#x27; to raise money for the Royal Marsden Cancer Charity and the Elena Baltacha Academy of Tennis. Murray was awarded the Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year award for 2014.

== Public image ==
=== National identity ===

Murray identifies himself as &quot;Scottish, but also British&quot;. His national identity has often been commented on by the media. Much of the discussion about Murray&#x27;s national identity began before Wimbledon 2006, when he was quoted as saying he would &quot;support whoever England is playing&quot; at the 2006 World Cup. English ex-tennis player Tim Henman confirmed that the remarks had been made in jest and were only in response to Murray being teased by journalist Des Kelly and Henman about Scotland&#x27;s failure to qualify.

Murray initially refused to endorse either side of the debate in the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence, citing the abuse he had received after his 2006 World Cup comments. Just before the referendum, Murray tweeted a message that was considered by the media to be supportive of independence. He received online abuse for expressing his opinion, including messages that were described as &quot;vile&quot; by Police Scotland. A few days after the vote, in which a 55% majority opposed Scottish independence, Murray said that he did not regret stating his view, but that he would concentrate on his tennis career in the future.

=== Other ===
In 2006, having been given a warning for racket abuse in a match with Kenneth Carlsen, Murray in the post-match interview stated that he and Carlsen had &quot;played like women&quot;. Murray was booed for the remark, but said later that the comment had been intended as a jocular response to what Svetlana Kuznetsova had said at the Hopman Cup. A few months later, Murray was fined for swearing at the umpire during a Davis Cup doubles rubber. Murray refused to shake hands with the umpire at the end of the match.

In 2007, Murray suggested that tennis had a match-fixing problem, stating that everyone knows it goes on, in the wake of the investigation surrounding Nikolay Davydenko.

In a 2015 column for the French sports newspaper &quot;L&#x27;Équipe&quot;, Murray criticised what he described as a double standard applied towards Amélie Mauresmo in her role as Murray&#x27;s coach, highlighting how many observers attributed his poor performances during the early part of her tenure to her appointment, which Murray denied, before pointing out that his previous coaches had not been blamed by the media for other spells of poor form. He also lamented the lack of female coaches in elite tennis, and concluded: &quot;Have I become a feminist? Well, if being a feminist is about fighting so that a woman is treated like a man then yes, I suppose I have&quot;. After BBC host John Inverdale indirectly suggested Murray was the first person to win more than one tennis Olympic gold medal, Murray interjected; &quot;I think Venus and Serena have won about four each.&quot; Murray has also argued that male and female tennis players should receive equal amounts of prize money.

From 2020 to 2021, Murray was critical of the ATP&#x27;s handling of the Alexander Zverev domestic abuse allegations, and urged the ATP to create a formal domestic abuse policy.

==Career statistics==
===Grand Slam performance timeline===

====Grand Slam tournament finals: 11 (3 titles, 8 runner-ups)====
===Year–End Championships performance timeline===
===Year–End Championship finals===

====Singles: 1 (1 title)====
===Olympic medal matches===
====Singles: 2 (2 gold medals)====
====Mixed doubles: 1 (1 silver medal)====
===Records and achievements===

* These records were attained in the Open Era.
* Records in bold indicate peerless achievements.
* Records in &quot;italics&quot; are currently active streaks.



===Professional awards===
* ITF World Champion: 2016.
* ATP Player of the Year: 2016.

== Awards and honours ==

* BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year: 2004
* BBC Sports Personality Team of the Year: 2012, 2015
* Most Titles in an ATP World Tour Season: 6 in 2009, 9 in 2016
* US Open Series Champion: 2010, 2015
* Best ATP World Tour Match of the Year (3): 2010, 2011, 2012
* Officer of the Order of the British Empire: 2013
* Laureus &quot;World Breakthrough of the Year&quot; Award: 2013
* Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Award for Top Scot: 2013
* Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Award for Sport: 2013
* BBC Sports Personality of the Year: 2013, 2015, 2016
* Doctor of the University of Stirling: 2014
* Freeman of Stirling: 2014
* Freeman of Merton: 2014
* Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year: 2014, 2022
* ITF Player of the Year: 2016
* Knight Bachelor: 2017
* 3rd Class Order of Merit of Ukraine: 2022

== See also ==

* 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics gold post boxes
* List of Grand Slam men&#x27;s singles champions
* Open Era tennis records – Men&#x27;s singles

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10125" start="0" end="24" title="Andy Murray" label="Sir Andrew Barron Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="77" end="83" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="123" end="134" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players" label="world No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="164" end="199" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q20806381" start="255" end="259" title="2016 ATP Tour" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q300008" start="275" end="283" title="ATP Tour" label="ATP Tour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="322" end="327" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Tournaments" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q430195" start="336" end="348" title="2012 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2012 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630058" start="350" end="378" title="2013 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2013 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q24487405" start="384" end="412" title="2016 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2016 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q270163" start="449" end="464" title="Tennis at the Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27745092" start="470" end="496" title="2016 ATP World Tour Finals – Singles" label="2016 ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="501" end="513" title="ATP Masters 1000 tournaments" label="Masters 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304541" start="602" end="606" title="Judy Murray" label="Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317820" start="635" end="640" title="Jamie Murray" label="Jamie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="658" end="667" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="766" end="779" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="784" end="796" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="979" end="993" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1030" end="1038" title="Big Three (tennis)#Big Four era" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q581788" start="1317" end="1332" title="Tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q233234" start="1432" end="1445" title="Virginia Wade" label="Virginia Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191087" start="1449" end="1453" title="1977 Wimbledon Championships – Women&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="1557" end="1567" title="Fred Perry" label="Fred Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q422971" start="1571" end="1575" title="1936 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q23747965" start="1702" end="1719" title="Tennis at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2016 Rio Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1882" end="1896" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players#Year-end No. 1 players" label="year-end No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q70884656" start="2110" end="2128" title="2019 European Open – Singles" label="2019 European Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q109317235" start="2194" end="2213" title="Tennis at the 2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Paris Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q586450" start="2607" end="2635" title="Great Britain Davis Cup team" label="Great Britain Davis Cup team"/>
<link wikidata="Q15720803" start="2650" end="2654" title="2015 Davis Cup" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q180872" start="2814" end="2829" title="Amélie Mauresmo" label="Amélie Mauresmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33114" start="2924" end="2936" title="Djokovic–Murray rivalry" label="former rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q124154946" start="2954" end="2974" title="2025 Australian Open" label="2025 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304541" start="3058" end="3069" title="Judy Murray" label="Judy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372775" start="3119" end="3130" title="Roy Erskine" label="Roy Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="3151" end="3161" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192597" start="3206" end="3229" title="Hibernian F.C." label="Hibernian Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="3281" end="3302" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q317820" start="3596" end="3601" title="Jamie Murray" label="Jamie"/>
<link wikidata="Q614314" start="3660" end="3668" title="Dunblane" label="Dunblane"/>
<link wikidata="Q614314" start="3682" end="3705" title="Dunblane Primary School" label="Dunblane Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153159" start="3760" end="3784" title="Dunblane massacre" label="Dunblane school massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q614314" start="4196" end="4216" title="Dunblane High School" label="Dunblane High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="4455" end="4476" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q327361" start="4732" end="4761" title="Schiller International School" label="Schiller International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q429013" start="4902" end="4916" title="Emilio Sánchez" label="Emilio Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q229081" start="4987" end="4994" title="patella" label="patella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187622" start="5306" end="5319" title="Cromlix House" label="Cromlix House"/>
<link wikidata="Q963530" start="5538" end="5560" title="University of Stirling" label="University of Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189495" start="5667" end="5678" title="Nigel Sears" label="Nigel Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265325" start="5775" end="5793" title="Dunblane Cathedral" label="Dunblane Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801326" start="5826" end="5833" title="Oxshott" label="Oxshott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810766" start="5872" end="5883" title="Leatherhead" label="Leatherhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="6153" end="6165" title="LGBT rights" label="LGBT+ rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="6179" end="6196" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="6244" end="6262" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524899" start="6395" end="6405" title="Leon Smith (tennis coach)" label="Leon Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313402" start="6647" end="6658" title="Junior Orange Bowl (tennis)" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377484" start="6790" end="6799" title="Petits As" label="Petits As"/>
<link wikidata="Q33114" start="6877" end="6904" title="Djokovic–Murray rivalry" label="rivalry with Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60289" start="6979" end="6992" title="Mischa Zverev" label="Mischa Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583528" start="7030" end="7054" title="Alexandre Krasnoroutskiy" label="Alexandre Krasnoroutskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q576938" start="7142" end="7149" title="Telford" label="Telford"/>
<link wikidata="Q299345" start="7277" end="7287" title="ATP Challenger Tour" label="Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334786" start="7292" end="7299" title="ITF Men&amp;#x27;s Circuit" label="Futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q864897" start="7349" end="7363" title="quarter-finals" label="quarter-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q299541" start="7371" end="7392" title="Manchester Open" label="Manchester Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="7456" end="7463" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="7518" end="7527" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="7673" end="7683" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="7709" end="7719" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q192661" start="7729" end="7747" title="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga" label="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q738013" start="7814" end="7820" title="Xàtiva" label="Xàtiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="7825" end="7829" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446800" start="7862" end="7876" title="2004 US Open – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="Junior US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="7902" end="7911" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602690" start="7912" end="7954" title="2004 Davis Cup World Group play-offs" label="World Group play-off match against Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779566" start="8035" end="8075" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year Young Personality" label="BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638897" start="8306" end="8310" title="2005 French Open – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076716" start="8329" end="8333" title="2004 Wimbledon Championships – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446800" start="8349" end="8353" title="2004 US Open – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="8617" end="8626" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8680" end="8689" title="Wild card (sports)#Professional tennis" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q299163" start="8741" end="8750" title="Open SEAT" label="Open SEAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q358656" start="8783" end="8794" title="Jan Hernych" label="Jan Hernych"/>
<link wikidata="Q245241" start="9005" end="9016" title="Marin Čilić" label="Marin Čilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585351" start="9019" end="9031" title="Mark Petchey" label="Mark Petchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q299685" start="9081" end="9093" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q367978" start="9118" end="9134" title="Santiago Ventura Bertomeu" label="Santiago Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q53407" start="9218" end="9229" title="Taylor Dent" label="Taylor Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q277802" start="9274" end="9290" title="Thomas Johansson" label="Thomas Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="9438" end="9447" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="9501" end="9509" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="9645" end="9661" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622269" start="9772" end="9777" title="Aptos" label="Aptos"/>
<link wikidata="Q213814" start="9782" end="9802" title="Binghamton, New York" label="Binghamton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="9807" end="9817" title="Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="9856" end="9867" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179364" start="9905" end="9917" title="Andrei Pavel" label="Andrei Pavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="9944" end="9951" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299944" start="10071" end="10085" title="Arnaud Clément" label="Arnaud Clément"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="10199" end="10217" title="Stanislas Wawrinka" label="Stanislas Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q299159" start="10258" end="10271" title="PTT Thailand Open (ATP)" label="Thailand Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="10295" end="10308" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221737" start="10340" end="10350" title="Tim Henman" label="Tim Henman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10382" end="10401" title="2005 Davidoff Swiss Indoors – Singles#Top Half" label="Basel Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834946" start="10518" end="10561" title="BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q715134" start="10741" end="10753" title="Brad Gilbert" label="Brad Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="10759" end="10767" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="10834" end="10846" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="10889" end="10903" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q221737" start="10975" end="10985" title="Tim Henman" label="Tim Henman"/>
<link wikidata="Q335209" start="11038" end="11051" title="Greg Rusedski" label="Greg Rusedski"/>
<link wikidata="Q299377" start="11220" end="11238" title="Juan Ignacio Chela" label="Juan Ignacio Chela"/>
<link wikidata="Q186429" start="11265" end="11277" title="Gaël Monfils" label="Gaël Monfils"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="11488" end="11494" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="11496" end="11502" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="11507" end="11514" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="12099" end="12106" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q595467" start="12114" end="12124" title="Rogers Cup (tennis)" label="Rogers Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q209436" start="12136" end="12151" title="Richard Gasquet" label="Richard Gasquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="12157" end="12167" title="Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="12218" end="12230" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="12563" end="12577" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q314767" start="12582" end="12596" title="Dominik Hrbatý" label="Dominik Hrbatý"/>
<link wikidata="Q299950" start="12627" end="12652" title="Legg Mason Tennis Classic" label="Legg Mason Tennis Classic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12996" end="13011" title="2007 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles#Section 8" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q58359" start="13088" end="13101" title="2007 Sony Ericsson Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Miami Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414976" start="13263" end="13274" title="2007 Qatar Telecom German Open" label="German Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13607" end="13615" title="2007 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles#Section 3" label="US Open."/>
<link wikidata="Q6851472" start="14180" end="14194" title="Miles Maclagan" label="Miles Maclagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q244983" start="14419" end="14434" title="Nicolás Almagro" label="Nicolás Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q209436" start="14607" end="14622" title="Richard Gasquet" label="Richard Gasquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="14794" end="14806" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085281" start="14971" end="14975" title="1997 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="15086" end="15102" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="Beijing Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q313144" start="15207" end="15218" title="Yen-hsun Lu" label="Yen-hsun Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="15981" end="15992" title="ATP World Tour Finals" label="Masters Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121463" start="16238" end="16248" title="2009 Qatar ExxonMobil Open" label="Qatar Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="16252" end="16256" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q570502" start="16321" end="16336" title="2009 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="16384" end="16401" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q287428" start="16414" end="16423" title="2009 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q796837" start="16500" end="16512" title="2009 Indian Wells Masters" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q191736" start="16605" end="16622" title="Nikolay Davydenko" label="Nikolay Davydenko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16626" end="16637" title="2009 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters – Singles#Finals" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735266" start="16771" end="16775" title="2009 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q294888" start="16789" end="16800" title="Juan Mónaco" label="Juan Mónaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010016" start="16839" end="16845" title="2009 Mutua Madrileña Madrid Open" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180535" start="16857" end="16878" title="Juan Martín del Potro" label="Juan Martín del Potro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="16963" end="16971" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17063" end="17074" title="2009 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles#Finals" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q208517" start="17096" end="17113" title="Fernando González" label="Fernando González"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="17170" end="17175" title="Lawn Tennis" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910482" start="17179" end="17191" title="2009 AEGON Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q53333" start="17283" end="17294" title="James Blake (tennis)" label="James Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316894" start="17436" end="17452" title="retractable roof" label="retractable roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606228" start="17646" end="17654" title="2009 Rogers Masters – Singles" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q380557" start="17797" end="17804" title="2009 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="17853" end="17871" title="Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779869" start="18162" end="18170" title="2009 Valencia Open 500" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q300019" start="18293" end="18310" title="2009 ATP World Tour Finals" label="World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q974505" start="18408" end="18424" title="BNP Paribas Open" label="BNP Paribas Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q192801" start="18479" end="18494" title="Robin Söderling" label="Robin Söderling"/>
<link wikidata="Q541770" start="18548" end="18571" title="2010 Sony Ericsson Open" label="2010 Sony Ericsson Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53422" start="18575" end="18585" title="Mardy Fish" label="Mardy Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q459528" start="18684" end="18709" title="Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters" label="Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q77149" start="18713" end="18734" title="Philipp Kohlschreiber" label="Philipp Kohlschreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q552518" start="18743" end="18756" title="Ross Hutchins" label="Ross Hutchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156604" start="18784" end="18798" title="Bryan brothers" label="Bryan brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="18946" end="18958" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q248438" start="18967" end="18978" title="2010 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193665" start="19007" end="19020" title="Tomáš Berdych" label="Tomáš Berdych"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367743" start="19045" end="19051" title="2010 Aegon Championships" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q46308" start="19339" end="19352" title="Àlex Corretja" label="Àlex Corretja"/>
<link wikidata="Q778025" start="19358" end="19378" title="2010 Farmers Classic" label="2010 Farmers Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q54538" start="19408" end="19419" title="Sam Querrey" label="Sam Querrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="19483" end="19495" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q595467" start="19518" end="19534" title="Rogers Cup (tennis)" label="Canadian Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576962" start="19634" end="19644" title="2010 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters and Women&amp;#x27;s Open" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q568472" start="20095" end="20102" title="2010 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073414" start="20211" end="20221" title="2010 China Open (tennis)" label="China Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q261095" start="20279" end="20292" title="Ivan Ljubičić" label="Ivan Ljubičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q674481" start="20314" end="20336" title="2010 Shanghai Rolex Masters" label="Shanghai Rolex Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576166" start="20424" end="20432" title="2010 Valencia Open 500" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312554" start="20570" end="20585" title="Mahesh Bhupathi" label="Mahesh Bhupathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q221359" start="20590" end="20600" title="Max Mirnyi" label="Max Mirnyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q282711" start="20755" end="20774" title="2010 BNP Paribas Masters" label="BNP Paribas Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q300022" start="20820" end="20831" title="2010 ATP World Tour Finals" label="Tour finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q676458" start="21161" end="21176" title="2011 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q287475" start="21271" end="21280" title="2011 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207084" start="21301" end="21317" title="Marcos Baghdatis" label="Marcos Baghdatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q796844" start="21497" end="21509" title="2011 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460570" start="21514" end="21519" title="2011 Sony Ericsson Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q459528" start="21596" end="21607" title="Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175037" start="21728" end="21737" title="2011 Barcelona Open Banco Sabadell" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161519" start="21795" end="21822" title="Madrid Open (tennis)" label="Mutua Madrileña Madrid Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="21862" end="21874" title="Rome Masters" label="Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q681986" start="21917" end="21928" title="2011 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q751102" start="22084" end="22093" title="2011 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q326333" start="22298" end="22313" title="2011 Rogers Cup" label="2011 Rogers Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q299956" start="22370" end="22384" title="Kevin Anderson (tennis)" label="Kevin Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577387" start="22397" end="22429" title="2011 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="2011 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q325307" start="22481" end="22488" title="2011 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q441037" start="22570" end="22581" title="Robin Haase" label="Robin Haase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020630" start="22786" end="22799" title="2011 PTT Thailand Open – Singles" label="Thailand Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052659" start="22808" end="22818" title="2011 Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships – Singles" label="Japan Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q155724" start="23084" end="23100" title="2011 Shanghai Rolex Masters – Singles" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="23175" end="23196" title="ATP World Tour Finals" label="ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="23463" end="23473" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q674874" start="23513" end="23521" title="2012 Brisbane International" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q311906" start="23530" end="23549" title="Alexandr Dolgopolov" label="Alexandr Dolgopolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q223549" start="23614" end="23627" title="Jürgen Melzer" label="Jürgen Melzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q77180" start="23632" end="23650" title="Philipp Petzschner" label="Philipp Petzschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q782695" start="23722" end="23742" title="2012 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2012 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299409" start="23816" end="23821" title="Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q974505" start="23930" end="23946" title="BNP Paribas Open" label="BNP Paribas Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="23977" end="23990" title="Miami Masters" label="Miami Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076612" start="24126" end="24138" title="2012 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q284329" start="24182" end="24193" title="2012 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299685" start="24290" end="24302" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q317974" start="24313" end="24326" title="Nicolas Mahut" label="Nicolas Mahut"/>
<link wikidata="Q753300" start="24331" end="24340" title="2012 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192661" start="24566" end="24584" title="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga" label="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q768781" start="24691" end="24703" title="Bunny Austin" label="Bunny Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30822" start="24808" end="24835" title="Tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="London 2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q146560" start="24886" end="24893" title="Austria at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q457476" start="24913" end="24927" title="Alexander Peya" label="Alexander Peya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10120" start="24977" end="24989" title="Laura Robson (tennis)" label="Laura Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q147408" start="25015" end="25025" title="Belarus at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10118" start="25037" end="25054" title="Victoria Azarenka" label="Victoria Azarenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q710611" start="25297" end="25311" title="Josiah Ritchie" label="Josiah Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q919270" start="25349" end="25359" title="2012 Rogers Cup – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Rogers Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q176577" start="25400" end="25413" title="Jérémy Chardy" label="Jérémy Chardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068579" start="25417" end="25427" title="2012 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q741560" start="25450" end="25457" title="2012 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q312343" start="25467" end="25479" title="Milos Raonic" label="Milos Raonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q465911" start="25930" end="25943" title="Harold Mahony" label="Harold Mahony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673851" start="26195" end="26207" title="1988 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1988 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26267" end="26313" title="Longest tennis match records#Men 4" label="longest final in the tournament&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627110" start="26344" end="26349" title="2012 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747134" start="26448" end="26456" title="Big Three (tennis)" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q866097" start="26574" end="26584" title="2012 Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships – Singles" label="Japan Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929732" start="26623" end="26630" title="2012 Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships – Doubles" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q296282" start="26686" end="26698" title="Leander Paes" label="Leander Paes"/>
<link wikidata="Q309395" start="26703" end="26717" title="Radek Štěpánek" label="Radek Štěpánek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572056" start="27096" end="27130" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671" start="27170" end="27178" title="Mo Farah" label="Mo Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="27284" end="27326" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629670" start="27340" end="27361" title="2013 New Year Honours" label="2013 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153543" start="27449" end="27457" title="2013 Brisbane International – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q337681" start="27466" end="27481" title="Grigor Dimitrov" label="Grigor Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783503" start="27520" end="27535" title="2013 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747134" start="27665" end="27711" title="Big Three (tennis)" label="Big Four (Federer, Nadal, Djokovic and Murray)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="27937" end="27950" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297939" start="28051" end="28056" title="2013 Sony Open Tennis" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q9327064" start="28465" end="28476" title="2013 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters" label="Monte-Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="28599" end="28603" title="Italian Open (tennis)" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q314348" start="28678" end="28695" title="Marcel Granollers" label="Marcel Granollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153409" start="28788" end="28799" title="2013 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415317" start="28881" end="28893" title="2013 Aegon Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q299685" start="28983" end="29000" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q29063" start="29337" end="29351" title="Jerzy Janowicz" label="Jerzy Janowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629980" start="29828" end="29835" title="2013 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q586450" start="30126" end="30154" title="Great Britain Davis Cup team" label="Great Britain Davis Cup team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3691170" start="30168" end="30188" title="2013 Davis Cup World Group play-offs" label="World Group Play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276241" start="30209" end="30216" title="Croatia Davis Cup team" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905846" start="30248" end="30259" title="Borna Ćorić" label="Borna Ćorić"/>
<link wikidata="Q261064" start="30285" end="30298" title="Colin Fleming" label="Colin Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588571" start="30319" end="30329" title="Mate Pavić" label="Mate Pavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q14921122" start="30398" end="30409" title="2014 Davis Cup World Group" label="World Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000910" start="30731" end="30770" title="2013 BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award" label="2013 BBC Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q15255901" start="30827" end="30832" title="2014 Qatar ExxonMobil Open" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198943" start="30845" end="30863" title="Mousa Shanan Zayed" label="Mousa Shanan Zayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630192" start="31036" end="31051" title="2014 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31309" end="31330" title="2014 Davis Cup World Group#United States vs. Great Britain" label="Davis Cup World Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q586450" start="31343" end="31356" title="Great Britain Davis Cup team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54694" start="31414" end="31426" title="Donald Young (tennis)" label="Donald Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637428" start="31548" end="31557" title="2014 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732344" start="31591" end="31603" title="2014 Abierto Mexicano Telcel" label="Mexican Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31661" end="31673" title="2014 BNP Paribas Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles#Section 2" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q455297" start="31743" end="31758" title="Jonathan Marray" label="Jonathan Marray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31784" end="31791" title="2014 BNP Paribas Open – Men&amp;#x27;s doubles#Bottom half" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q457476" start="31795" end="31809" title="Alexander Peya" label="Alexander Peya"/>
<link wikidata="Q286185" start="31814" end="31826" title="Bruno Soares" label="Bruno Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q15847980" start="31867" end="31872" title="2014 Miami Masters" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31928" end="31952" title="2014 Davis Cup World Group#Italy vs. Great Britain" label="Davis Cup quarter-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q319572" start="31976" end="31989" title="Andreas Seppi" label="Andreas Seppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q251980" start="32043" end="32056" title="Fabio Fognini" label="Fabio Fognini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16660303" start="32126" end="32132" title="2014 Mutua Madrid Open" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q232680" start="32219" end="32233" title="Elena Baltacha" label="Elena Baltacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q357335" start="32261" end="32277" title="Santiago Giraldo" label="Santiago Giraldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="32339" end="32343" title="Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q15700964" start="32454" end="32465" title="2014 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="32754" end="32765" title="French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q180872" start="32935" end="32950" title="Amélie Mauresmo" label="Amélie Mauresmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435005" start="33452" end="33465" title="2014 Rogers Cup" label="Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486256" start="33470" end="33488" title="2014 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15851911" start="33696" end="33708" title="2014 US Open (tennis)" label="2014 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="33720" end="33734" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18066003" start="34020" end="34033" title="2014 ATP Shenzhen Open" label="Shenzhen Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986440" start="34315" end="34322" title="2014 China Open (tennis)" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127934" start="34429" end="34445" title="2014 Shanghai Rolex Masters" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125591" start="34489" end="34495" title="2014 Erste Bank Open" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q299914" start="34640" end="34648" title="Valencia Open 500" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207205" start="34867" end="34880" title="2014 BNP Paribas Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15781253" start="35060" end="35081" title="2014 ATP World Tour Finals" label="ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q311222" start="35128" end="35141" title="Kei Nishikori" label="Kei Nishikori"/>
<link wikidata="Q723213" start="35344" end="35362" title="2007 Miami Masters" label="2007 Miami Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218962" start="35484" end="35498" title="Daniel Vallverdu" label="Dani Vallverdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17482052" start="35582" end="35597" title="2015 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720084" start="35606" end="35618" title="Nick Kyrgios" label="Nick Kyrgios"/>
<link wikidata="Q18981416" start="35905" end="35914" title="2015 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament – Singles" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059455" start="35969" end="35974" title="2015 Dubai Tennis Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q19162440" start="36030" end="36051" title="2015 Davis Cup World Group" label="Davis Cup World Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337785" start="36055" end="36062" title="Commonwealth Arena and Sir Chris Hoy Velodrome" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389353" start="36075" end="36088" title="United States Davis Cup team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q53566" start="36138" end="36148" title="John Isner" label="John Isner"/>
<link wikidata="Q586450" start="36159" end="36172" title="Great Britain Davis Cup team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q19505534" start="36252" end="36264" title="2015 BNP Paribas Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q221737" start="36277" end="36287" title="Tim Henman" label="Tim Henman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702377" start="36494" end="36499" title="2015 Miami Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q310380" start="36591" end="36605" title="Jonas Björkman" label="Jonas Björkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19815545" start="36719" end="36732" title="2015 BMW Open" label="2015 BMW Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928786" start="36799" end="36813" title="Buster Mottram" label="Buster Mottram"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702407" start="36863" end="36869" title="2015 Mutua Madrid Open" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17621972" start="37090" end="37102" title="2015 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868596" start="37180" end="37191" title="2015 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081029" start="37456" end="37484" title="2015 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2015 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q575550" start="37696" end="37702" title="France Davis Cup team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647046" start="37993" end="38002" title="2015 Citi Open" label="Citi Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q337763" start="38046" end="38065" title="Teymuraz Gabashvili" label="Teymuraz Gabashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q298542" start="38147" end="38160" title="Daniel Nestor" label="Daniel Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q511986" start="38209" end="38222" title="Rohan Bopanna" label="Rohan Bopanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074323" start="38227" end="38240" title="Florin Mergea" label="Florin Mergea"/>
<link wikidata="Q20763633" start="38269" end="38277" title="2015 Rogers Cup – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q559692" start="38629" end="38639" title="John Peers" label="John Peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20776609" start="38748" end="38758" title="2015 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q373522" start="38985" end="39001" title="Adrian Mannarino" label="Adrian Mannarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q312345" start="39126" end="39141" title="Thomaz Bellucci" label="Thomaz Bellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377557" start="39341" end="39357" title="2013 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2013 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q837819" start="39410" end="39422" title="2010 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2010 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19162440" start="39468" end="39489" title="2015 Davis Cup World Group" label="Davis Cup World Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784554" start="39564" end="39582" title="Thanasi Kokkinakis" label="Thanasi Kokkinakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q288326" start="39587" end="39600" title="Bernard Tomic" label="Bernard Tomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284978" start="39652" end="39661" title="Sam Groth" label="Sam Groth"/>
<link wikidata="Q586450" start="39702" end="39715" title="Great Britain Davis Cup team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39723" end="39738" title="2015 Davis Cup World Group#Belgium vs. Great Britain" label="Davis Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q728085" start="39840" end="39856" title="Shanghai Masters (tennis)" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21282438" start="39920" end="39933" title="2015 BNP Paribas Masters – Singles" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="40112" end="40139" title="ATP World Tour Masters 1000" label="ATP World Tour Masters 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="40281" end="40302" title="World Tour Finals" label="ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q718187" start="40567" end="40582" title="Ruben Bemelmans" label="Ruben Bemelmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q164531" start="40684" end="40696" title="Steve Darcis" label="Steve Darcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666732" start="40820" end="40824" title="1936 Davis Cup" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="41010" end="41022" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16475" start="41027" end="41040" title="Mats Wilander" label="Mats Wilander"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="41098" end="41113" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="41135" end="41150" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q312343" start="41165" end="41177" title="Milos Raonic" label="Milos Raonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="41217" end="41231" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="41282" end="41290" title="Open Era (tennis)" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="41298" end="41308" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q966361" start="41429" end="41442" title="Jamie Delgado" label="Jamie Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807306" start="41488" end="41502" title="2016 Davis Cup" label="2016 Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15714673" start="41526" end="41537" title="Taro Daniel" label="Taro Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078192" start="41579" end="41604" title="2016 Indian Wells Masters" label="2016 Indian Wells Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q367654" start="41616" end="41633" title="Federico Delbonis" label="Federico Delbonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019041" start="41657" end="41662" title="2016 Miami Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q23701712" start="41714" end="41725" title="2016 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23940225" start="41825" end="41847" title="2016 Mutua Madrid Open" label="2016 Mutua Madrid Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925101" start="42203" end="42240" title="2016 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="2016 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q233234" start="42413" end="42426" title="Virginia Wade" label="Virginia Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q552626" start="42484" end="42505" title="George Patrick Hughes" label="George Patrick Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690923" start="42518" end="42529" title="2016 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q24262960" start="42888" end="42900" title="2016 Aegon Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q299685" start="42985" end="43016" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127632" start="43025" end="43053" title="2016 Wimbledon Championships" label="2016 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="43298" end="43307" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23747965" start="43429" end="43446" title="Tennis at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Rio Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q336862" start="43943" end="43954" title="Guido Pella" label="Guido Pella"/>
<link wikidata="Q27062158" start="44028" end="44038" title="2016 China Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="China Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q27138131" start="44157" end="44165" title="2016 Shanghai Rolex Masters – Singles" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q966542" start="44176" end="44197" title="Roberto Bautista Agut" label="Roberto Bautista Agut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44538" end="44585" title="Tennis players with most titles in the Open Era#Men" label="all-time list of singles titles in the Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="44626" end="44639" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27229738" start="44661" end="44674" title="2016 BNP Paribas Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q245241" start="44839" end="44850" title="Marin Cilic" label="Marin Cilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27745092" start="45221" end="45255" title="2016 ATP World Tour Finals – Singles" label="final of the ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45340" end="45354" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players#Year-end No. 1 players" label="year-end No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q223041" start="45544" end="45575" title="International Tennis Federation" label="International Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q693708" start="45614" end="45648" title="ITF World Champions" label="2016 ITF men&amp;#x27;s world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="45743" end="45751" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012748" start="45764" end="45780" title="New Year Honours" label="New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q28091965" start="45898" end="45908" title="2017 Qatar ExxonMobil Open – Singles" label="Qatar Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q22077628" start="46000" end="46020" title="2017 Australian Open" label="2017 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q60289" start="46057" end="46070" title="Mischa Zverev" label="Mischa Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q299409" start="46089" end="46094" title="Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="46143" end="46160" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q974505" start="46362" end="46382" title="Indian Wells Masters" label="Indian Wells Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q440531" start="46386" end="46400" title="Vasek Pospisil" label="Vasek Pospisil"/>
<link wikidata="Q459528" start="46483" end="46502" title="Monte-Carlo Masters" label="Monte-Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q459158" start="46546" end="46566" title="Albert Ramos Viñolas" label="Albert Ramos-Vinolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514597" start="46588" end="46597" title="2017 Barcelona Open Banco Sabadell – Singles" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q88762" start="46621" end="46634" title="Dominic Thiem" label="Dominic Thiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q29789914" start="46704" end="46710" title="2017 Mutua Madrid Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q251980" start="46719" end="46732" title="Fabio Fognini" label="Fabio Fognini"/>
<link wikidata="Q29905336" start="46752" end="46756" title="2017 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24387175" start="46765" end="46781" title="2017 French Open" label="2017 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q311222" start="46805" end="46818" title="Kei Nishikori" label="Kei Nishikori"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="46864" end="46877" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q30274958" start="46983" end="47002" title="Grenfell Tower fire" label="Grenfell Tower fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16219277" start="47048" end="47063" title="Jordan Thompson (tennis)" label="Jordan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q595467" start="47267" end="47280" title="Canadian Open (tennis)" label="Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="47289" end="47307" title="Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="47376" end="47388" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836049" start="47438" end="47445" title="2017 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="47655" end="47662" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="47711" end="47719" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451141" start="47969" end="47980" title="Kyle Edmund" label="Kyle Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q125270187" start="48072" end="48098" title="Mouratoglou Tennis Academy" label="Mouratoglou Tennis Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="48102" end="48106" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q107275787" start="48160" end="48172" title="Aidan McHugh" label="Aidan McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q300031" start="48295" end="48329" title="Rosmalen Grass Court Championships" label="Rosmalen Grass Court Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q299685" start="48434" end="48446" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q55193784" start="48538" end="48562" title="2018 Eastbourne International – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Eastbourne International"/>
<link wikidata="Q30085309" start="48672" end="48681" title="2018 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q299950" start="48948" end="48958" title="Washington Open (tennis)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q523725" start="48985" end="48997" title="Marius Copil" label="Marius Copil"/>
<link wikidata="Q595467" start="49175" end="49188" title="Canadian Open (tennis)" label="Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="49253" end="49271" title="Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403768" start="49339" end="49352" title="Lucas Pouille" label="Lucas Pouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q50391517" start="49410" end="49417" title="2018 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336011" start="49432" end="49447" title="James Duckworth (tennis)" label="James Duckworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="49549" end="49566" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q15781252" start="49597" end="49610" title="ATP Shenzhen Open" label="Shenzhen Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q21623382" start="49634" end="49647" title="Zhizhen Zhang" label="Zhizhen Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19406" start="49652" end="49664" title="David Goffin" label="David Goffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="49677" end="49694" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q56713684" start="49770" end="49780" title="2018 China Open (tennis)" label="China Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q58880596" start="49983" end="49991" title="2019 Brisbane International" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336011" start="50029" end="50044" title="James Duckworth (tennis)" label="James Duckworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622022" start="50200" end="50215" title="Daniil Medvedev" label="Daniil Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q48213295" start="50271" end="50291" title="2019 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2019 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q54527" start="50865" end="50881" title="Billie Jean King" label="Billie Jean King"/>
<link wikidata="Q966542" start="51050" end="51071" title="Roberto Bautista Agut" label="Roberto Bautista Agut"/>
<link wikidata="Q54670" start="51207" end="51222" title="Sloane Stephens" label="Sloane Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q30767" start="51227" end="51245" title="Caroline Wozniacki" label="Caroline Wozniacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q53340" start="51465" end="51474" title="Bob Bryan" label="Bob Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157158" start="51506" end="51538" title="Birmingham Hip Resurfacing" label="Birmingham hip resurfacing (BHR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="52312" end="52326" title="Prince Charles" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="52330" end="52347" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q64689286" start="52477" end="52508" title="2019 Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships – Doubles" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q223695" start="52519" end="52534" title="Feliciano Lopez" label="Feliciano Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q921488" start="52556" end="52576" title="Juan Sebastián Cabal" label="Juan Sebastián Cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355458" start="52581" end="52593" title="Robert Farah (tennis)" label="Robert Farah"/>
<link wikidata="Q559692" start="52635" end="52645" title="John Peers" label="John Peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13538" start="52650" end="52664" title="Henri Kontinen" label="Henri Kontinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q555660" start="52695" end="52705" title="Rajeev Ram" label="Rajeev Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q18580128" start="52710" end="52723" title="Joe Salisbury" label="Joe Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q64859037" start="52850" end="52878" title="2019 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s doubles" label="Wimbledon men&amp;#x27;s doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093033" start="52886" end="52907" title="Pierre-Hugues Herbert" label="Pierre-Hugues Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q11459" start="52962" end="52977" title="Serena Williams" label="Serena Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q65010395" start="53005" end="53018" title="2019 Wimbledon Championships – Mixed doubles" label="mixed doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q286185" start="53022" end="53034" title="Bruno Soares" label="Bruno Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216368" start="53039" end="53054" title="Nicole Melichar" label="Nicole Melichar"/>
<link wikidata="Q209436" start="53126" end="53141" title="Richard Gasquet" label="Richard Gasquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q66363084" start="53161" end="53171" title="2019 Western and Southern Open Men&amp;#x27;s Singles" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q14558117" start="53286" end="53298" title="Neal Skupski" label="Neal Skupski"/>
<link wikidata="Q66385106" start="53527" end="53550" title="2019 Winston-Salem Open" label="2019 Winston-Salem Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700510" start="53563" end="53578" title="Tennys Sandgren" label="Tennys Sandgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q66817507" start="53617" end="53651" title="2019 Rafa Nadal Open Banc Sabadell" label="2019 Rafa Nadal Open Banc Sabadell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460787" start="53863" end="53875" title="Matteo Viola" label="Matteo Viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q23039164" start="53912" end="53925" title="European Open (tennis)" label="European Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="53935" end="53948" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="54253" end="54265" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="54416" end="54433" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62083037" start="54463" end="54476" title="2020 ATP Tour" label="2020 ATP Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q97959676" start="54591" end="54618" title="2020 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="Western &amp;amp; Southern Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="54684" end="54700" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q312343" start="54815" end="54827" title="Milos Raonic" label="Milos Raonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66399443" start="54894" end="54901" title="2020 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735453" start="54952" end="54970" title="Yoshihito Nishioka" label="Yoshihito Nishioka"/>
<link wikidata="Q20752045" start="55047" end="55068" title="Felix Auger-Aliassime" label="Felix Auger-Aliassime"/>
<link wikidata="Q63367923" start="55091" end="55102" title="2020 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="55173" end="55186" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q100293282" start="55239" end="55257" title="2020 Bett1Hulks Indoors – Singles" label="Bett1Hulks Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="55318" end="55335" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q105410003" start="55444" end="55467" title="2021 Open Sud de France" label="2021 Open Sud de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q105438747" start="55547" end="55584" title="2021 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="2021 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211771" start="55799" end="55830" title="2021 Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships – Singles" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918446" start="55848" end="55865" title="Matteo Berrettini" label="Matteo Berrettini"/>
<link wikidata="Q92032464" start="55887" end="55896" title="2021 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979382" start="55951" end="55967" title="Denis Shapovalov" label="Denis Shapovalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q65242340" start="56029" end="56055" title="Tennis at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s doubles" label="Olympic men&amp;#x27;s doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18580128" start="56067" end="56080" title="Joe Salisbury" label="Joe Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q317974" start="56116" end="56129" title="Nicolas Mahut" label="Nicolas Mahut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093033" start="56134" end="56155" title="Pierre-Hugues Herbert" label="Pierre-Hugues Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396729" start="56160" end="56174" title="Kevin Krawietz" label="Kevin Krawietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133598" start="56179" end="56187" title="Tim Pütz" label="Tim Pütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q245241" start="56205" end="56216" title="Marin Čilić" label="Marin Čilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q324515" start="56221" end="56231" title="Ivan Dodig" label="Ivan Dodig"/>
<link wikidata="Q108028695" start="56256" end="56288" title="2021 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="2021 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927958" start="56305" end="56319" title="Hubert Hurkacz" label="Hubert Hurkacz"/>
<link wikidata="Q108139021" start="56348" end="56371" title="2021 Winston-Salem Open" label="2021 Winston-Salem Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581428" start="56441" end="56451" title="Noah Rubin (tennis)" label="Noah Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305299" start="56470" end="56484" title="Frances Tiafoe" label="Frances Tiafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q98811685" start="56493" end="56500" title="2021 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q24450982" start="56513" end="56531" title="Stefanos Tsitsipas" label="Stefanos Tsitsipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q299582" start="56769" end="56781" title="Moselle Open" label="Moselle Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927958" start="56806" end="56820" title="Hubert Hurkacz" label="Hubert Hurkacz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810082" start="56905" end="56916" title="Casper Ruud" label="Casper Ruud"/>
<link wikidata="Q108581940" start="56924" end="56943" title="2021 San Diego Open" label="2021 San Diego Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q89357548" start="56978" end="56990" title="2021 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="57043" end="57059" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q108841295" start="57101" end="57114" title="2021 European Open" label="European Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305299" start="57179" end="57193" title="Frances Tiafoe" label="Frances Tiafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274812" start="57226" end="57243" title="Diego Schwartzman" label="Diego Schwartzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q109124061" start="57269" end="57280" title="2021 Erste Bank Open – Singles" label="Vienna Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927958" start="57334" end="57348" title="Hubert Hurkacz" label="Hubert Hurkacz"/>
<link wikidata="Q85518537" start="57458" end="57472" title="Carlos Alcaraz" label="Carlos Alcaraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563797" start="57501" end="57520" title="2021 Stockholm Open" label="2021 Stockholm Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q54812588" start="57589" end="57602" title="Jannik Sinner" label="Jannik Sinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q110382053" start="57778" end="57798" title="2022 Melbourne Summer Set – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Melbourne Summer Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391764" start="57802" end="57816" title="Facundo Bagnis" label="Facundo Bagnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110483248" start="57864" end="57885" title="2022 Sydney Tennis Classic – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Sydney Tennis Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546813" start="57897" end="57911" title="Aslan Karatsev" label="Aslan Karatsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q105404832" start="57921" end="57941" title="2022 Australian Open" label="2022 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q15714673" start="58010" end="58021" title="Taro Daniel" label="Taro Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q299701" start="58109" end="58118" title="Rotterdam Open" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20752045" start="58131" end="58152" title="Félix Auger-Aliassime" label="Félix Auger-Aliassime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218962" start="58188" end="58202" title="Dani Vallverdu" label="Dani Vallverdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q110930988" start="58248" end="58258" title="2022 Qatar ExxonMobil Open – Singles" label="Qatar Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q966542" start="58286" end="58307" title="Roberto Bautista Agut" label="Roberto Bautista Agut"/>
<link wikidata="Q30337019" start="58332" end="58337" title="Bagel (tennis)" label="bagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="58375" end="58389" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58397" end="58418" title="2015 Miami Open - Men&amp;#x27;s singles#Finals" label="2015 Miami Open final"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664340" start="58424" end="58429" title="2022 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q54812588" start="58456" end="58469" title="Jannik Sinner" label="Jannik Sinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="58542" end="58552" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q111065970" start="58607" end="58619" title="2022 BNP Paribas Open - Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q111081606" start="58771" end="58776" title="2022 Miami Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622022" start="58836" end="58851" title="Daniil Medvedev" label="Daniil Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161519" start="58877" end="58883" title="Madrid Open (tennis)" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q88762" start="58901" end="58914" title="Dominic Thiem" label="Dominic Thiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979382" start="58919" end="58935" title="Denis Shapovalov" label="Denis Shapovalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="58953" end="58967" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112241205" start="59098" end="59107" title="2022 BOSS Open - Singles" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q27745092" start="59165" end="59169" title="2016 ATP World Tour Finals – Singles" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q24450982" start="59206" end="59224" title="Stefanos Tsitsipas" label="Stefanos Tsitsipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720084" start="59256" end="59268" title="Nick Kyrgios" label="Nick Kyrgios"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918446" start="59323" end="59340" title="Matteo Berrettini" label="Matteo Berrettini"/>
<link wikidata="Q107301079" start="59462" end="59471" title="2022 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53566" start="59518" end="59528" title="John Isner" label="John Isner"/>
<link wikidata="Q299622" start="59533" end="59550" title="Hall of Fame Open" label="Hall of Fame Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q113352927" start="59668" end="59677" title="2022 Citi Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Citi Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q20788534" start="59681" end="59692" title="Mikael Ymer" label="Mikael Ymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17660516" start="59727" end="59739" title="Taylor Fritz" label="Taylor Fritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468239" start="59748" end="59761" title="2022 National Bank Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q113163457" start="59780" end="59790" title="2022 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q23668736" start="59823" end="59837" title="Cameron Norrie" label="Cameron Norrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q108454403" start="59847" end="59859" title="2022 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2022 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918446" start="59890" end="59907" title="Matteo Berrettini" label="Matteo Berrettini"/>
<link wikidata="Q110487798" start="59955" end="59975" title="2023 Australian Open - Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2023 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784554" start="60005" end="60023" title="Thanasi Kokkinakis" label="Thanasi Kokkinakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q966542" start="60182" end="60203" title="Roberto Bautista Agut" label="Roberto Bautista Agut"/>
<link wikidata="Q116729947" start="60255" end="60281" title="2023 Qatar ExxonMobil Open" label="2023 Qatar ExxonMobil Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q111441131" start="60383" end="60414" title="2023 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="2023 Dubai Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="60512" end="60522" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q974505" start="60552" end="60572" title="Indian Wells Masters" label="Indian Wells Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q111368027" start="60577" end="60587" title="2023 Miami Open" label="Miami Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q459528" start="60721" end="60740" title="Monte-Carlo Masters" label="Monte-Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161519" start="60745" end="60759" title="Madrid Open (tennis)" label="Madrid Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q117751474" start="60780" end="60806" title="2023 Open Aix Provence" label="Aix-en-Provence Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050871" start="60847" end="60857" title="Tommy Paul (tennis)" label="Tommy Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="60953" end="60964" title="French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q118719870" start="61059" end="61079" title="2023 Surbiton Trophy" label="2023 Surbiton Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30148749" start="61175" end="61189" title="Jurij Rodionov" label="Jurij Rodionov"/>
<link wikidata="Q118611129" start="61240" end="61260" title="2023 Nottingham Open" label="2023 Nottingham Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q85626140" start="61323" end="61336" title="Arthur Cazaux" label="Arthur Cazaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q113432321" start="61342" end="61351" title="2023 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24450982" start="61384" end="61402" title="Stefanos Tsitsipas" label="Stefanos Tsitsipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q114750867" start="61414" end="61421" title="2023 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q337681" start="61452" end="61467" title="Grigor Dimitrov" label="Grigor Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q124467133" start="61527" end="61558" title="2024 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="2024 Dubai Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979382" start="61600" end="61616" title="Denis Shapovalov" label="Denis Shapovalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q61594997" start="61695" end="61707" title="Tomas Machac" label="Tomas Machac"/>
<link wikidata="Q24228674" start="61886" end="61902" title="Gregoire Barrere" label="Gregoire Barrere"/>
<link wikidata="Q120716254" start="62000" end="62012" title="2024 Queen&amp;#x27;s Club Championships" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q30143529" start="62110" end="62124" title="Alexei Popyrin" label="Alexei Popyrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191740" start="62167" end="62184" title="Fernando Verdasco" label="Fernando Verdasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q209436" start="62189" end="62204" title="Richard Gasquet" label="Richard Gasquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16219277" start="62427" end="62442" title="Jordan Thompson (tennis)" label="Jordan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q121046430" start="62563" end="62591" title="2024 Wimbledon Championships" label="2024 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q61594997" start="62657" end="62669" title="Tomáš Macháč" label="Tomáš Macháč"/>
<link wikidata="Q317820" start="62776" end="62788" title="Jamie Murray" label="Jamie Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q64849968" start="62875" end="62888" title="Emma Raducanu" label="Emma Raducanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q109317235" start="63108" end="63127" title="Tennis at the 2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Paris Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847264" start="63299" end="63308" title="Dan Evans (tennis)" label="Dan Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17660516" start="63381" end="63393" title="Taylor Fritz" label="Taylor Fritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050871" start="63398" end="63408" title="Tommy Paul (tennis)" label="Tommy Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="63841" end="63855" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="64267" end="64283" title="ATP Masters 1000" label="ATP Masters 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q381132" start="64356" end="64376" title="2011 Australian Open" label="2011 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q741560" start="64382" end="64394" title="2012 US Open (tennis)" label="2012 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q678730" start="64400" end="64420" title="2013 Australian Open" label="2013 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q559726" start="64426" end="64454" title="2013 Wimbledon Championships" label="2013 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q17482052" start="64460" end="64480" title="2015 Australian Open" label="2015 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q21521385" start="64486" end="64506" title="2016 Australian Open" label="2016 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690923" start="64516" end="64532" title="2016 French Open" label="2016 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q626613" start="64723" end="64743" title="2012 Australian Open" label="2012 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q581788" start="64867" end="64892" title="Tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="London 2012 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q677295" start="64956" end="64977" title="2012 Shanghai Rolex Masters" label="2012 Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="65197" end="65201" title="Italian Open (tennis)" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q728085" start="65206" end="65214" title="Shanghai Masters (tennis)" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297497" start="65218" end="65222" title="2011 Internazionali BNL d&amp;#x27;Italia – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q155703" start="65227" end="65231" title="2012 Shanghai Rolex Masters – Singles" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q21715456" start="65601" end="65616" title="2016 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q23892541" start="65666" end="65677" title="2016 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q27745092" start="65831" end="65865" title="2016 ATP World Tour Finals – Singles" label="final of the ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="66182" end="66195" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15781253" start="66648" end="66674" title="2014 ATP World Tour Finals" label="2014 ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q388303" start="66763" end="66775" title="2008 US Open (tennis)" label="2008 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q476646" start="66781" end="66801" title="2010 Australian Open" label="2010 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q289587" start="66811" end="66839" title="2012 Wimbledon Championships" label="2012 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="66928" end="66949" title="ATP World Tour Finals" label="ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q581788" start="67112" end="67145" title="Tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="final of the London 2012 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155022" start="67199" end="67219" title="2012 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s Singles final" label="2012 Wimbledon Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="67399" end="67417" title="Career Golden Slam" label="Career Golden Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q678730" start="67502" end="67517" title="2013 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18410121" start="67630" end="67658" title="2015 Wimbledon Championships" label="2015 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q20776609" start="67838" end="67861" title="2015 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="2015 Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="68025" end="68037" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q299889" start="68066" end="68070" title="2007 ATP Tour" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="68181" end="68191" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="68287" end="68296" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="68309" end="68320" title="French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="68333" end="68348" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="68364" end="68371" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="68514" end="68517" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q796837" start="68548" end="68560" title="2009 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q300011" start="68564" end="68568" title="2009 ATP World Tour" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q287428" start="68591" end="68600" title="2009 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q512369" start="68616" end="68621" title="2011 Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q300013" start="68625" end="68629" title="2011 ATP World Tour" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702407" start="68638" end="68644" title="2015 Mutua Madrid Open" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15730643" start="68648" end="68652" title="2015 ATP World Tour" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q244427" start="68728" end="68739" title="2011 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q325307" start="68747" end="68754" title="2011 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q15700964" start="68786" end="68802" title="2014 French Open" label="2014 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702407" start="69010" end="69021" title="2015 Mutua Madrid Open" label="Madrid Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766780" start="69077" end="69101" title="2016 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters – Singles" label="2016 Monte Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23947946" start="69191" end="69207" title="2016 Mutua Madrid Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2016 Madrid Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="69270" end="69283" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q751798" start="69576" end="69590" title="2009 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2009 Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q837819" start="69812" end="69824" title="2010 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2010 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629980" start="69870" end="69882" title="2013 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2013 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q23892541" start="69964" end="69980" title="2016 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2016 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70018" end="70027" title="Tennis strategy#All-court player" label="all-court"/>
<link wikidata="Q756328" start="70053" end="70071" title="Counterpuncher" label="defensive baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q926656" start="70116" end="70129" title="Paul Annacone" label="Paul Annacone"/>
<link wikidata="Q221737" start="70633" end="70643" title="Tim Henman" label="Tim Henman"/>
<link wikidata="Q851584" start="70689" end="70692" title="Lob (tennis)" label="lob"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488758" start="71194" end="71203" title="drop shot" label="drop shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202096" start="71297" end="71303" title="Volley (tennis)" label="volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="71446" end="71469" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q30822" start="71478" end="71501" title="Tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Olympic Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19831126" start="71668" end="71674" title="2015 BMW Open – Singles" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869195" start="71679" end="71685" title="2015 Mutua Madrid Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911683" start="71768" end="71773" title="Serve (tennis)" label="serve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="72311" end="72317" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495988" start="72497" end="72509" title="Shiatzy Chen" label="Shiatzy Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="72511" end="72533" title="The Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759128" start="72538" end="72553" title="Highland Spring" label="Highland Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031485" start="72742" end="72754" title="Under Armour" label="Under Armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q98142473" start="72822" end="72829" title="Castore (brand)" label="Castore"/>
<link wikidata="Q631894" start="72930" end="72934" title="Head (company)" label="Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524899" start="73130" end="73140" title="Leon Smith (tennis)" label="Leon Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q107203866" start="73154" end="73166" title="William Álvarez (tennis)" label="Pato Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585351" start="73180" end="73192" title="Mark Petchey" label="Mark Petchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q715134" start="73206" end="73218" title="Brad Gilbert" label="Brad Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851472" start="73232" end="73246" title="Miles Maclagan" label="Miles Maclagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46308" start="73260" end="73273" title="Àlex Corretja" label="Àlex Corretja"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="73287" end="73297" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q310380" start="73335" end="73349" title="Jonas Björkman" label="Jonas Björkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q966361" start="73358" end="73371" title="Jamie Delgado" label="Jamie Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218962" start="73419" end="73433" title="Dani Vallverdu" label="Dani Vallverdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741347" start="73555" end="73573" title="Malaria No More UK" label="Malaria No More UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="73636" end="73649" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73830" end="73846" title="2011 Australian Open#Rally for Relief" label="Rally for Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q381132" start="73865" end="73885" title="2011 Australian Open" label="2011 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74100" end="74120" title="2013 Aegon Championships#Rally Against Cancer" label="Rally Against Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="74264" end="74287" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q232680" start="74426" end="74440" title="Elena Baltacha" label="Elena Baltacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="74446" end="74458" title="liver cancer" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="74642" end="74678" title="ATP Arthur Ashe Humanitarian award" label="Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114749" start="74777" end="74785" title="Scottish national identity" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402148" start="74796" end="74803" title="British national identity" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q241184" start="74949" end="74963" title="2006 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="75025" end="75032" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="75057" end="75071" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="75248" end="75256" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="75354" end="75369" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="2014 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="75373" end="75394" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209499" start="75699" end="75714" title="Police Scotland" label="Police Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75973" end="75985" title="Glossary of tennis terms#R" label="racket abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q465949" start="76002" end="76017" title="Kenneth Carlsen" label="Kenneth Carlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192064" start="76229" end="76248" title="Svetlana Kuznetsova" label="Svetlana Kuznetsova"/>
<link wikidata="Q331570" start="76265" end="76275" title="Hopman Cup" label="Hopman Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="76350" end="76359" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q191736" start="76599" end="76616" title="Nikolay Davydenko" label="Nikolay Davydenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q815748" start="76674" end="76687" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipe" label="L&amp;#x27;Équipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181808" start="77311" end="77325" title="John Inverdale" label="John Inverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180052" start="77457" end="77473" title="Williams sisters" label="Venus and Serena"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="77684" end="77700" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="78206" end="78214" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q693708" start="78360" end="78378" title="ITF World Champions" label="ITF World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="78388" end="78410" title="ATP Awards" label="ATP Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779566" start="78447" end="78487" title="BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834975" start="78496" end="78535" title="BBC Sports Personality Team of the Year Award" label="BBC Sports Personality Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q300008" start="78568" end="78582" title="ATP World Tour" label="ATP World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q300011" start="78596" end="78600" title="2009 ATP World Tour" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q20806381" start="78607" end="78611" title="2016 ATP World Tour" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193885" start="78614" end="78628" title="US Open Series" label="US Open Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052296" start="78639" end="78643" title="2010 US Open Series" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715152" start="78645" end="78649" title="2015 US Open Series" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="78729" end="78756" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q900341" start="78765" end="78772" title="Laureus" label="Laureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q680221" start="78779" end="78809" title="Laureus World Sports Award for Breakthrough of the Year" label="World Breakthrough of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568500" start="78830" end="78866" title="Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Awards" label="Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568500" start="78888" end="78924" title="Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Awards" label="Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572056" start="78943" end="78977" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q963530" start="79012" end="79034" title="University of Stirling" label="University of Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="79043" end="79050" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="79054" end="79062" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="79071" end="79078" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="79082" end="79088" title="London Borough of Merton" label="Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="79097" end="79133" title="ATP Arthur Ashe Humanitarian award" label="Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="79179" end="79194" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q431230" start="79213" end="79227" title="Order of Merit (Ukraine)" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626856" start="79264" end="79316" title="2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics gold post boxes" label="2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics gold post boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426439" start="79319" end="79366" title="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions" label="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232431" start="79369" end="79413" title="Open Era tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Open Era tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980837" wikidata="Q6941902" url="?curid=980837" title="Music history of the United States (1900–1940)">
<text>Music in the United States underwent many shifts and developments from 1900 to 1940. The country survived both World War I and the Great Depression before entering World War II in December 1941. Americans endured great loss and hardship but found hope and encouragement in music. The genres and styles present during this period were Native American music, blues and gospel, jazz, swing, Cajun and Creole music, and country. The United States also took inspiration from other cultures and parts of the world for her own music. The music of each region differed as much as the people did. The time also produced many notable singers and musicians, including jazz figure Louis Armstrong, blues and jazz singer Mamie Smith, and country singer Jimmie Rodgers.

==Native Americans==

Modern Native American pow wows arose around the turn of the 20th century. While some claim that pow wow had been an integral part of indigenous cultures for over 10 centuries, some modern analysts believe that pow wows were invented to appeal to tourists and had only a tangential relationship to genuine Native American traditions, which generally revolved around ceremonial dance music like the Ghost Dance, Zuni Shalako, Navajo Yeibichai and the Sun Dance of the Plains. The Native American Church, founded early in the 20th century, was a center of development for Native American gospel and Peyote song, a fusion of gospel and traditional music revolving around ceremonies in which hallucinogenic peyote is taken as a sacrament. In Arizona and Mexico, waila, or chicken scratch, music, had arisen as a fusion of native Tohono O&#x27;odham music with German polka and Mexican-American norteño.

Jazz, blues, folk, country, and gospel, music from the Caribbean region also briefly became popular during the first half of the twentieth century. Trinidadian calypso, Argentinian tango and Dominican merengue and other styles influenced American popular music. Hawaiian music (especially slack-key guitar) enjoyed an early vogue in the 1910s, influencing the developing genre of country music (this is the source of the steel guitar sound that is characteristic of modern country).

Eastern European Jews contributed klezmer music to American culture, with the earliest stars including Harry Kandel, Naftule Brandwein, Dave Tarras and Abe Schwartz. Kandel, a clarinetist, set the stage for American klezmer.

==Blues and gospel==
The blues began in rural communities, primarily in the south. During the 1920s, classic female blues singers like Mamie Smith (&quot;Crazy Blues&quot;) dominated the genre&#x27;s sound. For most white Americans, these female singers were their first exposure to black music, or &quot;race music&quot; as it was then known. In the 1930s, local blues styles developed in Memphis, New Orleans, the mid-Atlantic coast, Texas, Kansas City and, most importantly, Chicago. A style of piano-playing based on the blues, boogie-woogie was briefly popular among mainstream audiences and blues listeners.

At the heights of the Great Depression, gospel music started to become popular by people like Thomas A. Dorsey and Mahalia Jackson, who adapted Christian hymns to blues and jazz structures. By 1925, three main styles of gospel had become popular among mainstream audiences. Itinerant jack leg preachers like Blind Willie Johnson and Washington Phillips released recordings that are now collector&#x27;s items but were then only marginally popular. Jubilee quartets like the Norfolk Jubilee Quartet and the Golden Gate Quartet were popular and sophisticated, but the most successful form of gospel was singing preachers like Reverend J. M. Gates, who passionately sung about the terrible consequences of disobeying God&#x27;s laws.

==Jazz==
Jazz was more urban than the blues. Relying more on instrumentation, the sound was well-suited for listeners unfamiliar with the genre&#x27;s conventions. It drew primarily on New Orleans blues, but also incorporated influences from Jewish-American musicians and composers like Benny Goodman and George Gershwin. In the 1920s, jazz bars became popular among white Americans, particularly young ones. As with ragtime before, and most major genres since, jazz was blamed for the moral degeneracy of the youth that visited these bars and listened to the music. In spite of the controversy, jazz emerged as the dominant sound of the country in the late 1920s in popularized forms that some called watered down, like swing music and big band. Though these, like jazz proper, were blamed for crime and delinquency, they had become mainstream by the 1930s. In the 1940s, pure jazz began to become more popular, along with the blues, with artists like Ella Fitzgerald (&quot;A-Tisket, A-Tasket&quot;) and Billie Holiday (&quot;Strange Fruit&quot;) becoming nationally successful.

New Orleans jazz was and remains the most influential form of roots jazz. The major underpinnings of the style were in place by 1900 or a bit before, when New Orleans, Louisiana produced musicians like Buddy Bolden, Jelly Roll Morton and Kid Ory. The most distinctive characteristic of New Orleans jazz is the influence of the marching brass bands. The first recordings of the genre were by the Original Dixieland Jass Band from 1917. The 1920s saw trumpet and cornet leaders like Louis Armstrong and Joe &quot;King&quot; Oliver, playing with the trumpet proclaiming the melody and harmonies and countermelodies coming from the clarinet or trombone. The rhythm section typically included a tuba or bass, piano, banjo or drums. During this period, ensembles were standard, in contrast to many of the later developments in jazz. By the 1930s, however, newer forms of pop-jazz like swing music and Dixieland had overtaken authentic New Orleans-style jazz among mainstream audiences.

Dixieland jazz is a form of jazz which arose in the 1920s in Chicago. Musicians there were trying to revive authentic, classic New Orleans jazz. By the 1940s, Dixieland revival musicians like Jimmy McPartland, Eddie Condon and Bud Freeman had become well-known and established their own unique style. Most characteristically, players entered solos against riffing by other horns, and were followed by a closing with the drummer playing a four-bar tag that was then answered by the rest of the band.

In 1917, the Original Dixieland Jazz Band released &quot;Livery Stable Blues&quot;, which is often said to be the first jazz recording. The genre had certainly existed before 1917, however, but recording opportunities were bleak. Buddy Bolden, a cornetist from New Orleans, never recorded his influential take on jazz. The early 1920s saw recordings from Kid Ory, King Oliver, Sidney Bechet, Jelly Roll Morton and Bessie Smith. King Oliver included a young cornetist named Louis Armstrong on his records as the second cornet. Armstrong soon moved to Chicago, worked with Fletcher Henderson, Bessie Smith and Clarence Williams and eventually began working as a band leader in 1925, his work setting the stage for the development of swing and the jazz variations to come after. Jazz had just reached its first peak of mainstream popularity in 1924, with the recordings of Paul Whiteman.

Alongside the Great Depression, many musicians from poor, rural Southern states like Louisiana moved to the north, especially New York City and Chicago, Louis Armstrong was among them, and he helped make Chicago the center for musical innovation in the country before moving on to New York, where clubs like Cotton Club, Village Vanguard and Minton&#x27;s were flourishing.

The mid-1930s were the peak of big band swing, with artists like Charlie Barnet, Chick Webb and Benny Goodman rising to the ranks of esteemed-band leaders. Soloists appeared during this period, inspiring hysterical reactions among fans.

==Swing==
Swing was a pop-oriented form of jazz, the origins of which can be found as far back as 1923, when Fletcher Henderson began enlarging jazz bands. Whole new sections were added, and Henderson created music of greater range and texture. The same period saw Duke Ellington similarly expanding his relatively small jazz bands, and both groups had laid down recordings as early as 1931. Jead Goldkette and Ben Pollack were also early influential African American swing musicians, and were followed by yet more dance-oriented swing bands led by Jimmie Lunceford, Earl Hines, Don Redman, Count Basie, Glen Gray, Dorsey Brothers, Bob Crosby, Luis Russell, Andy Kirk, Glenn Miller, and Benny Carter.

==Cajun and Creole music==
Modern Cajun music began developing in the 1920s, drawing on traditional fiddlers and more modern accordionists. Joe and Cléoma Falcon made the first recording, &quot;Allons à Lafayette&quot;, in 1928. The song was a regional hit that paved the way for Cleoma&#x27;s brother, Amédée Breaux&#x27;s &quot;Jolie Blonde&quot;, now often considered the Cajun national anthem. Amédé Ardoin, a black man, soon became the most popular Cajun star, however. Louisiana&#x27;s Creole population, made up of mixed African, French and Anglo heritage, had developed a form of dance music known as la la. Canray Fontenot was perhaps the most influential la la performer.

In the 1930s, oil was discovered in Louisiana and Anglos came to the state en masse. Cajun culture was denigrated and restricted, and old-time music and western swing became major influences on Cajun music. Luderin Darbone&#x27;s The Hackleberry Ramblers and Harry Choates were the vanguard of this new wave of Cajun music, which incorporated English lyrics and a smooth style. By the 1940s, though a revival of traditional Cajun music had begun, led by Iry LeJeune, whose 1948 &quot;La valse du pont d&#x27;amour&quot; is considered a watershed in the field.

==Country music==
Country music evolved along somewhat the same lines as folk, but achieved much more mainstream success. Jug bands and other influences (including Hawaiian steel guitar, folk and the country blues) coalesced in the 1930s development of honky tonk, a rough form of country music.

At the beginning of the century, rural whites from Appalachia were known as &quot;hillbillies&quot;, and their music soon came to be called &quot;hillbilly music&quot;. Protestant churches like the Old Regular Baptists and Holiness Pentecostal used music in their services, and this was one of the biggest influences on hillbilly music.
Hillbilly music was not widely recorded until the 1920s. Bristol, a city on the Virginia and Tennessee border, was the site of a two-week recording session in 1927 that led to the discovery of the two biggest names in hillbilly music: The Carters and Jimmie Rodgers. The Carters were a trio playing Auto-harp and Guitar, with clear, strong vocals and harmonies, while Rodgers sang a more worldly, blues-influenced music that has been called country blues. Rodgers sold millions of records in the 1930s During this period, hillbilly music became big business, and musicians began endorsing products as well as adding new instruments, like fiddles, banjos, mandolins and Hawaiian steel guitar. Some other important musicians of this era include Gid Tanner &amp; the Skillet Lickers and Charlie Poole &amp; the North Carolina Ramblers.

By the 1940s, brother duets, in which two brothers sang harmony with precision and clarity, had become popular and was known as close harmony. The Blue Sky Boys, Del-more Brothers, Monroe Brothers and, especially, the Louvin Brothers, were the most popular brother duet pairs.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2267955" start="0" end="26" title="Music of the United States" label="Music in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="111" end="122" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="131" end="147" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="164" end="176" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662072" start="334" end="355" title="Native American music" label="Native American music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184215" start="398" end="410" title="Creole music" label="Creole music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="669" end="684" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q274181" start="708" end="719" title="Mamie Smith" label="Mamie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q366358" start="740" end="754" title="Jimmie Rodgers" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="786" end="801" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="802" end="809" title="pow wow" label="pow wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295854" start="1177" end="1188" title="Ghost Dance" label="Ghost Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q231317" start="1190" end="1194" title="Zuni people" label="Zuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116929" start="1195" end="1202" title="Shalako" label="Shalako"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="1204" end="1210" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q263937" start="1229" end="1238" title="Sun Dance" label="Sun Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="1258" end="1280" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1349" end="1371" title="Native American gospel" label="Native American gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179597" start="1376" end="1387" title="Peyote song" label="Peyote song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="1467" end="1481" title="Psychedelic drug" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="1482" end="1488" title="peyote" label="peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="1503" end="1512" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="1517" end="1524" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1529" end="1535" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096318" start="1537" end="1542" title="Chicken scratch" label="waila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937531" start="1604" end="1623" title="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham" label="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1635" end="1641" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="1642" end="1647" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780056" start="1669" end="1676" title="norteño (music)" label="norteño"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1734" end="1743" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="1827" end="1835" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q752785" start="1839" end="1846" title="Calypso music" label="calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1848" end="1859" title="Argentina" label="Argentinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14390274" start="1860" end="1865" title="Tango (music)" label="tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="1870" end="1879" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="1880" end="1888" title="merengue music" label="merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071834" start="1941" end="1955" title="Music of Hawaii" label="Hawaiian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507082" start="1968" end="1984" title="slack-key guitar" label="slack-key guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="2100" end="2112" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212944" start="2197" end="2204" title="klezmer" label="klezmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670168" start="2266" end="2278" title="Harry Kandel" label="Harry Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351126" start="2280" end="2297" title="Naftule Brandwein" label="Naftule Brandwein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229964" start="2299" end="2310" title="Dave Tarras" label="Dave Tarras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937096" start="2315" end="2327" title="Abe Schwartz" label="Abe Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="2339" end="2347" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309336" start="2490" end="2510" title="classic female blues" label="classic female blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q274181" start="2524" end="2535" title="Mamie Smith" label="Mamie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q509901" start="2779" end="2786" title="Memphis blues" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q516568" start="2788" end="2799" title="New Orleans blues" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109497" start="2801" end="2823" title="Piedmont blues" label="the mid-Atlantic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271752" start="2825" end="2830" title="Texas blues" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2832" end="2843" title="Blues#Urban blues" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071873" start="2867" end="2874" title="Chicago blues" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="2887" end="2892" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="2921" end="2934" title="boogie-woogie" label="boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="3026" end="3042" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="3044" end="3056" title="gospel music" label="gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q562158" start="3098" end="3114" title="Thomas A. Dorsey" label="Thomas A. Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q206466" start="3119" end="3134" title="Mahalia Jackson" label="Mahalia Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="3158" end="3162" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q712586" start="3312" end="3332" title="Blind Willie Johnson" label="Blind Willie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q346506" start="3337" end="3356" title="Washington Phillips" label="Washington Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301930" start="3452" end="3467" title="Jubilee quartet" label="Jubilee quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q652294" start="3510" end="3529" title="Golden Gate Quartet" label="Golden Gate Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15461031" start="3637" end="3648" title="Reverend J. M. Gates" label="J. M. Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3745" end="3749" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="4023" end="4036" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="4041" end="4056" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="4457" end="4468" title="swing music" label="swing music"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="4473" end="4481" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="4689" end="4704" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="4742" end="4756" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q765709" start="4764" end="4777" title="Strange Fruit" label="Strange Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="4818" end="4834" title="Dixieland" label="New Orleans jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="4973" end="4995" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q436176" start="5020" end="5032" title="Buddy Bolden" label="Buddy Bolden"/>
<link wikidata="Q317128" start="5034" end="5051" title="Jelly Roll Morton" label="Jelly Roll Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q441399" start="5056" end="5063" title="Kid Ory" label="Kid Ory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244156" start="5154" end="5164" title="brass band" label="brass band"/>
<link wikidata="Q933710" start="5213" end="5241" title="Original Dixieland Jass Band" label="Original Dixieland Jass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="5267" end="5274" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q202027" start="5279" end="5285" title="cornet" label="cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="5299" end="5314" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q313368" start="5319" end="5346" title="Joe &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Oliver" label="Joe &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101345" start="5414" end="5429" title="countermelodies" label="countermelodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131168" start="5508" end="5512" title="tuba" label="tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="5516" end="5520" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="5522" end="5527" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="5529" end="5534" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="5538" end="5542" title="drum" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="5697" end="5708" title="swing music" label="swing music"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="5799" end="5813" title="Dixieland jazz" label="Dixieland jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="5827" end="5831" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="5860" end="5867" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="5926" end="5942" title="Dixieland" label="New Orleans jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q484693" start="5991" end="6007" title="Jimmy McPartland" label="Jimmy McPartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282743" start="6009" end="6021" title="Eddie Condon" label="Eddie Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q711163" start="6026" end="6037" title="Bud Freeman" label="Bud Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347917" start="6356" end="6375" title="Livery Stable Blues" label="Livery Stable Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q436176" start="6529" end="6541" title="Buddy Bolden" label="Buddy Bolden"/>
<link wikidata="Q441399" start="6654" end="6661" title="Kid Ory" label="Kid Ory"/>
<link wikidata="Q313368" start="6663" end="6674" title="Joe &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Oliver" label="King Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q313519" start="6676" end="6689" title="Sidney Bechet" label="Sidney Bechet"/>
<link wikidata="Q317128" start="6691" end="6708" title="Jelly Roll Morton" label="Jelly Roll Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q93349" start="6713" end="6725" title="Bessie Smith" label="Bessie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="6772" end="6787" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q505559" start="6870" end="6888" title="Fletcher Henderson" label="Fletcher Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q162530" start="6907" end="6924" title="Clarence Williams (musician)" label="Clarence Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q470182" start="7169" end="7182" title="Paul Whiteman" label="Paul Whiteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="7199" end="7215" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7311" end="7324" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="7329" end="7336" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136776" start="7493" end="7504" title="Cotton Club" label="Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q670623" start="7506" end="7522" title="Village Vanguard" label="Village Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814151" start="7527" end="7540" title="Minton&amp;#x27;s" label="Minton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="7591" end="7599" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066820" start="7625" end="7639" title="Charlie Barnet" label="Charlie Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q505749" start="7641" end="7651" title="Chick Webb" label="Chick Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="7656" end="7669" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="8063" end="8077" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8190" end="8204" title="Jead Goldkette" label="Jead Goldkette"/>
<link wikidata="Q816581" start="8209" end="8220" title="Ben Pollack" label="Ben Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689291" start="8347" end="8363" title="Jimmie Lunceford" label="Jimmie Lunceford"/>
<link wikidata="Q354883" start="8365" end="8375" title="Earl Hines" label="Earl Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188936" start="8377" end="8387" title="Don Redman" label="Don Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="8389" end="8400" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q280103" start="8402" end="8411" title="Glen Gray" label="Glen Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661714" start="8413" end="8428" title="Dorsey Brothers" label="Dorsey Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q887871" start="8430" end="8440" title="Bob Crosby" label="Bob Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374916" start="8442" end="8454" title="Luis Russell" label="Luis Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q526442" start="8456" end="8465" title="Andy Kirk (musician)" label="Andy Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="8467" end="8479" title="Glenn Miller" label="Glenn Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q356715" start="8485" end="8497" title="Benny Carter" label="Benny Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324713" start="8640" end="8643" title="Joe Falcon" label="Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967575" start="8648" end="8661" title="Cléoma Falcon" label="Cléoma Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959939" start="8803" end="8816" title="Amédée Breaux" label="Amédée Breaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269883" start="8830" end="8842" title="Jolie Blonde" label="Jolie Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="8881" end="8896" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q482149" start="8898" end="8910" title="Amédé Ardoin" label="Amédé Ardoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942158" start="9109" end="9114" title="La la (music)" label="la la"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033625" start="9116" end="9131" title="Canray Fontenot" label="Canray Fontenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="9197" end="9200" title="Petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="9317" end="9331" title="old-time music" label="old-time music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="9336" end="9349" title="western swing" label="western swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698731" start="9390" end="9405" title="Luderin Darbone" label="Luderin Darbone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9413" end="9437" title="The Hackleberry Ramblers" label="The Hackleberry Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667909" start="9442" end="9455" title="Harry Choates" label="Harry Choates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154632" start="9637" end="9648" title="Iry LeJeune" label="Iry LeJeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="9762" end="9775" title="Country music" label="Country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075338" start="9866" end="9874" title="Jug band" label="Jug band"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="9908" end="9914" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="9917" end="9929" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q649823" start="9944" end="9957" title="country blues" label="country blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627155" start="9997" end="10007" title="honky tonk" label="honky tonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="10092" end="10102" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448" start="10123" end="10134" title="hillbilly" label="hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448" start="10187" end="10202" title="hillbilly music" label="hillbilly music"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="10210" end="10220" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084829" start="10239" end="10259" title="Old Regular Baptists" label="Old Regular Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q125996410" start="10264" end="10284" title="Holiness Pentecostal" label="Holiness Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917821" start="10435" end="10442" title="Bristol, Tennessee" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="10458" end="10466" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="10471" end="10480" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412029" start="10613" end="10624" title="Carter Family" label="The Carters"/>
<link wikidata="Q366358" start="10629" end="10643" title="Jimmie Rodgers (country singer)" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q370915" start="10677" end="10686" title="Auto-harp" label="Auto-harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="10691" end="10697" title="Guitar" label="Guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="10775" end="10780" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q649823" start="10819" end="10832" title="country blues" label="country blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="11016" end="11022" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="11025" end="11030" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="11033" end="11041" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="11047" end="11053" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="11056" end="11068" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11121" end="11157" title="Gid Tanner &amp;amp; the Skillet Lickers" label="Gid Tanner &amp;amp; the Skillet Lickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066976" start="11162" end="11209" title="Charlie Poole &amp;amp; the North Carolina Ramblers" label="Charlie Poole &amp;amp; the North Carolina Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124296467" start="11340" end="11353" title="close harmony" label="close harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q977373" start="11359" end="11372" title="Blue Sky Boys" label="Blue Sky Boys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11374" end="11391" title="Del-more Brothers" label="Del-more Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11393" end="11408" title="Monroe Brothers" label="Monroe Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756844" start="11430" end="11445" title="Louvin Brothers" label="Louvin Brothers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980840" wikidata="Q5300144" url="?curid=980840" title="Doubles">
<text>Men&#x27;s doubles, Women&#x27;s doubles or Mixed doubles are sports having two players per side, including;
* Beach volleyball
* Doubles badminton
* Doubles curling
* Footvolley
* Doubles pickleball
* Doubles squash
* Doubles table tennis
* Doubles tennis
Doubles may also refer to:

==Entertainment==
* &quot;Doubles&quot; (1985 play), a Broadway production by David Wiltse
* &quot;Doubles&quot; (2000 film), a 2000 Tamil-language film
* &quot;Doubles&quot; (2011 film), a 2011 Malayalam-language film

==Other==
* Doubles (food), a Trinidadian food item
* Doubles (bells), a ringing method rung on five church bells
* A type of semi-trailer truck

==See also==
* Double (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5300144" start="0" end="18" title="Doubles" label="Men&amp;#x27;s doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300144" start="20" end="40" title="Doubles" label="Women&amp;#x27;s doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300144" start="44" end="57" title="Doubles" label="Mixed doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="111" end="127" title="Beach volleyball" label="Beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130" end="147" title="Badminton#Doubles" label="Doubles badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214343" start="150" end="165" title="Doubles curling" label="Doubles curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q28961" start="168" end="178" title="Footvolley" label="Footvolley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="181" end="199" title="Glossary of pickleball#D" label="Doubles pickleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582101" start="202" end="216" title="Squash Doubles" label="Doubles squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673427" start="219" end="239" title="Glossary of table tennis" label="Doubles table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967745" start="242" end="256" title="Types of tennis match" label="Doubles tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300144" start="257" end="264" title="Doubles" label="Doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241212" start="363" end="375" title="David Wiltse" label="David Wiltse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644987" start="378" end="409" title="Doubles (2000 film)" label="&amp;quot;Doubles&amp;quot; (2000 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300146" start="440" end="471" title="Doubles (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;Doubles&amp;quot; (2011 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300145" start="517" end="531" title="Doubles (food)" label="Doubles (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q461406" start="559" end="574" title="Doubles (bells)" label="Doubles (bells)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="631" end="649" title="semi-trailer truck" label="semi-trailer truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q139090" start="666" end="689" title="Double (disambiguation)" label="Double (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980841" wikidata="Q5502868" url="?curid=980841" title="Frequency extender">
<text>In broadcast engineering, a frequency extender is an electronic device that expands the usable frequency range of POTS telephone lines. It also allows high-fidelity analog audio to be sent over regular telephone lines, without the loss of lower audio frequencies (bass). It is an extended concept of a telephone hybrid.

The concept uses frequency shifting to overcome the narrow bandwidth of regular telephone systems, extending the usable range by approximately two octaves. The input signal is sent on one telephone line as-is, or in some cases upshifted to provide extra low-frequency response, and sent on a second line shifted down by 3 kHz, which is normally the upper bandpass limit in telephony. Thus, an audio frequency of 5 kHz is sent at 2 kHz. A receiver on the other end then shifts the second line back up and mixes it with the first. This results in greatly improved audio, adding a full octave of range, and pushing the total bandpass to 6 kHz. The sound is then acceptable for voice, if not for music.

It is also possible to add other lines, each increasing the bandpass by another 3 kHz. However, the law of diminishing returns takes over, because each successive octave is double the size of the last. A third line pushes the bandpass up 50% to 9 kHz, equivalent to AM radio. A fourth line would push it up 33% to 12 kHz. FM radio quality would require five telephone lines to be installed, pushing the bandpass up 25% to 15 kHz. The audio is shifted down by 6,9, and 12 kHz respectively for each additional line.

Frequency extenders have been nearly eliminated by POTS codecs.

==See also==
* Remote broadcast

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2176252" start="3" end="24" title="broadcast engineering" label="broadcast engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502868" start="28" end="46" title="Frequency extender" label="frequency extender"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="53" end="63" title="Electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067263" start="64" end="70" title="Information appliance" label="device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="114" end="118" title="Plain old telephone service" label="POTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="151" end="164" title="high-fidelity" label="high-fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931994" start="165" end="177" title="analog audio" label="analog audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="202" end="216" title="telephone line" label="telephone line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413664" start="245" end="262" title="audio frequencies" label="audio frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="264" end="268" title="Bass (sound)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="289" end="296" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q456280" start="302" end="318" title="telephone hybrid" label="telephone hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="325" end="332" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140483" start="373" end="379" title="narrowband" label="narrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="380" end="389" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="468" end="475" title="Octave" label="octaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="487" end="493" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="643" end="646" title="kHz" label="kHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718101" start="676" end="684" title="bandpass" label="bandpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="825" end="830" title="audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="904" end="910" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390" start="995" end="1000" title="Human voice" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="1013" end="1018" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q863946" start="1121" end="1147" title="Diminishing returns" label="law of diminishing returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559698" start="1261" end="1262" title="%" label="%"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="1287" end="1295" title="AM radio" label="AM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="1343" end="1351" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120046" start="1587" end="1597" title="POTS codec" label="POTS codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312133" start="1616" end="1632" title="Remote broadcast" label="Remote broadcast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980845" wikidata="Q333425" url="?curid=980845" title="Fareed Zakaria">
<text>Fareed Rafiq Zakaria (; born January 20, 1964) is an Indian-born American journalist, political commentator, and author. He is the host of CNN&#x27;s &quot;Fareed Zakaria GPS&quot; and writes a weekly paid column for &quot;The Washington Post.&quot; He has been a columnist for &quot;Newsweek&quot;, editor of &quot;Newsweek International&quot;, and an editor at large of &quot;Time.&quot;

==Early life and education==
Zakaria was born in Mumbai, India, to a Konkani Muslim family. His father, Rafiq Zakaria (1920–2005), was a politician associated with the Indian National Congress and a scholar of Islam. His mother, Fatima Zakaria (1936–2021), his father&#x27;s second wife, was for a time the editor of the &quot;Sunday Times of India&quot;. She died during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Zakaria attended the Cathedral and John Connon School in Mumbai. He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts from Yale University in 1986, where he was president of the Yale Political Union, editor in chief of the &quot;Yale Political Monthly,&quot; a member of the Scroll and Key society, and a member of the Party of the Right. As a student at Yale University in the mid-1980s, Zakaria opposed anti-apartheid divestment, arguing that Yale should not divest from its holdings in South Africa. He later gained a PhD in government from Harvard University in 1993, where he studied under Samuel P. Huntington and Stanley Hoffmann, as well as international relations theorist Robert Keohane.

==Career==
After directing a research project on American foreign policy at Harvard, Zakaria became the managing editor of &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; in 1992, at the age of 28. Under his guidance, the magazine was redesigned to be published once every two months, moving away from a quarterly schedule. He served as an adjunct professor at Columbia University, where he taught a seminar on international relations. In October 2000, he was named editor of &quot;Newsweek International&quot;, and became a weekly columnist for &quot;Newsweek&quot;. In August 2010, he moved to &quot;Time&quot; to serve as editor at-large and columnist. He writes a weekly column for &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and is a contributing editor for the Atlantic Media group, which includes &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot;.

He has published on a variety of subjects for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, &quot;The New Republic.&quot; For a brief period, he was a wine columnist for the web magazine &quot;Slate,&quot; with the pseudonym of George Saintsbury, after the English writer.

Zakaria is the author of &quot;From Wealth to Power: The Unusual Origins of America&#x27;s World Role&quot; (Princeton, 1998), &quot;The Future of Freedom&quot; (Norton, 2003), &quot;The Post-American World&quot; (2008), and &quot;In Defense of a Liberal Education&quot; (Norton, 2015). He co-edited &quot;The American Encounter: The United States and the Making of the Modern World&quot; (Basic Books) with James F. Hoge Jr. His last three books have been New York Times bestsellers and The Future of Freedom and The Post American World have both been translated into more than 25 languages. In 2011 an updated and expanded edition of &quot;The Post-American World&quot; (&quot;Release 2.0&quot;) was published.

Zakaria was a news analyst with ABC&#x27;s &quot;This Week with George Stephanopoulos&quot; (2002–2007) where he was a member of the Sunday morning roundtable. He hosted the weekly TV news show, &quot;Foreign Exchange with Fareed Zakaria&quot; on PBS (2005–08). His weekly show, &quot;Fareed Zakaria GPS&quot; (&quot;Global Public Square&quot;), premiered on CNN in June 2008. It airs twice weekly in the United States and four times weekly on CNN International, reaching over 200 million homes. It celebrated its 10th anniversary on June 5, 2018, as announced on the weekly foreign affairs show on CNN.

In 2013, he became one of the producers for the HBO series &quot;Vice&quot;, for which he serves as a consultant.

Zakaria, a member of the Berggruen Institute, additionally features as an interlocutor for the annual Berggruen Prize.

==Political views==
Zakaria self-identifies as a &quot;centrist&quot;, though he has been described variously as a political liberal, a conservative, a moderate, or a radical centrist. George Stephanopoulos said of him in 2003, &quot;He&#x27;s so well versed in politics, and he can&#x27;t be pigeonholed. I can&#x27;t be sure whenever I turn to him where he&#x27;s going to be coming from or what he&#x27;s going to say.&quot; In February 2008, Zakaria wrote that &quot;Conservatism grew powerful in the 1970s and 1980s because it proposed solutions appropriate to the problems of the age&quot;, adding that &quot;a new world requires new thinking&quot;. He supported Barack Obama during the 2008 Democratic primary campaign and also for president. In January 2009, &quot;Forbes&quot; referred to Zakaria as one of the 25 most influential liberals in the American media. Zakaria has stated that he tries not to be devoted to any type of ideology, saying &quot;I feel that&#x27;s part of my job ... which is not to pick sides but to explain what I think is happening on the ground. I can&#x27;t say, &#x27;This is my team and I&#x27;m going to root for them no matter what they do.&#x27;&quot;
Zakaria &quot;may have more intellectual range and insights than any other public thinker in the West,&quot; wrote David Shribman in &quot;The Boston Globe&quot;. In 2003, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger told &quot;New York Magazine&quot; that Zakaria &quot;has a first-class mind and likes to say things that run against conventional wisdom.&quot; However, in 2011, the editors of &quot;The New Republic&quot; included him in a list of &quot;over-rated thinkers&quot; and commented, &quot;There&#x27;s something suspicious about a thinker always so perfectly in tune with the moment.&quot;

Zakaria&#x27;s books include &quot;The Future of Freedom&quot; and &quot;The Post-American World&quot;. &quot;The Future of Freedom&quot; argues that what is defined as democracy in the Western world is actually &quot;liberal democracy&quot;, a combination of constitutional liberalism and participatory politics. Zakaria points out that protection of liberty and the rule of law actually preceded popular elections by centuries in Western Europe, and that when countries only adopt elections without the protection of liberty, they create &quot;illiberal democracy&quot;. &quot;The Post-American World&quot;, published in 2008 before the financial crisis, argued that the most important trend of modern times is the &quot;rise of the rest,&quot; the economic emergence of China, India, Brazil, and other countries.

From 2006, Zakaria has also criticized what he views as &quot;fear-based&quot; American policies employed not only in combating terrorism, but also in enforcing immigration and drug smuggling laws, and has argued in favor of decriminalization of drugs and citizenship for presently illegal immigrants to the United States of all backgrounds.

Referring to his views on Iran, Leon Wieseltier described Zakaria in 2010 as a &quot;consummate spokesman for the shibboleths of the [Obama] White House and for the smooth new worldliness, the at-the-highest-levels impatience with democracy and human rights as central objectives of our foreign policy, that now characterize advanced liberal thinking about America&#x27;s role in the world.&quot;

Before the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Zakaria endorsed Barack Obama on his CNN program. In May 2011 &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that Obama has &quot;sounded out prominent journalists like Fareed Zakaria ... and Thomas L. Friedman&quot; concerning Middle East issues.
After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, in a &quot;Newsweek&quot; cover essay, &quot;Why They Hate Us,&quot; Zakaria argued that Islamic extremism was not fundamentally rooted in Islam, nor could it be claimed a reaction to American foreign policy. He located the problem in the political-social-economic stagnation of Arab societies, which then bred an extreme, religious opposition. He portrayed Osama bin Laden as one in a long line of extremists who used religion to justify mass murder. Zakaria argued for an intergenerational effort to create more open and dynamic societies in Arab countries, and thereby helping Islam enter the modern world.

Zakaria initially supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq. He said at the time, &quot;The place is so dysfunctional ... any stirring of the pot is good. America&#x27;s involvement in the region is for the good.&quot; He argued for a United Nations–sanctioned operation with a much larger force—approximately 400,000 troops—than was actually employed by the administration of President George W. Bush. However, he soon became a critic. In addition to objecting to the war plan, he frequently criticized the way the Bush administration was running the occupation of Iraq. He argued against the disbanding of the army and bureaucracy yet supported the de-Baathification programs. He continued to argue that a functioning democracy in Iraq would be a powerful new model for Arab politics but suggested that an honest accounting would have to say that the costs of the invasion had been much higher than the benefits. He opposed the Iraq surge in March 2007, writing that it would work militarily but not politically, still leaving Iraq divided among its three communities. Instead, he advocated that Washington push hard for a political settlement between the Sunni Arabs, Shia Arabs, and Kurds, and begin a reduction in forces to only 60,000 troops. He later wrote that the surge &quot;succeeded&quot; militarily but that it did not produce a political compact and that Iraq remained divided along sectarian lines, undermining its unity, democracy, and legacy.

Zakaria supported the April 2017 U.S. missile strike against a Syrian government–controlled airbase. Zakaria praised President Donald Trump&#x27;s strike and said it was the moment &quot;[he] became president of the United States.&quot;

In July 2020, Zakaria was one of the 153 signers of the &quot;Harper&#x27;s Letter&quot; (also known as &quot;A Letter on Justice and Open Debate&quot;) that expressed concern that &quot;the free exchange of information and ideas, the lifeblood of a liberal society, is daily becoming more constricted.&quot;

In March 2021, Zakaria criticized the size of the U.S. military budget, saying that &quot;The United States’ F-35 fighter jet program, bedeviled by cost overruns and technical problems, will ultimately cost taxpayers $1.7 trillion. China will spend a comparable amount of money on its Belt and Road Initiative...Which is money better spent?&quot;.

In July 2022, Zakaria wrote a &quot;Washington Post&quot; article titled &quot;Forget pronouns. Democrats need to become the party of building things&quot;, in which he said &quot;There is plenty of evidence that the Democratic Party has moved left, that it is out of sync with Americans on many of these cultural issues, and that it needs to correct course&quot; and that &quot;This is not a perception problem. It is a reality problem. Democrats need to once more become the party that gets stuff done, builds things and makes government work for people. That&#x27;s a lot more important to most Americans than using the right pronouns&quot;.

==Honors and awards==
Zakaria has been nominated five times for the National Magazine Award, and won it once, for his columns and commentary. His show has won a Peabody Award and been nominated for several Emmys. He was conferred &quot;India Abroad&quot; Person of the Year 2008 award on March 20, 2009, in New York. Filmmaker Mira Nair, who won the award for year 2007, honored her successor.

He has received honorary degrees from Harvard University, Brown University, Duke University, Johns Hopkins University, the University of Miami, Oberlin College, Bates College, and the University of Oklahoma among others. He was the 2000 Annual Orator of the Philomathean Society of the University of Pennsylvania.

In January 2010, Zakaria was given the Padma Bhushan award by the Indian government for his contribution to the field of journalism.

He has served on the boards of the Council on Foreign Relations, Columbia University&#x27;s International House, City College of New York&#x27;s Colin Powell School for Civic and Global Leadership, among others. He was a trustee of Yale Corporation, the governing body of Yale University and the Trilateral Commission.

In 2020, Zakaria was awarded the International Center for Journalists (ICFJ) Founders Award for Excellence in Journalism.

==Controversies==

===Role in the 2003 invasion of Iraq===
In his 2006 book &quot;State of Denial&quot;, journalist Bob Woodward of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; described a November 29, 2001, meeting of Middle East analysts, including Zakaria, that was convened at the request of the then Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz. According to a story in &quot;The New York Times&quot; on Woodward&#x27;s book, the Wolfowitz meeting ultimately produced a report for President George W. Bush that supported the subsequent invasion of Iraq. Zakaria, however, later told &quot;The New York Times&quot; that he had briefly attended what he thought was &quot;a brainstorming session&quot;. He was not told that a report would be prepared for the President, and in fact, the report did not have his name on it. The &quot;Times&quot; issued a correction.

===Debate on the Park51 Islamic Center===
In 2010, in protest at the Anti-Defamation League&#x27;s opposition to the building of the Park51 mosque and Islamic cultural center two blocks from the World Trade Center site, Zakaria returned the Hubert H. Humphrey First Amendment Freedoms Prize awarded to him by the ADL in 2005. He declared that the ADL&#x27;s opposition to the mosque meant that he could not &quot;in good conscience keep [the award] anymore&quot;. In support of his decision, he stated that the larger issue in the controversy is freedom of religion in the United States, even while acknowledging that he is not a religious person. He also wrote that a &quot;moderate, mainstream version of Islam&quot; is essential to winning the war on terror, and that moves like the ADL&#x27;s make it harder for such a moderate version of Islam to emerge and thrive. On August 8, 2010, edition of &quot;Fareed Zakaria GPS&quot;, Zakaria addressed the issue, stating that in returning his award, he had hoped that the ADL would reconsider their stance.

===Plagiarism allegations===

Zakaria was suspended for a week in August 2012 while &quot;Time&quot; and CNN investigated an allegation of plagiarism involving a August 20 column on gun control with similarities to a &quot;New Yorker&quot; article by Jill Lepore. In a statement Zakaria apologized, saying that he had made &quot;a terrible mistake.&quot; Six days later, after a review of his research notes and years of prior commentary, &quot;Time&quot; and CNN reinstated Zakaria. &quot;Time&quot; described the incident as &quot;isolated&quot; and &quot;unintentional&quot;; and CNN &quot;... found nothing that merited continuing the suspension ...&quot;.

The controversy was reignited in September 2014, when &quot;Esquire&quot; and &quot;The Week&quot; magazines reported on allegations made in pseudonymous blogs. &quot;Newsweek&quot; added a blanket warning to its archive of articles penned by Zakaria, and after an investigation of his several hundred columns for the magazine, found improper citation in seven. Similarly, after allegations surfaced on Twitter regarding the originality of one of Zakaria&#x27;s columns for &quot;Slate&quot;, the online magazine appended a notice to the article indicating that, &quot;This piece does not meet Slate&#x27;s editorial standards, having failed to properly attribute quotations and information...&quot;. However, &quot;Slate&quot; Editor-in-Chief Jacob Weisberg, who had, months before, exchanged barbs with one of the aforementioned anonymous bloggers on Twitter in defense of Zakaria, maintained his original position that what Zakaria did was not plagiarism.

Corrections to selected Zakaria columns were also issued by &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, which had responded to the initial allegations by telling the &quot;Poynter&quot; media industry news site that it would investigate. Later on the same day, November 10, the &quot;Post&quot; said that it had found &quot;problematic&quot; sourcing in five Zakaria columns, &quot;and will likely note the lack of attribution in archived editions of the articles.&quot; However, editors at &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and &quot;Newsweek &quot;denied that Zakaria&#x27;s errors constituted plagiarism.

==Personal life==
Zakaria is a naturalized citizen of the United States. In 1997, Zakaria married Paula Throckmorton, a jewelry designer. The couple have three children. In July 2018, his wife filed for divorce.

He lives on the Upper West Side in New York City. As a graduate student, Zakaria fostered a love for cooking and credits chefs Jacques Pépin and Julia Child with his greater interest in food. Zakaria is a self-described secular and nonpracticing Muslim. He added: &quot;My views on faith are complicated—somewhere between deism and agnosticism. I am completely secular in my outlook.&quot; His ex-wife is a Christian and his three children have not been raised as Muslims.

==Bibliography==
* &quot;The American Encounter: The United States and the Making of the Modern World Essays from 75 Years of Foreign Affairs&quot;, edited by James F. Hoge and Fareed Zakaria, (Basic Books; 1997) 
* &quot;From Wealth to Power: The Unusual origins of America&#x27;s World Role&quot;, Fareed Zakaria, (Princeton University Press; 1998) 
* &quot;The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad&quot;, Fareed Zakaria, (W.W. Norton &amp; Company; 2003) 
* &quot;The Post-American World&quot;, Fareed Zakaria, (W.W. Norton &amp; Company; 2008) 
* &quot;The Post-American World, Release 2.0&quot;, Fareed Zakaria, (W.W. Norton &amp; Company; 2011) 
* &quot;In Defense of a Liberal Education&quot;, Fareed Zakaria, (W.W. Norton &amp; Company; 2015) 
* &quot;Ten Lessons for a Post-Pandemic World&quot;, Fareed Zakaria, (W.W. Norton &amp; Company; 2020) 
* &quot;Age of Revolutions: Progress and Backlash from 1600 to the Present&quot;, Fareed Zakaria, (W. W. Norton &amp; Company; 2024) 

==See also==
* Indians in the New York City metropolitan region
* List of Yale University people
* List of Harvard University people
* New Yorkers in journalism

==References==
==External links==
* FareedZakaria.com Official site
* Global Public Square (GPS) at &quot;CNN&quot;
* Column archive at &quot;The Daily Star&quot;
* Column archive (through 2010) at &quot;Newsweek&quot;
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333425" start="0" end="20" title="Fareed Zakaria" label="Fareed Rafiq Zakaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="139" end="142" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434939" start="156" end="174" title="Fareed Zakaria GPS" label="Fareed Zakaria GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="223" end="242" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="284" end="292" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="316" end="338" title="Newsweek International" label="Newsweek International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338722" start="353" end="368" title="editor at large" label="editor at large"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="378" end="382" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="440" end="446" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429498" start="460" end="474" title="Konkani Muslims" label="Konkani Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q335052" start="495" end="508" title="Rafiq Zakaria" label="Rafiq Zakaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="559" end="583" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437868" start="620" end="634" title="Fatima Zakaria" label="Fatima Zakaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767391" start="718" end="739" title="The Sunday Times (India)" label="Sunday Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="767" end="784" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052294" start="808" end="840" title="Cathedral and John Connon School" label="Cathedral and John Connon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="894" end="909" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047411" start="949" end="969" title="Yale Political Union" label="Yale Political Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757654" start="1000" end="1022" title="Yale Political Monthly" label="Yale Political Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560506" start="1046" end="1060" title="Scroll and Key" label="Scroll and Key"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1090" end="1108" title="Party of the Right (Yale)#Party of the Right" label="Party of the Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1126" end="1141" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282253" start="1176" end="1201" title="anti-apartheid divestment" label="anti-apartheid divestment"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1315" end="1333" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="1366" end="1386" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q555421" start="1391" end="1407" title="Stanley Hoffmann" label="Stanley Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q544500" start="1453" end="1467" title="Robert Keohane" label="Robert Keohane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043394" start="1519" end="1542" title="Foreign relations of the United States" label="American foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1546" end="1553" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="1599" end="1614" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q357813" start="1790" end="1807" title="adjunct professor" label="adjunct professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="1811" end="1830" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="1861" end="1884" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="1932" end="1954" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek International"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="2002" end="2010" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2052" end="2056" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="2142" end="2161" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="2248" end="2268" title="The Atlantic Monthly" label="The Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2329" end="2347" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="2361" end="2384" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="2398" end="2412" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="2426" end="2442" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="2521" end="2526" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419967" start="2556" end="2573" title="George Saintsbury" label="George Saintsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419967" start="2585" end="2599" title="George Saintsbury" label="English writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250932" start="2735" end="2756" title="The Future of Freedom" label="The Future of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326268" start="2785" end="2808" title="The Post-American World" label="The Post-American World"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="3059" end="3085" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="New York Times bestsellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="3348" end="3351" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q112674" start="3365" end="3401" title="This Week (ABC TV series)" label="This Week with George Stephanopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468255" start="3517" end="3553" title="Foreign Exchange with Fareed Zakaria" label="Foreign Exchange with Fareed Zakaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="3563" end="3566" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434939" start="3601" end="3619" title="Fareed Zakaria GPS" label="Fareed Zakaria GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="3675" end="3678" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="3969" end="3972" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15036515" start="3986" end="3990" title="Vice (TV series)" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884400" start="4061" end="4080" title="Berggruen Institute" label="Berggruen Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324637" start="4138" end="4153" title="The Berggruen Prize" label="Berggruen Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="4211" end="4219" title="Centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="4271" end="4288" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="political liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="4292" end="4304" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448005" start="4323" end="4339" title="Radical center (politics)" label="radical centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655924" start="4341" end="4362" title="George Stephanopoulos" label="George Stephanopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942165" start="4449" end="4460" title="Pigeonholing" label="pigeonholed"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="4825" end="4837" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="4929" end="4935" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817576" start="5012" end="5026" title="American media" label="American media"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="5489" end="5505" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="5548" end="5563" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="5575" end="5592" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="5748" end="5764" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250932" start="5987" end="6008" title="The Future of Freedom" label="The Future of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326268" start="6025" end="6048" title="The Post-American World" label="The Post-American World"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="6170" end="6187" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007647" start="6212" end="6237" title="constitutional liberalism" label="constitutional liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q605479" start="6498" end="6517" title="illiberal democracy" label="illiberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7138" end="7142" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470191" start="7144" end="7159" title="Leon Wieseltier" label="Leon Wieseltier"/>
<link wikidata="Q840625" start="7226" end="7237" title="shibboleths" label="shibboleths"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="7253" end="7264" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="7521" end="7552" title="2008 U.S. presidential election" label="2008 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563386" start="7562" end="7570" title="List of Barack Obama presidential campaign endorsements, 2008" label="endorsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7571" end="7583" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7622" end="7640" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q310950" start="7739" end="7757" title="Thomas Friedman" label="Thomas L. Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="7805" end="7827" title="9/11 terrorist attacks" label="9/11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082705" start="7918" end="7935" title="Islamic extremism" label="Islamic extremism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7968" end="7973" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q744448" start="8013" end="8036" title="Foreign policy of the United States" label="American foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="8187" end="8202" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="8472" end="8493" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="8793" end="8807" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8821" end="8835" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722016" start="8986" end="9004" title="History of Iraq (2003–2011)" label="occupation of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243806" start="9085" end="9102" title="de-Baathification" label="de-Baathification"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519677" start="9154" end="9171" title="democracy in Iraq" label="democracy in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067814" start="9369" end="9374" title="Iraq War troop surge of 2007" label="surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q29197866" start="9928" end="9947" title="2017 Shayrat missile strike" label="U.S. missile strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="10022" end="10034" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q97051339" start="10243" end="10278" title="A Letter on Justice and Open Debate" label="A Letter on Justice and Open Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708315" start="10493" end="10513" title="Military budget of the United States" label="U.S. military budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="10552" end="10556" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="F-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="10728" end="10752" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336908" start="11506" end="11529" title="National Magazine Award" label="National Magazine Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="11599" end="11612" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948494" start="11674" end="11686" title="India Abroad" label="India Abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q466320" start="11765" end="11774" title="Mira Nair" label="Mira Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="11871" end="11889" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="11891" end="11907" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="11909" end="11924" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="11926" end="11950" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="11956" end="11975" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="11977" end="11992" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q810771" start="11994" end="12007" title="Bates College" label="Bates College"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="12017" end="12039" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186110" start="12091" end="12111" title="Philomathean Society" label="Philomathean Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="12119" end="12145" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q932650" start="12187" end="12200" title="Padma Bhushan" label="Padma Bhushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570465" start="12461" end="12478" title="Global leadership" label="Global Leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599066" start="12514" end="12530" title="Yale Corporation" label="Yale Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118524" start="12635" end="12671" title="International Center for Journalists" label="International Center for Journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603732" start="12807" end="12822" title="State of Denial" label="State of Denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q312782" start="12841" end="12853" title="Bob Woodward" label="Bob Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="12863" end="12882" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q219861" start="13045" end="13059" title="Paul Wolfowitz" label="Paul Wolfowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13091" end="13109" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="13206" end="13220" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="13251" end="13267" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="13648" end="13670" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q238063" start="13712" end="13718" title="Park51" label="Park51"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692282" start="13774" end="13797" title="World Trade Center site" label="World Trade Center site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434939" start="14486" end="14504" title="Fareed Zakaria GPS" label="Fareed Zakaria GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192915" start="14887" end="14898" title="Jill Lepore" label="Jill Lepore"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="15358" end="15365" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774107" start="15382" end="15390" title="The Week" label="The Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858594" start="16042" end="16056" title="Jacob Weisberg" label="Jacob Weisberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978233" start="16419" end="16426" title="Poynter Institute" label="Poynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="16841" end="16851" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="16885" end="16904" title="Citizenship of the United States" label="naturalized citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q429687" start="17083" end="17098" title="Upper West Side" label="Upper West Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132519" start="17194" end="17207" title="Jacques Pépin" label="Jacques Pépin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214477" start="17212" end="17223" title="Julia Child" label="Julia Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="17389" end="17394" title="deism" label="deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250932" start="17901" end="17922" title="The Future of Freedom" label="The Future of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326268" start="18029" end="18052" title="The Post-American World" label="The Post-American World"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891906" start="18568" end="18616" title="Indians in the New York City metropolitan region" label="Indians in the New York City metropolitan region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432904" start="18619" end="18649" title="List of Yale University people" label="List of Yale University people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572908" start="18652" end="18685" title="List of Harvard University people" label="List of Harvard University people"/>
<link wikidata="Q56724095" start="18688" end="18713" title="New Yorkers in journalism" label="New Yorkers in journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="18821" end="18824" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q494370" start="18857" end="18871" title="Daily Star (Lebanon)" label="The Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="18919" end="18927" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980865" wikidata="Q781973" url="?curid=980865" title="Rust Belt">
<text>The Rust Belt, formerly the Steel Belt or Factory Belt, is an area of the United States that underwent substantial industrial decline in the late 20th century. The region is centered in the Great Lakes and Mid Atlantic regions of the United States. Common definitions of the Rust Belt include Northern Illinois, three regions of Pennsylvania (the Coal Region, Lehigh Valley, and Western Pennsylvania), Upstate New York, and southeastern Wisconsin. Smaller parts of Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio are also considered part of the Rust Belt. Some broader geographic definitions include of the region includes parts of Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, and West Virginia. 

Between the late 19th century to the late 20th century, the Rust Belt formed the industrial heartland of the country, and its economies were largely based on iron and steel, automobile production, coal mining, and the processing of raw materials. The term &quot;Rust Belt&quot;, derived from the substance rust, refers to the socially corrosive effects of economic decline, population loss, and urban decay attributable to deindustrialization. The term gained popularity in the U.S. beginning in the 1980s, when it was commonly contrasted with the Sun Belt, whose economy was then thriving. 

The Rust Belt experienced industrial decline beginning in the 1950s and 1960s, with manufacturing peaking as a percentage of U.S. GDP in 1953 and declining incrementally in subsequent years and especially in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Demand for coal declined as industry turned to oil and natural gas, and U.S. steel was undercut by competition from Germany and Japan. High labor costs in the Rust Belt were also a factor in encouraging the region&#x27;s heavy manufacturing companies to relocate to the Sun Belt or overseas or to discontinue entirely. The U.S. automotive industry also declined as consumers turned to fuel-efficient foreign-manufactured vehicles after the 1973 oil crisis raised the cost of gasoline and foreign auto manufacturers began opening factories in the U.S., which were largely not strongly unionized like the U.S. auto manufacturers in the Rust Belt. Families moved away from Rust Belt communities, leaving cities with falling tax revenues, declining infrastructure, and abandoned buildings. Major Rust Belt cities include Baltimore, Buffalo, Chicago, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Detroit, Milwaukee, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Rochester, and St. Louis. New England was also hit hard by industrial decline, but cities closer to the East Coast, including in the metropolitan areas of Boston, New York, and Washington, D.C. were able to adapt by diversifying or transforming their economies, shifting to services, advanced manufacturing, and high-tech industries.

Since the 1980s, presidential candidates have devoted much of their time to the economic concerns of the Rust Belt region, which includes several populous swing states, including Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. These states were crucial to Republican Donald Trump&#x27;s victories in the 2016 and 2024 presidential elections and the losses by Democrats Hillary Clinton in 2016 and Kamala Harris in 2024.

==Background==
In the 20th century, local economies in these states specialized in large-scale manufacturing of finished medium to heavy industrial and consumer products, as well as the transportation and processing of the raw materials required for heavy industry. The area was referred to as the Manufacturing Belt, Factory Belt, or Steel Belt as distinct from the agricultural Midwestern states forming the so-called Corn Belt and Great Plains states that are often called the &quot;breadbasket of America&quot;.

The flourishing industrial manufacturing in the region was caused in part by the proximity to the Great Lakes waterways, and abundance of paved roads, water canals, and railroads. After the transportation infrastructure linked the iron ore found in the so-called Iron Range of northern Minnesota, Wisconsin and Upper Michigan with the coking coal mined from the Appalachian Basin in Western Pennsylvania and Western Virginia, the Steel Belt was born. Soon it developed into the Factory Belt with its manufacturing cities: Chicago, Buffalo, Detroit, Milwaukee, Cincinnati, Toledo, Cleveland, St. Louis, Youngstown, and Pittsburgh, among others. This region for decades served as a magnet for immigrants from Austria-Hungary, Poland, and Russia, as well as Yugoslavia, Italy, and the Levant in some areas, who provided the industrial facilities with inexpensive labor. These migrants drawn by labor were also accompanied by African Americans during the Great Migration who were drawn by jobs and better economic opportunity.
Following several &quot;boom&quot; periods from the late-19th to the mid-20th century, cities in this area struggled to adapt to a variety of adverse economic and social conditions. From 1979 to 1982, known as the Volcker shock, the U.S. Federal Reserve decided to raise the base interest rate in the United States to 19%. High-interest rates attracted wealthy foreign &quot;hot money&quot; into U.S. banks and caused the U.S. dollar to appreciate. This made U.S. products more expensive for foreigners to buy and also made imports much cheaper for Americans to purchase. The misaligned exchange rate was not rectified until 1986, by which time Japanese imports, in particular, had made rapid inroads into U.S. markets. 

From 1987 to 1999, the U.S. stock market went into a stratospheric rise, and this continued to pull wealthy foreign money into U.S. banks, which biased the exchange rate against manufactured goods. Related issues include the decline of the iron and steel industry, the movement of manufacturing to the southeastern states with their lower labor costs, the layoffs due to the rise of automation in industrial processes, the decreased need for labor in making steel products, new organizational methods such as just-in-time manufacturing which allowed factories to maintain production with fewer workers, the internationalization of American business, and the liberalization of foreign trade policies due to globalization. Cities struggling with these conditions shared several difficulties, including population loss, lack of education, declining tax revenues, high unemployment and crime, drugs, swelling welfare rolls, deficit spending, and poor municipal credit ratings.

==Geography==

Since the term &quot;Rust Belt&quot; is used to refer to a set of economic and social conditions rather than to an overall geographical region of the U.S., the Rust Belt has no precise boundaries. The extent to which a community may have been described as a &quot;Rust Belt city&quot; depends on how great a role industrial manufacturing played in its local economy in the past and how it does now, as well as on perceptions of the economic viability and living standards of the present day.

News media occasionally refer to a patchwork of defunct centers of heavy industry and manufacturing across the Great Lakes and Midwestern United States as the &quot;snow belt&quot;, the manufacturing belt, or the factory belt because of their vibrant industrial economies in the past. This includes most of the cities of the Midwest as far west as the Mississippi River, including St. Louis, and many of those in the Great Lakes and Northern New York. At the center of this expanse lies an area stretching from northern Indiana and southern Michigan in the west to Upstate New York in the east, where local tax revenues relied more heavily on manufacturing than on any other sector.

Prior to World War II, cities in the Rust Belt region were among the largest in the U.S. However, by the end of the 20th century, their population had fallen the most in the country.

==History==


The linking of the former Northwest Territory with the once-rapidly industrializing East Coast was effected through several large-scale infrastructural projects, most notably the Erie Canal in 1825, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad in 1830, the Allegheny Portage Railroad in 1834, and the consolidation of the New York Central Railroad following the end of the American Civil War in 1875. A gate was opened between a variety of burgeoning industries on the interior North American continent and the markets of large East Coast cities and Western Europe.

Coal, iron ore, and other raw materials were shipped in from surrounding regions which emerged as major ports on the Great Lakes and served as transportation hubs for the region with proximity to railroad lines. Coming in the other direction were millions of European immigrants, who populated the cities along the Great Lakes shores with then-unprecedented speed. Chicago was a rural trading post in the 1840s but grew to be as big as Paris by the time of the 1893 Columbian Exposition.

Early signs of the difficulty in the northern states were evident early in the 20th century before the &quot;boom years&quot; were even over. Lowell, Massachusetts, once the center of textile production in the U.S., was described in the magazine &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot; as a &quot;depressed industrial desert&quot; as early as 1931, as its textile concerns were being uprooted and sent southward, primarily to the Carolinas. 

In the first half of the 20th century, the Great Depression followed by American entry into World War II was followed by a rapid return to economic growth, during which much of the industrial North reached its peak population and industrial output.

The northern cities experienced changes that followed the end of World War II, with the onset of the outward migration of residents to newer suburban communities, and the declining role of manufacturing in the American economy.

Outsourcing of manufacturing jobs in tradeable goods has been an important issue in the region. One source has been globalization and the expansion of worldwide free trade agreements. Anti-globalization groups argue that trade with developing countries has resulted in stiff competition from countries such as China which pegs its currency to the dollar and has much lower prevailing wages, forcing domestic wages to drift downward. Some economists are concerned that long-run effects of high trade deficits and outsourcing are a cause of economic problems in the U.S. with high external debt (amount owed to foreign lenders) and a serious deterioration in the United States net international investment position (NIIP) (−24% of GDP).

Some economists contend that the U.S. is borrowing to fund consumption of imports while accumulating unsustainable amounts of debt. On June 26, 2009, Jeff Immelt, CEO of General Electric, called for the U.S. to increase its manufacturing base employment to 20% of the workforce, commenting that the U.S. has outsourced too much in some areas and can no longer rely on the financial sector and consumer spending to drive demand.

Since the 1960s, the expansion of worldwide free trade agreements have been less favorable to U.S. workers. Imported goods such as steel cost much less to produce in Third World countries with cheap foreign labor (see steel crisis). The introduction of pollution regulation in the late 1960&#x27;s, combined with rapidly increasing U.S. energy costs (see 1970s energy crisis) caused much U.S. heavy industry to begin moving to other countries. Beginning with the recession of 1970–71, a new pattern of deindustrializing economy emerged. Competitive devaluation combined with each successive downturn saw traditional U.S. manufacturing workers experiencing lay-offs. In general, in the Factory Belt employment in the manufacturing sector declined by 32.9% between 1969 and 1996.

Wealth-producing primary and secondary sector jobs such as those in manufacturing and computer software were often replaced by much-lower-paying wealth-consuming jobs such as those in retail and government in the service sector when the economy recovered.

In 1984, an incremental expansion of the U.S. trade deficit with China began combined with growing trade deficits with Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. As a result, the traditional manufacturing workers in the region have experienced economic upheaval. This effect has devastated government budgets across the U.S. and increased corporate borrowing to fund retiree benefits. Some economists believe that GDP and employment can be dragged down by large long-run trade deficits.

==Free trade, deindustrialization and wage deflation==
In early 2017, Joseph Stiglitz wrote that &quot;the American middle class is indeed the loser of globalization or free trade&quot; (the diminution of international trade regulations as well as tariffs, taxes) and &quot;China, with its large emerging middle class, is among the big beneficiaries of globalization&quot;. &quot;Thanks to globalization, in terms of purchasing-power parity, China actually has already become the largest economy in the world in September 2015&quot;.

Studies by David Autor, David Dorn and Gordon Hanson show that free trade with China cost Americans around one million manufacturing workers between 1991 and 2007.Competition from Chinese imports has led to manufacturing job losses and declining wages. They also found that offsetting job gains in other industries never materialized. Closed companies no longer order goods and services from local non-manufacturing firms and former industrial workers may be unemployed for years or permanently. Increased import exposure reduces wages in the non-manufacturing sector due to lower demand for non-manufacturing goods and increased labor supply from workers who have lost their manufacturing jobs. Other work by this team of economists, with Daron Acemoglu and Brendan Price, estimates that competition from Chinese imports cost the U.S. as many as 2.4 million jobs in total between 1999 and 2011.

Avraham Ebenstein, Margaret McMillan, Ann Harrison also pointed out in their article “Why are American Workers getting Poorer? China, Trade and Offshoring” these negative effects of trade with China on American workers.

The Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning think tank, has claimed that free trade created a large trade deficit in the United States for decades which lead to the closure of many factories and cost the United States millions of jobs in the manufacturing sector. Trade deficits lead to significant wage losses, not only for workers in the manufacturing sector, but also for all workers throughout the economy who do not have a university degree. For example, in 2011, 100 million full-time, full-year workers without a university degree suffered an average loss of $1,800 (~$ in ) on their annual salary. According to the Economic Policy Institute, the workers who lost their jobs in the manufacturing sector and who have to accept a reduction in their wages to find work in other sectors, are creating competition, that reduces the wages of workers already employed in these other sectors. The threat of offshoring of production facilities leads workers to accept wage cuts to keep their jobs.

According to the Economic Policy Institute, trade agreements have not reduced trade deficits but rather increased them. The growing trade deficit with China comes from China&#x27;s manipulation of its currency, dumping policies, subsidies, trade barriers that give it a very important advantage in international trade. In addition, industrial jobs lost by imports from China are significantly better paid than jobs created by exports to China. So even if imports were equal to exports, workers would still lose out on their wages.

According to the Economic Policy Institute, the manufacturing sector is a sector with very high productivity growth, which promotes high wages and good benefits for its workers. Indeed, this sector accounts for more than two thirds of private sector research and development and employs more than twice as many scientists and engineers as the rest of the economy. The manufacturing sector therefore provides a very important stimulus to overall economic growth. Manufacturing is also associated with well-paid service jobs such as accounting, business management, research and development and legal services. Deindustrialisation is therefore also leading to a significant loss of these service jobs. Deindustrialization thus means the disappearance of a very important driver of economic growth.

In 2010, Paul Krugman called for a general tariff rate of 25% on all Chinese products to halt the deindustrialization of the United States and the offshoring of American industries and factories to China. Paul Krugman notes that the trade deficit caused by free trade has been detrimental to the U.S. manufacturing sector: “There is no doubt that increased imports, particularly from China, have reduced manufacturing employment..., the complete elimination of the U.S. manufacturing trade deficit would add about two million manufacturing jobs. He expected Chinese surpluses to destroy 1.4 million American jobs by 2011. He therefore proposed taxing the products of certain countries to force them to readjust their currencies.

===Outcomes===

In 1999, Francis Fukuyama wrote that the social and cultural consequences of deindustrialization and manufacturing decline that turned a former thriving Factory Belt into a Rust Belt as a part of a bigger transitional trend that he called the &quot;Great Disruption&quot;: &quot;People associate the information age with the advent of the Internet in the 1990s, but the shift from the industrial era started more than a generation earlier, with the deindustrialization of the Rust Belt in the United States and comparable movements away from manufacturing in other industrialized countries. … The decline is readily measurable in statistics on crime, fatherless children, broken trust, reduced opportunities for and outcomes from education, and the like&quot;.

Problems associated with the Rust Belt persist even today, particularly around the eastern Great Lakes states, and many once-booming manufacturing metropolises dramatically slowed down. From 1970 to 2006, Cleveland, Detroit, Buffalo, and Pittsburgh lost about 45% of their population and median household incomes fell: in Cleveland and Detroit by about 30%, in Buffalo by 20%, and Pittsburgh by 10%.

During the mid-1990s, several Rust Belt metropolitan areas experienced a suspension in negative growth, indicated by stabilizing unemployment, wages, and populations. During the first decade of the 21st century, however, a negative trend still persisted: Detroit, Michigan lost 25.7% of its population; Gary, Indiana, 22%; Youngstown, Ohio, 18.9%; Flint, Michigan, 18.7%; and Cleveland, Ohio, 14.5%.

In the late 2000s, American manufacturing recovered faster from the Great Recession of 2008 than the other sectors of the economy, and a number of initiatives, both public and private, are encouraging the development of alternative fuel, nano and other technologies. 

Along with the neighboring Golden Horseshoe of southern Ontario, the Rust Belt composes one of the world&#x27;s major manufacturing regions.

===Transformation===
Delving into the past and musing on the future of Rust Belt states, a 2010 Brookings Institution report suggests that the Great Lakes region has a sizable potential for transformation, citing already existing global trade networks, clean energy/low carbon capacity, developed innovation infrastructure, and higher educational network.

Different strategies were proposed in order to reverse the fortunes of the former Factory Belt including building casinos and convention centers, retaining the creative class through arts and downtown renewal, encouraging the knowledge economy type of entrepreneurship, and other steps. This includes growing new industrial base with a pool of skilled labor, rebuilding the infrastructure and infrasystems, creating research and development-focused university-business partnerships, and close cooperation between central, state and local government, and business.

New types of research and development-intensive nontraditional manufacturing have emerged recently in the Rust Belt, including biotechnology, the polymer industry, infotech, and nanotech. Information technology is seen as representing an opportunity for the Rust Belt&#x27;s revitalization. Among the successful recent examples is the Detroit Aircraft Corporation, which specializes in unmanned aerial systems integration, testing and aerial cinematography services.

In Pittsburgh, robotics research centers and companies such as the National Robotics Engineering Center and Robotics Institute, Aethon Inc., American Robot Corporation, Automatika, Quantapoint, Blue Belt Technologies, and Seegrid are creating state-of-the-art robotic technology applications. Akron, a former &quot;Rubber Capital of the World&quot; that lost 35,000 jobs after major tire and rubber manufacturers Goodrich, Firestone, and General Tire closed their production lines, is now again well known around the world as a center of polymer research with four hundred polymer-related manufacturing and distribution companies operating in the area. The turnaround was accomplished in part by a partnership between Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Company, which chose to stay, the University of Akron, and the city mayor&#x27;s office. The Akron Global Business Accelerator that jump-started a score of successful business ventures in Akron resides in the refurbished B.F. Goodrich tire factory.

Additive manufacturing, or 3D printing, creates another promising avenue for the manufacturing resurgence. Such companies as MakerGear from Beachwood, Ohio, or ExOne Company from North Huntingdon, Pennsylvania, are designing and manufacturing industrial and consumer products using 3-D imaging systems.

In 2013, &quot;The Economist&quot; reported a growing trend of reshoring, or inshoring, of manufacturing when a growing number of American companies were moving their production facilities from overseas back home. Rust Belt states can ultimately benefit from this process of international insourcing.

There have also been attempts to reinvent properties in the Rust Belt in order to reverse its economic decline. Buildings with compartmentalization unsuitable for today&#x27;s uses were acquired and renewed to facilitate new businesses. These business activities suggest that the revival is taking place in the once-stagnant area. The CHIPS and Science Act, which became effective in August 2022, was designed to rebuild the manufacturing sector with thousands of jobs and research programs in states like Ohio focusing on making products like semiconductors due to the global chip shortage of the early 2020s.

==In popular culture==
The Rust Belt is depicted in various films, television shows, and songs. It is the subject of the popular Billy Joel song, &quot;Allentown,&quot; originally released on &quot;The Nylon Curtain&quot; album in 1982. The song uses Allentown as a metaphor for the resilience of working class Americans in distressed industrial cities during the recession of the early 1980s.

The Rust Belt is the setting for Philipp Meyer&#x27;s 2009 novel &quot;American Rust&quot; and its 2021 television adaptation. A core plot device of both is the economic, social, and population decline facing the fictional Western Pennsylvanian town of Buell, itself brought about by thorough de-industrialization typical of the region.

The 21st century evolution of this region of the U.S. is also depicted through the fictional town of New Canaan, Ohio, in Stephen Markley&#x27;s 2018 bestseller novel, &quot;Ohio&quot;. The town is described through both the teenage glamour of high school lens in the early 2000s and the harsh reality lens of what the town became 10 years later.

==See also==
* Corn Belt
* Decline of Detroit
* Deindustrialization
* Dutch disease
* Early 1980s recession in the United States
* Economy of Allentown, Pennsylvania
* Economy of the United States
* Economy of Youngstown, Ohio
* Modern ruins
* Outsourcing
* Shrinking city
* Snowbelt
* Steel City
* Steel crisis
* Sunbelt
* Urban decay
==References==
==Further reading==
* Cooke, Philip. &quot;The Rise of the Rustbelt&quot;. London: UCL Press, 1995. 
* Coppola, Alessandro. &quot;Apocalypse town: cronache dalla fine della civiltà urbana&quot;. Roma: Laterza, 2012. 
* Denison, Daniel R., and Stuart L. Hart. &quot;Revival in the rust belt&quot;. Ann Arbor, Mich: University of Michigan Press, 1987. 
* Engerman, Stanley L., and Robert E. Gallman. &quot;The Cambridge Economic History of the United States: The Twentieth Century&quot;. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
* Hagedorn, John, and Perry Macon. &quot;People and Folks: Gangs, Crime, and the Underclass in a Rust-Belt City&quot;. Chicago: Lake View Press, 1988. 
* High, Steven C. &quot;Industrial Sunset: The Making of North America&#x27;s Rust Belt, 1969–1984&quot;. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2003. 
* Higgins, James Jeffrey. &quot;Images of the Rust Belt&quot;. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1999. 
* Lopez, Steven Henry. &quot;Reorganizing the Rust Belt: An Inside Study of the American Labor Movement&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004. 
* Preston, Richard. &quot;American Steel&quot;. New York: Avon Books, 1992. 
* Rotella, Carlo. &quot;Good with Their Hands: Boxers, Bluesmen, and Other Characters from the Rust Belt&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002. 
* Teaford, Jon C. &quot;Cities of the Heartland: The Rise and Fall of the Industrial Midwest&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993. 
* Warren, Kenneth. &quot;The American Steel Industry, 1850–1970: A Geographical Interpretation&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973. 
* Winant, Gabriel. &quot;The Next Shift: The Fall of Industry and the Rise of Health Care in Rust Belt America&quot; (Harvard University Press, 2021), focus on Pittsburgh
==External links==

* Industrial Heartland map and photographs
* Rust Belt map
* Changing Gears Documentary Film Collection Digital Media Repository, Ball State University Libraries
* Collection: &quot;Rust Belt&quot; at the University of Michigan Museum of Art</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="4" end="13" title="Rust Belt" label="Rust Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="28" end="38" title="Rust Belt" label="Steel Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="42" end="54" title="Rust Belt" label="Factory Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="74" end="87" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="115" end="133" title="Deindustrialization" label="industrial decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="190" end="201" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="206" end="218" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="234" end="247" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058402" start="293" end="310" title="Northern Illinois" label="Northern Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="329" end="341" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137767" start="347" end="358" title="Coal Region" label="Coal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q123202" start="360" end="373" title="Lehigh Valley" label="Lehigh Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988152" start="379" end="399" title="Western Pennsylvania" label="Western Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="402" end="418" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="437" end="446" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="465" end="472" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="474" end="482" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="488" end="492" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="612" end="616" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="618" end="626" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="628" end="636" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="638" end="647" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="649" end="657" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="659" end="669" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="675" end="688" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25323750" start="850" end="864" title="Iron and steel industry in the United States" label="iron and steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995270" start="866" end="887" title="Automotive industry in the United States" label="automobile production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137832" start="889" end="900" title="Coal mining in the United States" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="924" end="937" title="Raw material" label="raw materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q184197" start="998" end="1002" title="rust" label="rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357355" start="1048" end="1064" title="economic collapse" label="economic decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q284137" start="1066" end="1081" title="population decline" label="population loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="1087" end="1098" title="urban decay" label="urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="1240" end="1248" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="1410" end="1418" title="Economy of the United States" label="U.S. GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="1572" end="1575" title="Petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="1580" end="1591" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1641" end="1648" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1653" end="1658" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="1965" end="1980" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467234" start="2100" end="2118" title="Labor unions in the United States" label="strongly unionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q385503" start="2246" end="2258" title="Tax revenue" label="tax revenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="2342" end="2351" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="2353" end="2360" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2362" end="2369" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="2371" end="2381" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="2383" end="2392" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="2394" end="2401" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="2403" end="2412" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2414" end="2426" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="2428" end="2438" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="2440" end="2449" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="2455" end="2464" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="2466" end="2477" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="2544" end="2554" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="2595" end="2601" title="Greater Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="2603" end="2611" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="2617" end="2633" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q90256569" start="2656" end="2668" title="Economic diversity" label="diversifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="2714" end="2722" title="Service economy" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="2930" end="2942" title="swing state" label="swing states"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3028" end="3038" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="3039" end="3051" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="3076" end="3080" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="3085" end="3112" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3131" end="3140" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="3141" end="3156" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="3169" end="3182" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133130" start="3613" end="3622" title="Corn Belt" label="Corn Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="3627" end="3639" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="3808" end="3819" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="3941" end="3949" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154526" start="3973" end="3983" title="Iron Range" label="Iron Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="3996" end="4005" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="4021" end="4035" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48969047" start="4045" end="4056" title="Metallurgical coal" label="coking coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535417" start="4072" end="4089" title="Geology of the Appalachians" label="Appalachian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988152" start="4093" end="4113" title="Western Pennsylvania" label="Western Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866888" start="4118" end="4134" title="Western Virginia" label="Western Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="4417" end="4432" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4434" end="4440" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4446" end="4452" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="4465" end="4475" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4477" end="4482" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="4492" end="4498" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="4632" end="4649" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="4661" end="4676" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="4776" end="4794" title="Gilded Age" label="from the late-19th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634334" start="4802" end="4818" title="Post–World War II economic expansion" label="mid-20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q349785" start="4947" end="4960" title="Paul Volcker" label="Volcker shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="4966" end="4986" title="Federal Reserve" label="U.S. Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5034" end="5047" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="5155" end="5166" title="United States dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25323750" start="5695" end="5718" title="Iron and steel industry in the United States" label="iron and steel industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="5838" end="5848" title="automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="5964" end="5990" title="Lean manufacturing" label="just-in-time manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q746418" start="6113" end="6127" title="liberalization" label="liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="6161" end="6174" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418058" start="6255" end="6270" title="Shrinking city" label="population loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="7289" end="7306" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="7502" end="7518" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7630" end="7642" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="7845" end="7864" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="7955" end="7979" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructural projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="7998" end="8008" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q805757" start="8022" end="8049" title="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad" label="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677208" start="8063" end="8089" title="Allegheny Portage Railroad" label="Allegheny Portage Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="8128" end="8153" title="New York Central Railroad" label="New York Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8179" end="8197" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="8284" end="8297" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="8356" end="8370" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="8809" end="8814" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="8834" end="8859" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="1893 Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="9004" end="9025" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="9114" end="9127" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747220" start="9278" end="9287" title="Carolinas" label="Carolinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="9334" end="9350" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="9483" end="9488" title="Northern United States" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="9931" end="9941" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10080" end="10085" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="10263" end="10277" title="Balance of trade" label="trade deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q461319" start="10349" end="10362" title="external debt" label="external debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q779297" start="10445" end="10482" title="net international investment position" label="net international investment position"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686485" start="10656" end="10667" title="Jeff Immelt" label="Jeff Immelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="10676" end="10692" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164722" start="10899" end="10916" title="consumer spending" label="consumer spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="11101" end="11112" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q872158" start="11153" end="11165" title="steel crisis" label="steel crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574284" start="11290" end="11309" title="1970s energy crisis" label="1970s energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="11556" end="11569" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="11927" end="11934" title="tertiary sector of the economy" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="12090" end="12095" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="12097" end="12108" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="12114" end="12120" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="12518" end="12533" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="12600" end="12613" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13062" end="13067" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="13287" end="13297" title="Industry (economics)" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821213" start="13513" end="13518" title="wages" label="wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282092" start="14105" end="14130" title="Economic Policy Institute" label="Economic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="14203" end="14216" title="trade deficit" label="trade deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="14284" end="14293" title="factories" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051832" start="15009" end="15019" title="offshoring" label="offshoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="15232" end="15245" title="trade deficit" label="trade deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="15301" end="15309" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="15340" end="15345" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111958" start="15728" end="15740" title="productivity" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="16241" end="16260" title="Deindustrialisation" label="Deindustrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="16438" end="16450" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186123" start="17184" end="17200" title="Francis Fukuyama" label="Francis Fukuyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="18807" end="18822" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535009" start="19035" end="19051" title="Golden Horseshoe" label="Golden Horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="19064" end="19071" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="19246" end="19267" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="20199" end="20212" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456979" start="20218" end="20225" title="Polymer science" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="20236" end="20244" title="Information technology" label="infotech"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="20250" end="20258" title="Nanotechnology" label="nanotech"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="20260" end="20282" title="Information technology" label="Information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265845" start="20407" end="20435" title="Detroit Aircraft Corporation" label="Detroit Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978137" start="20607" end="20643" title="National Robotics Engineering Center" label="National Robotics Engineering Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353431" start="20648" end="20666" title="Robotics Institute" label="Robotics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826622" start="20709" end="20719" title="Automatika" label="Automatika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268892" start="20721" end="20732" title="Quantapoint" label="Quantapoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="20833" end="20838" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537591" start="20953" end="20961" title="Goodrich Corporation" label="Goodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q420837" start="20963" end="20972" title="Firestone Tire and Rubber Company" label="Firestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q369128" start="20978" end="20990" title="General Tire" label="General Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="21258" end="21292" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear Tire &amp;amp; Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346135" start="21319" end="21338" title="University of Akron" label="University of Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q229367" start="21535" end="21573" title="3D printing" label="Additive manufacturing, or 3D printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q812890" start="21675" end="21690" title="Beachwood, Ohio" label="Beachwood, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055678" start="21714" end="21744" title="North Huntingdon Township, Pennsylvania" label="North Huntingdon, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="21854" end="21867" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21902" end="21911" title="Insourcing#Terminology" label="reshoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051832" start="21916" end="21925" title="inshoring" label="inshoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="22128" end="22138" title="insourcing" label="insourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q113449362" start="22476" end="22497" title="CHIPS and Science Act" label="CHIPS and Science Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q106971802" start="22711" end="22750" title="2020–2023 global chip shortage" label="global chip shortage of the early 2020s"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="22882" end="22892" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732053" start="22905" end="22914" title="Allentown (song)" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539448" start="22951" end="22968" title="The Nylon Curtain" label="The Nylon Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="23050" end="23063" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="23117" end="23126" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087069" start="23181" end="23201" title="Philipp Meyer" label="Philipp Meyer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744868" start="23219" end="23232" title="American Rust" label="American Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q108485957" start="23252" end="23273" title="American Rust (TV series)" label="television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841154" start="23282" end="23293" title="plot device" label="plot device"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042783" start="23309" end="23349" title="Societal collapse" label="economic, social, and population decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q116196584" start="23608" end="23623" title="Stephen Markley" label="Stephen Markley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133130" start="23849" end="23858" title="Corn Belt" label="Corn Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724015" start="23861" end="23879" title="Decline of Detroit" label="Decline of Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="23882" end="23901" title="Deindustrialization" label="Deindustrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q192523" start="23904" end="23917" title="Dutch disease" label="Dutch disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326572" start="23920" end="23962" title="Early 1980s recession in the United States" label="Early 1980s recession in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333623" start="23965" end="23999" title="Economy of Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Economy of Allentown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="24002" end="24030" title="Economy of the United States" label="Economy of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333810" start="24033" end="24060" title="Economy of Youngstown, Ohio" label="Economy of Youngstown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870700" start="24063" end="24075" title="Modern ruins" label="Modern ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="24078" end="24089" title="Outsourcing" label="Outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418058" start="24092" end="24106" title="Shrinking city" label="Shrinking city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190077" start="24109" end="24117" title="Snowbelt" label="Snowbelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605647" start="24120" end="24130" title="Steel City" label="Steel City"/>
<link wikidata="Q872158" start="24133" end="24145" title="Steel crisis" label="Steel crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="24148" end="24155" title="Sunbelt" label="Sunbelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="24158" end="24169" title="Urban decay" label="Urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q50082892" start="25529" end="25544" title="Jon C. Teaford" label="Teaford, Jon C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980869" wikidata="Q7375921" url="?curid=980869" title="Rubel Phillips">
<text>Rubel Lex Phillips (March 29, 1925 – June 18, 2011) was an American politician and lawyer. He grew up poor in Alcorn County, Mississippi, and graduated from the University of Mississippi School of Law. Hailing from a politically active family and initially a member of the Democratic Party, he served as a circuit court clerk from 1952 to 1956 and chaired the Mississippi Public Service Commission from 1956 to 1958. In 1962 Phillips joined the Republican Party. He ran as a Republican in the 1963 Mississippi gubernatorial election, the first person to do so since 1947. Supporting a platform of racial segregation and opposition to the presidential administration of John F. Kennedy, he lost, garnering only 38 percent of the vote.

Phillips ran as a Republican a second time during the 1967 Mississippi gubernatorial election with a more racially moderate approach, losing after getting only 30 percent of the vote. He never ran for office again but continued to fundraise for Republican candidates throughout the rest of his life. He thereafter became an executive at the Stirling Homex Corporation, but was incarcerated and disbarred after becoming involved in a scheme to inflate profit figures to investors and regulators. Reinstated to the bar in 1982, he resumed legal practice and worked as a consultant and counsel for a telephone company. He died at an assisted living facility in Ridgeland, Mississippi, in 2011.

== Early life ==
Rubel Lex Phillips was born on March 29, 1925, in Alcorn County, Mississippi, to William T. Phillips and Ollie Fare Phillips. He had four brothers, including future writer Thomas Hal Phillips. The family grew up poor, and in the 1940s they moved to Kossuth. Rubel Phillips graduated from Alcorn Agricultural High School in 1943 and enlisted in the United States Navy. He served for four years, including duty in the Pacific Theater of World War II, and retained an officer&#x27;s commission in the force until he retired from the navy with the rank of commander in 1963. He graduated from Millsaps College and the University of Mississippi School of Law. In 1955, he married Margaret James in Drew and subsequently had two sons with her.

== Political career ==
=== Early career ===
Hailing from a politically active family and initially a member of the Democratic Party, Phillips was elected circuit court clerk for Alcorn County, serving from 1952 until 1956. He was elected to the Mississippi Public Service Commission in 1955 as its northern district member. He succeeded Howard H. Little, who unsuccessfully ran against Nellah Massey Bailey for State Tax Collector rather than seek reelection. The two other members of the commission decided to name Phillips as the body&#x27;s chairman upon their assumption of office. He and the rest of the commission were sworn in on January 16, 1956. During his tenure the commission&#x27;s regulatory authority was strengthened and it successfully litigated the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company to lower its rates for Mississippi customers. He announced his resignation from the Public Service Commission on December 20, 1957, to join a law firm in Jackson. Governor J. P. Coleman appointed his brother, Thomas, to succeed him on the commission. His resignation went into effect on January 1, 1958. In 1959 he worked on a campaign advisory committee for Ross Barnett.

=== Party switch and 1963 gubernatorial campaign ===
Phillips opposed the nomination of John F. Kennedy as the Democratic U.S. presidential candidate in 1960 and voted for the slate of unpledged electors during the general election. In late 1962 he began consulting Wirt Yerger Jr. on the possibility of him running for the office of governor of Mississippi with the backing of the Mississippi Republican Party, which Yerger chaired. After several weeks of public speculation, on December 20, Phillips formally announced his decision to run as a Republican in the 1963 Mississippi gubernatorial election, making him the first Republican gubernatorial candidate in Mississippi since George L. Sheldon ran in 1947. He justified his switch in party affiliation by arguing that the Republican Party offered Mississippi &quot;a program of genuine conservatism and local responsibility&quot; and accusing the &quot;National Democratic Party&quot; of promoting socialism. Political columnist Bill Minor said of his party switch, &quot;I really believe he converted to Republicanism as a political opportunity to raise money to run. I never saw him as adopting the philosophy.&quot;

Like his Democratic opponent, Paul B. Johnson Jr., Phillips&#x27; campaign was dominated by appeals to white supremacy and race-baiting, arguing that Republicans were better suited to protect Jim Crow racial segregation in the state than Democrats. He declared in one campaign appearance, &quot;I was born a segregationist, I am for segregation now, and I will be for segregation when I die.&quot; He attempted to link Johnson with President Kennedy, using the campaign slogan &quot;K.O. the Kennedys&quot;, and stated that he would help U.S. Senator Barry Goldwater get elected president in 1964. He also stated that a strong two-party system in the state would &quot;undermine the Negro&quot; as &quot;Negroes are all Democrats.&quot; Johnson characterized Phillips as a covert racial moderate who had switched parties because he had little chance of winning a large Democratic primary, and his campaign publicized a memo Phillips had written as a public service commissioner in 1956 calling for a moderate approach to racial issues. He and major state newspapers decried the threat posed by a two-party system to the political unity of white conservatives, warning that it would create an opening for black voters to gain influence. Phillips also backed education reform, civil service reform, and right-to-work legislation. He opposed sales tax increases. He lost the election, garnering only 38 percent of the vote. Despite concluding that Republicans had &quot;lost a battle,&quot; he argued that &quot;we have not lost the war. We now know that we have a strong two-party system.&quot;

=== 1967 gubernatorial campaign ===
Eager to continue to build up the Republican Party in Mississippi, state Republican chairman Clarke Reed and finance director Billy Mounger convinced Phillips to run again in the 1967 Mississippi gubernatorial election. Encouraged by the good performance of moderate Republicans in the South during the 1966 United States elections, Phillips decided to run as a moderate against segregationist Democrat John Bell Williams. He opened his campaign on October 3 with a television broadcast, calling for a &quot;two-way street in human relations&quot; and advising that &quot;The white cannot keep the Negro down without paying the awesome penalty of restricting his own advancement.&quot; The declaration marked a break from previous Republican messaging in the state and garnered skepticism from political observers. When asked whether his comments had doomed his chances, Phillips stated, &quot;I think the people of Mississippi are ready to face this issue. I think it is a timely subject.&quot; He also alleged that the state was controlled by an &quot;old guard establishment&quot; who were interested in perpetuating their own power at the expense of the state&#x27;s economy.

Phillips backed the reinstatement of compulsory school attendance legislation, the disbanding of the Mississippi Milk Commission and the repeal of the two-year residency requirement for prospective voters in the state. He also supported a freeze on state government hiring, which Williams rejected, arguing it would deny employment opportunities to young people. Phillips was endorsed by the black-dominated and civil rights-oriented Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, which praised his call to improve the state&#x27;s race relations and reduce the restriction of black economic advancement. He denounced their support as a &quot;kiss of death type endorsement&quot;. He lost overwhelmingly to Williams, only garnering 30 percent of the vote, much of it coming from black voters registered in wake of the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. He never ran for office again but continued to fundraise for Republican candidates throughout the rest of his life.

== Later life ==
Following his second failed gubernatorial bid, Phillips became an executive for the Stirling Homex Corporation, a New York-based company that built housing modules. The firm went bankrupt in 1972, and Phillips and four other executives were indicted for conspiracy and the fraudulent sale of stock. Phillips and three others were convicted of inflating profits to deceive investors, auditors, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. He was sentenced to pay a $5,000 fine () and 10 months of incarceration. The defendants appealed their case to the U.S. Supreme Court, which declined to hear their case in 1978. Two years later the Mississippi Supreme Court disbarred Phillips. He successfully sought reinstatement to the bar in September 1982 and resumed practicing law in Jackson. From 1979 to 1990 he worked as a consultant and retained counsel for Mobile Communications Corporation of America. He died on June 18, 2011, at an assisted living facility in Ridgeland, Mississippi. Historian Billy Burton Hathorn reflected that Phillips&#x27; &quot;two campaigns breathed new life in a previously moribund party [...] Phillips spearheaded a gradual change in the political climate of his native state so that in the future it would be the general election, not the second Democratic primary, which became the principal focus of attention.&quot;

== References ==
== Works cited ==
* 
* 

|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7375921" start="0" end="18" title="Rubel Phillips" label="Rubel Lex Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q111286" start="110" end="136" title="Alcorn County, Mississippi" label="Alcorn County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14693404" start="161" end="200" title="University of Mississippi School of Law" label="University of Mississippi School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="273" end="289" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="306" end="319" title="circuit court" label="circuit court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879252" start="360" end="397" title="Mississippi Public Service Commission" label="Mississippi Public Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="445" end="461" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221412" start="493" end="532" title="1963 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1963 Mississippi gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="669" end="684" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221409" start="789" end="828" title="1967 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1967 Mississippi gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875702" start="1076" end="1102" title="Stirling Homex Corporation" label="Stirling Homex Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q892431" start="1393" end="1415" title="Ridgeland, Mississippi" label="Ridgeland, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q111286" start="1494" end="1520" title="Alcorn County, Mississippi" label="Alcorn County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790343" start="1616" end="1635" title="Thomas Hal Phillips" label="Thomas Hal Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533368" start="1693" end="1700" title="Kossuth, Mississippi" label="Kossuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1792" end="1810" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296445" start="1860" end="1875" title="Asiatic-Pacific Theater" label="Pacific Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1879" end="1891" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860022" start="2033" end="2049" title="Millsaps College" label="Millsaps College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14693404" start="2058" end="2097" title="University of Mississippi School of Law" label="University of Mississippi School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q892472" start="2137" end="2141" title="Drew, Mississippi" label="Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2298" end="2314" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="2337" end="2350" title="circuit court" label="circuit court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879252" start="2428" end="2465" title="Mississippi Public Service Commission" label="Mississippi Public Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878525" start="2569" end="2589" title="Nellah Massey Bailey" label="Nellah Massey Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141630" start="2950" end="2995" title="Southern Bell" label="Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="3150" end="3157" title="Jackson, Mississippi" label="Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q641724" start="3168" end="3181" title="J. P. Coleman" label="J. P. Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q881524" start="3355" end="3367" title="Ross Barnett" label="Ross Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3458" end="3473" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897290" start="3555" end="3572" title="unpledged elector" label="unpledged elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097598" start="3585" end="3601" title="1960 United States presidential election in Mississippi" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q878632" start="3704" end="3727" title="governor of Mississippi" label="governor of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879263" start="3752" end="3780" title="Mississippi Republican Party" label="Mississippi Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221412" start="3934" end="3973" title="1963 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1963 Mississippi gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q366474" start="4052" end="4069" title="George L. Sheldon" label="George L. Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4148" end="4164" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="4324" end="4333" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053146" start="4355" end="4365" title="Bill Minor" label="Bill Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q889440" start="4576" end="4595" title="Paul B. Johnson Jr." label="Paul B. Johnson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="4649" end="4664" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315426" start="4669" end="4681" title="race-baiting" label="race-baiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="4738" end="4746" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="5097" end="5112" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="5173" end="5189" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863124" start="5821" end="5841" title="Civil service reform in the United States" label="civil service reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333460" start="5847" end="5872" title="right-to-work law" label="right-to-work legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="5885" end="5894" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876098" start="6269" end="6280" title="Clarke Reed" label="Clarke Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221409" start="6355" end="6394" title="1967 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1967 Mississippi gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892439" start="6479" end="6507" title="1966 United States elections" label="1966 United States elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q518055" start="6579" end="6597" title="John Bell Williams" label="John Bell Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879148" start="7791" end="7827" title="Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party" label="Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="8181" end="8206" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875702" start="8426" end="8452" title="Stirling Homex Corporation" label="Stirling Homex Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="8743" end="8782" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="8899" end="8917" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644945" start="8982" end="9007" title="Mississippi Supreme Court" label="Mississippi Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q815668" start="9202" end="9246" title="BellSouth" label="Mobile Communications Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q892431" start="9308" end="9330" title="Ridgeland, Mississippi" label="Ridgeland, Mississippi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980872" wikidata="Q423826" url="?curid=980872" title="Marth">
<text>Marth may refer to:

* Marth, Thuringia, Germany

==People with the surname==
* Albert Marth (1828–1897), German astronomer
* Christophe Marth (born 1980), French rugby player
* Frank Marth (1922–2014), American actor
* Tommy Marth (1978–2012), American saxophonist who performed with The Killers

==Other uses==
* Marth (&quot;Fire Emblem&quot;), a video game character
* Marth (lunar crater), a crater on the Moon
* Marth (Martian crater), a crater on Mars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423826" start="0" end="5" title="Marth" label="Marth"/>
<link wikidata="Q569087" start="23" end="39" title="Marth, Thuringia" label="Marth, Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57378" start="80" end="92" title="Albert Marth" label="Albert Marth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126" end="142" title="Christophe Marth" label="Christophe Marth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082704" start="178" end="189" title="Frank Marth" label="Frank Marth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819660" start="220" end="231" title="Tommy Marth" label="Tommy Marth"/>
<link wikidata="Q150266" start="315" end="346" title="Marth (Fire Emblem)" label="Marth (&amp;quot;Fire Emblem&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113284" start="373" end="393" title="Marth (lunar crater)" label="Marth (lunar crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614530" start="418" end="440" title="Marth (Martian crater)" label="Marth (Martian crater)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980880" wikidata="Q7980470" url="?curid=980880" title="Weka Pass Railway">
<text>The Weka Pass Railway is a New Zealand heritage railway based in Waipara, North Canterbury. It is operated on a 12.8 km length of the former Waiau Branch railway between Waipara and Waikari. The railway is operated by an incorporated society which consists solely of members and volunteers, and are largely resident in the city of Christchurch, 60 km to the south. The railway began carrying passengers in 1984 and is now well established locally and nationally.

==History==

===Beginnings===
The first stage of the Waiau Branch line inland through the Weka Pass to Waikari was completed in 1882. This area is noted for its scenery and the railway passes through many large cuttings, around tight curves and on steep gradients (max 1 in 47). When originally built the line was expected to be part of the South Island Main Trunk Railway north of the city of Christchurch. Further sections of the line through Hawarden, Medbury, Balmoral, Pahau, Culverden, Achray, Rotherham and Waiau were constructed in subsequent years. The line was officially opened to Medbury in 1884 and to Culverden in 1886, but the final section to Waiau was not completed until 1919. In the 1920&#x27;s the decision was made to take the Main North Line on a coastal route north out of Waipara. The Main North Line, which involved major earthworks and many engineering difficulties, was not completed until 1945.

The Waiau Branch suffered the fate of many rural branch lines in later years as increasing competition from road transport saw a decline in traffic carried. For many years, the railways were protected from this competition by mileage limits; as these were gradually increased, more and more branches were closed down. The branch line had a short reprieve in its twilight years when large amounts of logs were carried from the Balmoral forest. Closure occurred on 15 January 1978.

===Formation===
A public meeting at Waipara in August 1982 saw a steering committee established to investigate the Weka Pass Railway proposal. There had been interest from a number of people in preserving part of this old branch line particularly in the scenic Weka Pass. The impetus came from local Waipara people who saw the tourist potential, and railway enthusiasts, many drawn from the Ferrymead Railway. The Society was formally established in November that year. The new group began negotiating with NZ Railways and other parties to purchase track, locomotives, rolling stock and other facilities. In May 1983, the first major public event was held. The &quot;Mayfair Festival&quot; was held and featured the Canterbury Railway Societys Manning Wardle No. 1841 of 1914, and Fowler No. 16246 of 1924 from the Canterbury Steam Preservation Society, along with rakes of LA and LC &quot;high-side&quot; wagons, full of passengers. Shuttles ran from the old Waipara yard to the 3 km straight.

In July 1983, the railway agreed with the New Zealand Railways Corporation to lease the line between Waipara and the south bank of the Hurunui River. Public running commenced on 4 June 1984, and travelled from McCaskeys Crossing to Herberts Crossing (and stopped for picnics at Frog Rock along the way). The WPR purchased the leased section of the line on 3 September 1984, and the final payment was made on 28 August 1990. On 30 September 1984, running on the line ceased due to legal complications about the transfer of the ownership. The railway was later granted permission to operate trains on under their own name on the line, a public running recommenced on 17 March 1985.

Following the closure the Waiau line, all of the track remained in place except for the removal of a level crossing at Waikari where the road crossed State Highway 7 due to Transit New Zealand and the National Roads Board refusing for the crossing to be reinstalled. Because of this, in September 1988 the WPR agreed to lift the line between Waikari and the south bank of the Hurunui River, and section was finally lifted by July 1991.

==Track and turntables==

===Track===
The Weka Pass Railway operates 12.8 km of the former Waiau Branchline between Waipara and its terminus at Waikari.

Not long after trains commenced running to Waikari, the railway suffered a major setback in 1986 when heavy rain damaged the line in a number of places. During this time, it was decided that the line wasn&#x27;t in good condition, and it would need extensive repairs, and earthworks in some portion of line. By April 1987, trains were running to the 5.5 km peg. Due to a slump near Antils Hut found in September 1987, trains were once again restricted. After repairs were made, trains recommenced running to the area on 28 January 1988. During this time, the section of track between the old Waipara yard and Glenmark Station were realigned. In the same year, work started in Waikari with the ripping up of track.

On 3 June 1990, trains started operating to Gate No. 2. Trains then started operating to Frog Rock in June 1991, and to Herberts Crossing on 23 August 1992. The line later reached Timpendean, but due to the lack of a suitable picnic area, trains were only allowed to run to Herberts Crossing. On 11 September 1999 was marked as a historic day for the WPR, as it was the day for the grand opening of the line to Waikari, and also the official opening day of the WPR. A &quot;members train&quot; was hauled by DGs 770 and 791 and travelled all the way to Waikari, and after dropping the members off at the platform, the train was propelled back, where the DGs were placed into the turntable road, and F 163 sat in the loop with the &quot;members train&quot;. A &quot;special guest train&quot;, which was hauled by A 428, followed soon after. WD 357 sat at the end of the line at the stop block. In 2001, a new turn-out was installed in the yard in Waipara.

===Turntables===
The railway has a turntable at both Glenmark and Waikari. A 55-foot turntable was installed in Waikari on 3 October 2002, and was recommissioned on 31 August 2003. A special train ran from Christchurch hauled by DCP 4761, as well as another train, which was hauled by A 428 and composed of the railway&#x27;s own carriages. The turntable was found in a scrap heap in Middleton Yard (in Christchurch), and was purchased by the railway in the mid-1990s. A 62-foot turntable was installed in Glenmark (Waipara). It took 14 months for the turntable to be restored and installed, and was reopened on 12 July 2009. There were issues with the installation with the turntable, as the land was privately owned at the time. This now enables the locomotives to be turned to face the correct way, instead of running tender-leading on the return journey to Glenmark from Waikari. In 2010, the railway won the &quot;KiwiRail Network Infrastructure Improvement Undertaken by a Heritage Railway award&quot; for the restorations of the two turntables.

==Buildings==

===Stations===

====Glenmark Station====
The ex-Mina Railway Station was built in 1910, and served many passenger trains along the Main North Line, and had been extensively refurbished. By 1979, a new concrete front was needed to support the platform. In October 1980, the railway station became an unattended flag station, and was closed to all traffic. A private resident and his family, who was living in Cheviot at the time, raised funds and made generous donations to preserve and transport the station to Waipara. In 1986 disassemble of the station commenced, and the station arrived in its current site in 1987. The building was shifted in two sections, and after rejoining the two sections, a new roof was constructed, and new foundations made. A verandah was also fitted, and the station has been in use since April 1988. To avoid confusion, the station was renamed as &quot;Glenmark Station&quot;, to avoid confusion of the current Waipara Station on the Main North Line.

====Waikari Station====
The ex-Hundalee Station was built in 1939, and is a standard class A station (which were designed by George Troup). The station also served many passenger trains along the Main North Line. The building was purchased by the WPR, and was transported to Waikari on 29 October 1991. By July 1992, the station was fully restored, and served its first train in Waikari on 11 September 1999.

In 1995, the railway received an award from the Rail Heritage Trust of New Zealand for the restoration of the two stations.

===Locomotive depot and workshop===
In the mid 1980s, a two-road workshop was built in the old Waipara rail yard. The depot was later extended to a three-road depot in 2005, and a pit was installed.

===Carriage Shed===
Between 2005 and 2006, a two-road carriage shed was built, and was fitted with roller doors. It houses the WPRs carriage fleet, Wickham Track Inspection Car and one or both DGs. During mid-2012, the shed was fitted with four swinging doors.

===Gate Huts===
Because of the railway running through private farmland, Gate Keepers are assigned to Gates No. 1 and 2. Because of this, a hut is allocated to both gates.

During the mid to late 1980s, phone-booth huts were built. But because of the small size of them, the ex-pump-house from the former Kaiapoi rail yard was transported to Gate No. 1, and the ex-Hawarden Gangers hut was transported to Gate No. 2, to replace the phone-booth like-huts. On 8 July 2004, two new brand new huts (which were built in the WPRs yard in Waipara) replaced the second-hand huts (which have since been demolished). The new huts have been named after two late members respectfully.

==Locomotives and rolling stock==
The railway presently owns four locomotives, all formerly owned by the New Zealand Government Railways, and a large fleet of ex-NZR rolling stock.

===NZR steam locomotives===

===NZR diesel locomotives===

===Carriages===

===Viewing cars===

===Vans===

=== Wagons ===

===Cranes===


===Track inspection cars===

==Gallery==
==References==


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7980470" start="4" end="21" title="Weka Pass Railway" label="Weka Pass Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592130" start="27" end="55" title="List of New Zealand railway museums and heritage lines" label="New Zealand heritage railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="65" end="72" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="80" end="90" title="Canterbury, New Zealand" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959914" start="141" end="153" title="Waiau Branch" label="Waiau Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="170" end="177" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540639" start="182" end="189" title="Waikari" label="Waikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="331" end="343" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557399" start="554" end="563" title="Weka Pass" label="Weka Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703074" start="805" end="836" title="South Island Main Trunk Railway" label="South Island Main Trunk Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="858" end="870" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684665" start="909" end="917" title="Hawarden, New Zealand" label="Hawarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15252632" start="919" end="926" title="Medbury" label="Medbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193746" start="945" end="954" title="Culverden" label="Culverden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370420" start="964" end="973" title="Rotherham, New Zealand" label="Rotherham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959913" start="978" end="983" title="Waiau, Canterbury" label="Waiau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705311" start="1212" end="1227" title="Main North Line, New Zealand" label="Main North Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="1905" end="1912" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445548" start="2260" end="2277" title="Ferrymead Railway" label="Ferrymead Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033685" start="2585" end="2611" title="Canterbury Railway Society" label="Canterbury Railway Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965211" start="2613" end="2627" title="Manning Wardle" label="Manning Wardle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983338" start="2907" end="2939" title="New Zealand Railways Corporation" label="New Zealand Railways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14922567" start="3000" end="3013" title="Hurunui River" label="Hurunui River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959914" start="3572" end="3582" title="Waiau Branch" label="Waiau line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540639" start="3665" end="3672" title="Waikari" label="Waikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558580" start="3696" end="3711" title="New Zealand State Highway 7" label="State Highway 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959914" start="4074" end="4086" title="Waiau Branch" label="Waiau Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="4099" end="4106" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540639" start="4127" end="4134" title="Waikari" label="Waikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926771" start="5360" end="5362" title="New Zealand DG and DH class locomotive" label="DG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956208" start="5551" end="5556" title="NZR F class" label="F 163"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956179" start="5664" end="5669" title="NZR A class (1906)" label="A 428"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956255" start="5692" end="5698" title="NZR WD class" label="WD 357"/>
<link wikidata="Q730493" start="5843" end="5852" title="Railway turntable" label="turntable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540639" start="5874" end="5881" title="Waikari" label="Waikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="6014" end="6026" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269511" start="6037" end="6045" title="New Zealand DC class locomotive" label="DCP 4761"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956179" start="6093" end="6098" title="NZR A class (1906)" label="A 428"/>
<link wikidata="Q749311" start="6629" end="6643" title="Tender (rail)" label="tender-leading"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705311" start="7007" end="7022" title="Main North Line, New Zealand" label="Main North Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070959" start="7284" end="7291" title="Cheviot, New Zealand" label="Cheviot"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="7387" end="7394" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545328" start="7984" end="7996" title="George Troup (architect)" label="George Troup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705311" start="8055" end="8070" title="Main North Line, New Zealand" label="Main North Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540639" start="8134" end="8141" title="Waikari" label="Waikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="8489" end="8496" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998400" start="8742" end="8770" title="Wickham trolley" label="Wickham Track Inspection Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926771" start="8787" end="8789" title="New Zealand DG and DH class locomotive" label="DG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013339" start="9161" end="9168" title="Kaiapoi" label="Kaiapoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684665" start="9221" end="9229" title="Hawarden, New Zealand" label="Hawarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="9388" end="9395" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q538101" start="9635" end="9666" title="New Zealand Railways Department" label="New Zealand Government Railways"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980883" wikidata="Q60438528" url="?curid=980883" title="Bastard!!">
<text>is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Kazushi Hagiwara. It began its serialization in Shueisha&#x27;s &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot; in 1988, after debuting with a pilot one-shot in that magazine in 1987, and has continued irregularly in &quot;Ultra Jump&quot; since 2000, with its latest chapter released in 2010. As of 2012, 27 collected volumes have been released. The pilot one-shot was remade by Tatsuya Shihara and published in &quot;Ultra Jump&quot; in July 2023. The manga was formerly licensed for English release in North America by Viz Media; only the first 19 volumes were released.

Hagiwara is an enthusiastic fan of heavy metal music and &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, using ideas from both of these in the &quot;Bastard!!&quot; story. Many characters and places in the story, for instance, are named after members of Hagiwara&#x27;s favorite bands.

The manga was adapted into a six-episode original video animation (OVA) series by AIC, released from 1992 to 1993. The OVA was released in North America by Pioneer in 1998. An original net animation (ONA) adaptation of the same name, by Liden Films, premiered on Netflix worldwide in June 2022. The second season premiered in July 2023.

&quot;Bastard!!&quot; is one of Shueisha&#x27;s best-selling manga series of all time, with over 30 million copies in circulation.

== Overview ==

Four centuries ago, Earth suffered a cataclysm caused by the demon Anthrasax before she was slain by the Dragon Knight, plunging the world into a new dark age. In the present, the Kingdom of Metallicana is attacked by the Dark Rebel Army who seek to resurrect Anthrasax. This prompts the high priest to ask his daughter to awaken Dark Schneider, a dark wizard and founding leader of the Dark Rebel Army who reincarnated himself within the body of 15-year-old Lucien Renlen. In time, Dark’s allies learn of his true nature and ties to the calamity that befell the Old World.

&quot;Bastard!!&quot;s history is about sorcery, revenge, and other power struggles in a &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;–like world. It is a dystopian world where people need magic to survive against wild beasts and evil monsters. There are four kingdoms, each one the protector of one of the four seals that keep the God of Destruction in stasis.

== Media ==
=== Manga ===
&quot;Bastard!!&quot; is written and illustrated by Kazushi Hagiwara. A pilot chapter, titled , was published in Shueisha&#x27;s manga magazine &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot; in 1987. &quot;Bastard!!&quot; began serialization in the same magazine on March 14, 1988, and ran on a regular basis in the magazine until August 21, 1989. The first volume was published on August 10, 1988. The series was then switched to the &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump Specials&quot; quarterly magazine, where it ran on an irregular basis. It was later published again in &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot;, on an irregular &quot;monthly&quot; basis, from 1997 to 2000. The series was transferred to the manga magazine &quot;Ultra Jump&quot;, starting on December 19, 2000. The manga is published in the magazine on an irregular schedule. Its latest chapter was published on May 19, 2010. Twenty-seven volumes have been released as of March 2012. Shueisha re-released the series in a new -like edition, titled &quot;Bastard!! Complete Edition&quot;. The first volume updates Hagiwara&#x27;s art style, improving backgrounds, screentones and includes redrawing of some characters. The second volume is fully redrawn and includes a graphic sex scene not included in the original release. Further volumes are unchanged. Volumes were released from December 2000 to December 2009. In 2014, Shueisha released a nine-volume edition from May to September.

In North America, Viz Media announced the license of &quot;Bastard!!&quot; in July 2001. The Viz edition is based on &quot;Bastard!! Complete Edition&quot;. Viz edition differs in a few ways from Japan release. Including graphic sexual scenes being censored, the major differences are the changing of place names. The series names places, spells and some people after various heavy metal bands, such as Metallica, Judas Priest, Whitesnake, Anthrax, Megadeth, Venom, Guns N&#x27; Roses, and Helloween. Fearing lawsuits, Viz Media (and Pioneer for the OVA adaptation) took the Japanese transliterations of these band names and changed them somewhat, then transliterating them back to English, e.g., Anthrax became &quot;Anthrasax&quot;, Iron Maiden into &quot;Aian Meide&quot;, and the main city in which the story takes place, Metallicana, was changed to &quot;Meta-Rikana&quot;. Viz Media published the first five volumes in a left-to-right edition from August 2002 to December 2003. The volumes were later republished in its original right-to-left version starting from November 2003. The manga stopped its publication after the release of volume 19 in September 2009.

A 51-page reboot of the pilot chapter, &quot;Wizard!! Bakuen no Seifukusha&quot;, illustrated by Tatsuya Shihara, was published in &quot;Ultra Jump&quot; on July 29, 2023.

==== Volumes ====










=== Original video animation ===
A six-episode original video animation (OVA) series by AIC was released between August 25, 1992, and June 25, 1993. The OVA cover the story up through the Four Lords of Havoc&#x27;s battle against Abigail (volumes 6–7 of the manga).

In North America, Pioneer Entertainment released the series on three VHS set tapes with an English dub between August 28 and December 8, 1998. Pioneer re-released the OVA on DVD on June 5, 2001.

=== Original net animation ===

An original net animation (ONA) adaptation by Liden Films was announced on February 3, 2022. The 24-episode ONA is directed by Takaharu Ozaki, with scripts written by Yōsuke Kuroda, character designs by Sayaka Ono, and music composed by Yasuharu Takanashi. The first 13 episodes were released worldwide on Netflix on June 30, 2022, while the remaining 11 episodes were released on September 15 of the same year. The opening theme is &quot;Bloody Power Fame&quot; by Coldrain, while the ending theme is &quot;Blessless&quot; by Tielle. In Japan, the ONA series began a televised broadcast on BS11 on January 11, 2023.

A second season was announced on January 9, 2023. It premiered on Netflix on July 31, 2023, consisting 15 episodes. The opening theme is &quot;New Dawn&quot; by Coldrain, while the ending theme is &quot;La Muse Perdue&quot; by Tielle. The second season began broadcasting on BS11 and other networks on January 3, 2024; the first three episodes aired as a 90-minute special.

The series&#x27; first season was released on a Blu-ray Disc set in North America by Sentai Filmworks on January 21, 2025.

=== Video games ===
A 1994 &quot;Bastard!!&quot; 3D fighting game was released for Super Famicom. A role-playing video game with turn-based fighting elements, titled , was released for PlayStation on December 27, 1996.

A MMOG platformer called &quot;Bastard!! Online&quot; was also in development by the Japanese publisher Tecmo and software developer Shaft. A beta test was released in 2006; however, Tecmo announced that they had canceled its development in December 2009.

== Reception and legacy ==
&quot;Bastard!!&quot; is one of Shueisha&#x27;s best-selling manga series of all time, with over 30 million copies in circulation.

Video game designer and producer Daisuke Ishiwatari said &quot;Bastard!!&quot;″s fantasy setting was a major influence on creating &quot;Guilty Gear&quot;.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="14" end="19" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343976" start="54" end="70" title="Kazushi Hagiwara" label="Kazushi Hagiwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q844822" start="102" end="110" title="Shueisha" label="Shueisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="124" end="142" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Weekly Shōnen Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="186" end="194" title="One-shot (comics)" label="one-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q81268" start="260" end="270" title="Ultra Jump" label="Ultra Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="559" end="568" title="Viz Media" label="Viz Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="647" end="664" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="675" end="697" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="928" end="952" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q548166" start="969" end="972" title="Anime International Company" label="AIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205595" start="1043" end="1050" title="Geneon" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047299" start="1063" end="1085" title="original net animation" label="original net animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60438528" start="1092" end="1119" title="Bastard!! (2022 manga series)" label="adaptation of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q16144186" start="1124" end="1135" title="Liden Films" label="Liden Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1150" end="1157" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16074293" start="1273" end="1298" title="List of best-selling manga" label="best-selling manga series"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="1988" end="1995" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="sorcery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="2043" end="2065" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="2092" end="2101" title="dystopian" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="2126" end="2131" title="magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343976" start="2378" end="2394" title="Kazushi Hagiwara" label="Kazushi Hagiwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q844822" start="2439" end="2447" title="Shueisha" label="Shueisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q231302" start="2455" end="2460" title="Shōnen manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="2476" end="2494" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Weekly Shōnen Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q237338" start="3001" end="3006" title="Seinen manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q81268" start="3022" end="3032" title="Ultra Jump" label="Ultra Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164109" start="3422" end="3432" title="screentone" label="screentone"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="3764" end="3773" title="Viz Media" label="Viz Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="4122" end="4133" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="4149" end="4158" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q83468" start="4160" end="4172" title="Judas Priest" label="Judas Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q189965" start="4174" end="4184" title="Whitesnake" label="Whitesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q109871" start="4186" end="4193" title="Anthrax (American band)" label="Anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="4195" end="4203" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192861" start="4205" end="4210" title="Venom (band)" label="Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="4212" end="4230" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q158895" start="4236" end="4245" title="Helloween" label="Helloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="4481" end="4492" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709148" start="4927" end="4933" title="reboot" label="reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="5165" end="5189" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q548166" start="5206" end="5209" title="Anime International Company" label="AIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205595" start="5403" end="5424" title="NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan" label="Pioneer Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047299" start="5616" end="5638" title="original net animation" label="original net animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16144186" start="5659" end="5670" title="Liden Films" label="Liden Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273101" start="5780" end="5793" title="Yōsuke Kuroda" label="Yōsuke Kuroda"/>
<link wikidata="Q941314" start="5850" end="5868" title="Yasuharu Takanashi" label="Yasuharu Takanashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="5919" end="5926" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050499" start="6079" end="6087" title="Coldrain" label="Coldrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q843957" start="6204" end="6208" title="Nippon BS Broadcasting" label="BS11"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="6654" end="6666" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966664" start="6691" end="6707" title="Sentai Filmworks" label="Sentai Filmworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="6779" end="6795" title="fighting game" label="3D fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="6813" end="6826" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="6830" end="6853" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421045" start="6859" end="6869" title="turn-based" label="turn-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="6915" end="6926" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="6952" end="6956" title="MMOG" label="MMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="6957" end="6967" title="platform game" label="platformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423789" start="7054" end="7059" title="Tecmo" label="Tecmo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7092" end="7101" title="Development stage#Beta" label="beta test"/>
<link wikidata="Q16074293" start="7282" end="7307" title="List of best-selling manga" label="best-selling manga series"/>
<link wikidata="Q429678" start="7399" end="7417" title="Daisuke Ishiwatari" label="Daisuke Ishiwatari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626555" start="7503" end="7514" title="Guilty Gear (video game)" label="Guilty Gear"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980889" wikidata="Q6521740" url="?curid=980889" title="Len Derkach">
<text>Leonard &quot;Len&quot; Derkach (born January 21, 1945) is a former politician in Manitoba, Canada. He was a cabinet minister in the government of Gary Filmon, and was a member of the Manitoba legislature from 1986 to 2011.

The son of Nicholas Derkach and Minnie Kalyniak, he was born in Rossburn, Manitoba, and was educated at Brandon University. He worked as a teacher and farmer before entering provincial politics. He was also a school board trustee on the Pelly Trail School Board from 1979 to 1985, serving as chair from 1982 to 1985.

In 1974, he married Margaret Ann Helten.

In 1986, Derkach was elected to the provincial legislature as a Progressive Conservative in Roblin-Russell, a rural riding in the province&#x27;s southwest. Derkach defeated his New Democratic opponent, Fred Embryk, by 3241 votes to 3203. The NDP won the election, and Derkach became an opposition MLA.

The Progressive Conservatives won the provincial election of 1988, and Derkach was re-elected in Roblin-Russell by an increased margin (with the Liberals overtaking the NDP for second place). When Gary Filmon was sworn in as Premier on May 9, 1988, Derkach was named Minister of Education (which was renamed Minister of Education and Training on April 21, 1989). In this capacity, he increased funding for the province&#x27;s private schools.

Derkach was easily re-elected in the provincial election of 1990. After a cabinet shuffle on January 14, 1992, he was named Minister of Rural Development. He was again re-elected in the provincial election of 1995, once more defeating Fred Embryk.

The Progressive Conservatives were defeated by the New Democrats in the provincial election of 1999. Derkach was re-elected in the renamed riding of Russell by a reduced margin, defeating New Democrat Vince Lelond by 595 votes. He resigned from cabinet with the rest of the Filmon ministry after the election.

Derkach served as opposition critic on matters relating to education and Manitoba&#x27;s growing casino economy, and was re-elected by an increased margin in the general election of 2003, despite the poor province-wide showing of the Progressive Conservative Party.

In addition to serving as a cabinet minister, Derkach also served as Director of the Canada Ukraine Legislative Education Project while in government. He was re-elected in the 2007 election.

In 2011, Derkach announced he would not seek an eighth term in the legislature.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6521740" start="0" end="31" title="Len Derkach" label="Leonard &amp;quot;Len&amp;quot; Derkach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="82" end="90" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494847" start="147" end="158" title="Gary Filmon" label="Gary Filmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15150769" start="184" end="204" title="Manitoba legislature" label="Manitoba legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451103" start="289" end="297" title="Rossburn, Manitoba" label="Rossburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957110" start="329" end="347" title="Brandon University" label="Brandon University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="462" end="486" title="Pelly Trail School Board" label="Pelly Trail School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366633" start="649" end="673" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353217" start="677" end="691" title="Roblin-Russell (Manitoba riding)" label="Roblin-Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q774542" start="763" end="777" title="New Democratic Party of Manitoba" label="New Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366499" start="1034" end="1042" title="Manitoba Liberal Party" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q959664" start="1114" end="1121" title="Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1156" end="1177" title="Manitoba Minister of Education" label="Minister of Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1197" end="1231" title="Manitoba Minister of Education and Training" label="Minister of Education and Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750212" start="1370" end="1397" title="1990 Manitoba general election" label="provincial election of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1457" end="1486" title="Manitoba Minister of Rural Development" label="Minister of Rural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586318" start="1519" end="1546" title="1995 Manitoba general election" label="provincial election of 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586319" start="1654" end="1681" title="1999 Manitoba general election" label="provincial election of 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381312" start="1731" end="1738" title="Russell (Manitoba riding)" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="1990" end="1996" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586320" start="2055" end="2079" title="2003 Manitoba general election" label="general election of 2003"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2245" end="2289" title="Canada Ukraine Legislative Education Project" label="Canada Ukraine Legislative Education Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586321" start="2336" end="2349" title="2007 Manitoba general election" label="2007 election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980900" wikidata="Q3150355" url="?curid=980900" title="Area codes 954 and 754">
<text>Area codes 954 and 754 are the telephone area codes in the North American Numbering Plan (NANP) for Broward County, Florida. Notable cities in the numbering plan area are Fort Lauderdale, Plantation, Hollywood, Parkland, Sunrise, Pompano Beach, Coral Springs, Deerfield Beach, Davie, Weston, Dania Beach, Oakland Park and Pembroke Pines.

Area code 954 went into service on September 11, 1995, in a split of area code 305, which was the original and sole area code for Florida in 1947, when AT&amp;T created the first nationwide telephone numbering plan. By 1995, Broward County had used 305 for 48 years, and numerous splits over the years had made area code 305 more or less coextensive with the Miami–Fort Lauderdale area. This split was intended as a long-term solution, but within five years 954 was already close to exhaustion due to South Florida&#x27;s explosive growth and the proliferation of auxiliary devices, such as cell phones, pagers, and fax machines.

In November 2000, the Florida Public Service Commission approved the use of an overlay area code to service Broward County, after a telecommunications industry group sought alternatives to relieve the strain on the county. It was projected that 954 was to be exhausted by the third quarter of 2002. The North American Numbering Plan Administration (NANPA) announced on December 4, 2000, an area code overlay plan for relief, assigning area code 754 to the same territory in Broward County. The area code was activated on August 1, 2001 and began use on April 1, 2002. As the overlay plan required, ten-digit dialing became mandatory in Broward. As 954 exchanges are exhausted, new numbers use area code 754.

==See also==

* List of Florida area codes
* List of NANP area codes

==References==
==External links==

* List of exchanges from AreaCodeDownload.com, 754 Area Code
* List of exchanges from AreaCodeDownload.com, 954 Area Code</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3150355" start="0" end="22" title="Area codes 954 and 754" label="Area codes 954 and 754"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="41" end="50" title="area code" label="area code"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="59" end="88" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="North American Numbering Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494624" start="100" end="123" title="Broward County, Florida" label="Broward County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="171" end="186" title="Fort Lauderdale, Florida" label="Fort Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q984677" start="188" end="198" title="Plantation, Florida" label="Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q234453" start="200" end="209" title="Hollywood, Florida" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q588338" start="211" end="219" title="Parkland, Florida" label="Parkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q506375" start="221" end="228" title="Sunrise, Florida" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q671458" start="230" end="243" title="Pompano Beach, Florida" label="Pompano Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q505557" start="245" end="258" title="Coral Springs, Florida" label="Coral Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q584849" start="260" end="275" title="Deerfield Beach, Florida" label="Deerfield Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q985438" start="277" end="282" title="Davie, Florida" label="Davie"/>
<link wikidata="Q990644" start="284" end="290" title="Weston, Florida" label="Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q986191" start="292" end="303" title="Dania Beach, Florida" label="Dania Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q985183" start="305" end="317" title="Oakland Park, Florida" label="Oakland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q370972" start="322" end="336" title="Pembroke Pines, Florida" label="Pembroke Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150333" start="408" end="421" title="area code 305" label="area code 305"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="491" end="499" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="529" end="553" title="telephone numbering plan" label="telephone numbering plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="698" end="703" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461562" start="992" end="1025" title="Florida Public Service Commission" label="Florida Public Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="1273" end="1317" title="North American Numbering Plan Administration" label="North American Numbering Plan Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963044" start="1370" end="1382" title="overlay plan" label="overlay plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699109" start="1568" end="1585" title="ten-digit dialing" label="ten-digit dialing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138420" start="1695" end="1721" title="List of Florida area codes" label="List of Florida area codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299175" start="1724" end="1747" title="List of NANP area codes" label="List of NANP area codes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980910" wikidata="Q5325090" url="?curid=980910" title="Eagle Food Centers">
<text>Eagle Food Centers was a chain of supermarkets that operated in Iowa, Wisconsin, Indiana, and Illinois for several years. The company was based in Milan, Illinois. The company operated stores under many names, including BOGO&#x27;S, Eagle Country Market, Eagle Discount Centers, Eagle Discount Supermarkets, Eagle Food Centers, May&#x27;s Drug and MEMCO. Eagle also operated stores in Houston known as Eagle Supermarkets until March 1985. The chain held a 6% market share and had 1,100 employees before leaving the area.

==History==

===Beginning===
In 1893, Tenenbom family opened the forerunner of Eagle&#x27;s chain in Davenport. In 1921, Geifman&#x27;s and Eagle Kash and Karry opened small neighborhood markets in the Quad-Cities, which specialized in fruits and vegetables. These two operations grew during the 1930s as both family operations added new stores. Eagle&#x27;s was owned by brothers-in-law Frank Weindruch and Isadore Pesses. Max Geifman of Rock Island, and his sons, Ben and Morris, owned the Illinois Geifman stores. Their uncle George and his sons, Morris and Sam owned the Iowa Geifman stores. By 1935 self-service had become important in the grocery business, with Eagle and other stores responding by allowing self-service at lower prices.

===1950s–1960s===
In 1952, Abe Tenenbom died, and his nephew, Richard Waxenberg took over Tenenboms, and the Illinois Geifman&#x27;s merged their five stores with the eight stores of Davenport&#x27;s Tenenbom-Waxenberg family. Together they became known as United Supermarkets. In 1954, United merged with 10 stores of Eagle Kash and Karry, forming the largest area chain, called Eagle-United Supermarkets. In 1957, construction was completed of the new Milan warehouse. The former Eagle warehouse on Fifth Avenue in Moline was sold to Fresh-Pak Candy. In 1961, Eagle was purchased by Consolidated Foods Corp. of Chicago. Consolidated operated 68 Piggly Wiggly stores at that time. The Eagle and Piggly Wiggly operations were then combined and operated from Eagle&#x27;s corporate office and warehouse in Milan, Illinois. In 1965, Coin Bakery (of Rock Island) was purchased and became a part of Eagle, under the name Harvest Day Bakery.

===Sale to Lucky===
In 1968, California-based Lucky Stores bought Eagle Food Centers from Consolidated Foods Corporation. Eagle Food Centers and Piggly Wiggly stores were renamed Eagle Discount Supermarkets, following Lucky&#x27;s successful discount pricing program. Lucky established Lucky Midwestern Division headquarters in Milan, Illinois.

===1980s===
In 1981, Eagle operated 136 stores and had sales of $1.2 billion (~$ in ). Eagle expanded into the Midwest by opening a new distribution center in Westville, Indiana. In 1984, a strike by the United Food and Commercial Workers against Eagle Foods Stores created a bitter labor atmosphere. In 1985, after four years of operation, the Westville distribution center closed. In November 1987, Lucky Stores sold majority ownership of Eagle Food Stores to New York-based Odyssey Partners. Odyssey provided a monetary transfusion which allowed Eagle to expand old stores and add new ones. In December 1987, Eagle filed a building permit for a $1.2 million (~$ in ) expansion of its Avenue of the Cities store in Moline, ballooning the store by . In 1988, New stores opened in Galesburg and the Chicago suburb of Downers Grove. In August 1988, Eagle announced construction of a $2.5 million (~$ in ), grocery store in East Moline to replace an aging, store at 1313 42nd Ave.

In November 1988, Eagle applied for a building permit to allow a $1.2 million, expansion of the Milan warehouse, and also announced a $1 million expansion of the Geneseo store, expanding the building from 19,000 to . In August 1989, Eagle became a publicly owned corporation.

===1990s===
In June 1990, Eagle Food Centers elected its first board of directors at the company&#x27;s first annual stockholders&#x27; meeting at the Milan Community Center. In May 1992, Pasquale &quot;Pat&quot; Petitti, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of Eagle Food Centers, Inc., retired after 35 years with the company. In December 1999, Eagle sold five of its Chicago-area stores, leaving 90 stores in Illinois, Iowa and Indiana. Eagle stock price dipped to $2.03, down from a 52-week high of $4.25, and the company reported a net loss of $1.5 million.

==Bankruptcy==
Eventually, the company found that it was unable to compete with other chains, such as Jewel-Osco, Dominick&#x27;s, Hy-Vee, Walmart and Kroger. The first sign of this was the sale of the Harvest Day bakery in Rock Island, Illinois, to Metz Baking Company in 1998. The company went into Chapter 11 bankruptcy in March 2000.

In 2003, Eagle Food Stores ceased operations and sold its assets. Some of the stores were acquired by other chains, such as Hy-Vee, Kroger, Jewel, and Butera. The Downtown Eagle Corporation was founded to take over two stores - one in Clinton, Iowa and the other in Dubuque, Iowa. They purchased the rights to the Eagle Country Market name and signage and operate the two stores under the Eagle Country Market name. One location in Coralville, IA, was purchased by GEICO and converted to a call center. One location in Cedar Rapids was bought by Rockwell Collins. Another two sites in Iowa City were bought by Lenoch &amp; Cilek Ace Hardware and Auto Zone. The Buffalo Grove, IL, location was converted into a bowling and entertainment center known as &quot;esKape&quot; - and following a sale to the Brunswick Corporation, it was renovated into the country&#x27;s third &quot;Brunswick&#x27;s&quot; upscale bowling center. One of the Eagle stores in Galesburg, Illinois, was later a B&amp;G grocery store created by two former Eagle workers. Now the building is a Dunham&#x27;s Sports. The other location on East Main Street was razed, and Nees Harley Davidson dealership was built in its place. The Eagle Country Market in Moline, Illinois became a Hy-Vee that has since closed and the one in Rock Island, Illinois was rebranded to Rock Island Country Market, which has also since closed. The Elk Grove Village, IL location became a Food 4 Less that has since closed. The Bolingbrook, IL location became a Best Buy store. There are many Eagle Buildings remaining. Most are occupied by stores; some include Kroger and Hilander (which is Schnucks).

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5325090" start="0" end="18" title="Eagle Food Centers" label="Eagle Food Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="34" end="46" title="supermarkets" label="supermarkets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="64" end="68" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="94" end="102" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022976" start="147" end="162" title="Milan, Illinois" label="Milan, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698032" start="328" end="343" title="Lucky Stores" label="May&amp;#x27;s Drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530586" start="348" end="353" title="Gemco" label="MEMCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="385" end="392" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325090" start="402" end="420" title="Eagle Food Centers" label="Eagle Supermarkets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388303" start="1914" end="1927" title="Piggly Wiggly" label="Piggly Wiggly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698032" start="2251" end="2263" title="Lucky Stores" label="Lucky Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178470" start="4487" end="4497" title="Jewel-Osco" label="Jewel-Osco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290899" start="4499" end="4514" title="Dominick&amp;#x27;s" label="Dominick&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639719" start="4516" end="4522" title="Hy-Vee" label="Hy-Vee"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="4524" end="4531" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q153417" start="4536" end="4542" title="Kroger" label="Kroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639719" start="4848" end="4854" title="Hy-Vee" label="Hy-Vee"/>
<link wikidata="Q153417" start="4856" end="4862" title="Kroger" label="Kroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178470" start="4864" end="4869" title="Jewel-Osco" label="Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4875" end="4881" title="Butera Market" label="Butera"/>
<link wikidata="Q676421" start="4959" end="4972" title="Clinton, Iowa" label="Clinton, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q493794" start="4990" end="5003" title="Dubuque, Iowa" label="Dubuque, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913878" start="5156" end="5170" title="Coralville, IA" label="Coralville, IA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498689" start="5189" end="5194" title="GEICO" label="GEICO"/>
<link wikidata="Q486439" start="5243" end="5255" title="Cedar Rapids" label="Cedar Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q461210" start="5270" end="5286" title="Rockwell Collins" label="Rockwell Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q967086" start="5385" end="5402" title="Buffalo Grove, IL" label="Buffalo Grove, IL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="5434" end="5441" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q994153" start="5525" end="5546" title="Brunswick Corporation" label="Brunswick Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q579736" start="5949" end="5965" title="Moline, Illinois" label="Moline, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q577878" start="6019" end="6040" title="Rock Island, Illinois" label="Rock Island, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q328455" start="6119" end="6140" title="Elk Grove Village, IL" label="Elk Grove Village, IL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465282" start="6159" end="6170" title="Food 4 Less" label="Food 4 Less"/>
<link wikidata="Q891359" start="6198" end="6213" title="Bolingbrook, IL" label="Bolingbrook, IL"/>
<link wikidata="Q533415" start="6232" end="6240" title="Best Buy" label="Best Buy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980911" wikidata="Q1755383" url="?curid=980911" title="Rating system of the Royal Navy">
<text>The rating system of the Royal Navy and its predecessors was used by the Royal Navy between the beginning of the 17th century and the middle of the 19th century to categorise sailing warships, initially classing them according to their assigned complement of men, and later according to the number of their carriage-mounted guns. The rating system of the Royal Navy formally came to an end in the late 19th century by declaration of the Admiralty. The main cause behind this declaration focused on new types of gun, the introduction of steam propulsion and the use of iron and steel armour which made rating ships by the number of guns obsolete.

==Origins and description==
The first movement towards a rating system may be seen in the 15th century and the first half of the 16th century, when the largest carracks in the Navy, such as the &quot;Mary Rose&quot;, the &quot;Peter Pomegranate&quot; and the &quot;Henri Grâce à Dieu&quot;, were denoted &quot;great ships&quot;. This was only on the basis of their roughly-estimated size and not on their weight, crew or number of guns. When these carracks were superseded by the new-style galleons later in the 16th century, the term &quot;great ship&quot; was used to formally delineate the Navy&#x27;s largest ships from all the rest.

===The Stuart era===
The earliest categorisation of Royal Navy ships dates to the reign of King Henry VIII. Henry&#x27;s Navy consisted of 58 ships, and in 1546 the Anthony Roll divided them into four groups: &#x27;ships, galliasses, pinnaces, and row barges.&#x27;&quot;

The formal system of dividing up the Navy&#x27;s combatant warships into a number or groups or &quot;rates&quot;, however, only originated in the very early part of the Stuart era, with the first lists of such categorisation appearing around 1604. At this time the combatant ships of the &quot;Navy Royal&quot; were divided up according to the number of men required to man them at sea (i.e. the size of the crew) into four groups:

* Royal Ships - the largest ships in the previous &quot;great ships&quot; grouping, mounting 42–55 guns and carrying at least 400 men;
* Great Ships - the rest of the ships in the previous &quot;great ships&quot; grouping, mounting 38–40 guns;
* Middling ships mounting 30–32 guns; and
* Small ships mounting fewer than 30 guns

A 1612 list referred to four groups: royal, middling, small and pinnaces; but defined them by tonnage instead of by guns, starting from 800 to 1200 tons for the ships royal, down to below 250 tons for the pinnaces.

By the early years of King Charles I&#x27;s reign, these four groups had been renamed to a numerical sequence. The royal ships were now graded as &quot;first rank&quot;, the great ships as &quot;second rank&quot;, the middling ships as &quot;third rank&quot;, and the small ships as &quot;fourth rank&quot;. Soon afterwards, the structure was again modified, with the term &quot;rank&quot; now being replaced by &quot;rate&quot;, and the former small ships now being sub-divided into fourth, fifth and sixth rates.

The earliest rating was based not on the number of guns, but on the established complement (number of men). In 1626, a table drawn up by Charles I used the term &quot;rates&quot; for the first time in a classification scheme connected with the Navy. The table specified the amount of monthly wages a seaman or officer would earn, in an ordered scheme of six rates, from &quot;first-rate&quot; to &quot;sixth-rate&quot;, with each rate divided into two classes, with differing numbers of men assigned to each class. No specific connection with the size of the ship or number of armaments aboard was given in this 1626 table, and as far as is known, this was related exclusively to seaman pay grades.

This classification scheme was substantially altered in late 1653 as the complements of individual ships were raised. From about 1660 the classification moved from one based on the number of men to one based on the number of carriage guns a ship carried.

Samuel Pepys, then Secretary to the Admiralty, revised the structure in 1677 and laid it down as a &quot;solemn, universal and unalterable&quot; classification. The rating of a ship was of administrative and military use. The number and weight of guns determined the size of crew needed, and hence the amount of pay and rations needed. It also indicated whether a ship was powerful enough to stand in the line of battle. Pepys&#x27;s original classification was updated by further definitions in 1714, 1721, 1760, 1782, 1801 and 1817, the last being the most severe, as it provided for including in the count of guns the carronades that had previously been excluded. On the whole the trend was for each rate to have a greater number of guns. For instance, Pepys allowed a first rate 90–100 guns, but on the 1801 scheme a first rate had 100–120. A sixth rate&#x27;s range went from 4–18 to 20–28 (after 1714 any ship with fewer than 20 guns was unrated).

===First, second and third rates (ships of the line)===
A first-, second- or third-rate ship was regarded as a &quot;ship-of-the-line&quot;. The first and second rates were three-deckers; that is, they had three continuous decks of guns (on the lower deck, middle deck and upper deck), usually as well as smaller weapons on the quarterdeck, forecastle and poop.

The largest third rates, those of 80 guns, were likewise three-deckers from the 1690s until the early 1750s, but both before this period and subsequent to it, 80-gun ships were built as two-deckers. All the other third rates, with 74 guns or less, were likewise two-deckers, with just two continuous decks of guns (on the lower deck and upper deck), as well as smaller weapons on the quarterdeck, forecastle and (if they had one) poop. A series of major changes to the rating system took effect from the start of January 1817, when the carronades carried by each ship were included in the count of guns (previously these had usually been omitted); the first rate from that date included all of the three-deckers (the adding in of their carronades had meant that all three-deckers now had over 100 guns), the new second rate included all two-deckers of 80 guns or more, with the third rate reduced to two-deckers of fewer than 80 guns.

A special case were the Royal Yachts, which, for reasons of protocol, had to be commanded by a senior captain. These vessels, despite their small size and minimal armament, were often classed as second or third rate ships, appropriate for the seniority of the captain.

===Fourth, fifth and sixth rates===
The smaller fourth rates, of about 50 or 60 guns on two decks, were ships-of-the-line until 1756, when it was felt that such 50-gun ships were now too small for pitched battles. The larger fourth rates of 60 guns continued to be counted as ships-of-the-line, but few new ships of this rate were added, the 60-gun fourth rate being superseded over the next few decades by the 64-gun third rate. The Navy did retain some fourth rates for convoy escort, or as flagships on far-flung stations; it also converted some East Indiamen to that role.

The smaller two deckers originally blurred the distinction between a fourth rate and a fifth rate. At the low end of the fourth rate one might find the two-decker 50-gun ships from about 1756. The high end of the fifth rate would include two-deckers of 40- or 44-guns (from 1690) or even the demi-batterie 32-gun and 36-gun ships of the 1690–1730 period. The fifth rates at the start of the 18th century were generally &quot;demi-batterie&quot; ships, carrying a few heavy guns on their lower deck (which often used the rest of the lower deck for row ports) and a full battery of lesser guns on the upper deck. However, these were gradually phased out, as the low freeboard (i.e., the height of the lower deck gunport sills above the waterline) meant that in rough weather it was often impossible to open the lower deck gunports.

Fifth and sixth rates were never included among ships-of-the-line. The middle of the 18th century saw the introduction of a new fifth-rate type—the classic frigate, with no ports on the lower deck, and the main battery disposed solely on the upper deck, where it could be fought in all weathers.

Sixth-rate ships were generally useful as convoy escorts, for blockade duties and the carrying of dispatches; their small size made them less suited for the general cruising tasks the fifth-rate frigates did so well. Essentially there were two groups of sixth rates. The larger category comprised the sixth-rate frigates of 28 guns, carrying a main battery of twenty-four 9-pounder guns, as well as four smaller guns on their superstructures. The second comprised the &quot;post ships&quot; of between 20 and 24 guns. These were too small to be formally counted as frigates (although colloquially often grouped with them), but still required a post-captain (i.e. an officer holding the substantive rank of captain) as their commander.

===Unrated vessels===
The rating system did not handle vessels smaller than the sixth rate. The remainder were simply &quot;unrated&quot;. The larger of the unrated vessels were generally all called sloops, but that nomenclature is quite confusing for unrated vessels, especially when dealing with the finer points of &quot;ship-sloop&quot;, &quot;brig-sloop&quot;, &quot;sloop-of-war&quot; (which really just meant the same in naval parlance as &quot;sloop&quot;) or even &quot;corvette&quot; (the last a French term that the British Navy did not use until the 1840s). Technically the category of &quot;sloop-of-war&quot; included any unrated combatant vessel—in theory, the term even extended to bomb vessels and fire ships. During the Napoleonic Wars, the Royal Navy increased the number of sloops in service by some 400% as it found that it needed vast numbers of these small vessels for escorting convoys (as in any war, the introduction of convoys created a huge need for escort vessels), combating privateers, and themselves taking prizes.

==The number of guns and the rate==
The rated number of guns often differed from the number a vessel actually carried. The guns that determined a ship&#x27;s rating were the carriage-mounted cannon, long-barreled, muzzle-loading guns that moved on &#x27;trucks&#x27;—wooden wheels. The count did not include smaller (and basically anti-personnel) weapons such as swivel-mounted guns (&quot;swivels&quot;), which fired half-pound projectiles, or small arms. For instance, was rated for 18 guns but during construction her rating was reduced to 16 guns (6-pounders), and she also carried 14 half-pound swivels.

Vessels might also carry other guns that did not contribute to the rating. Examples of such weapons would include mortars, howitzers or boat guns, the boat guns being small guns intended for mounting on the bow of a vessel&#x27;s boats to provide fire support during landings, cutting out expeditions, and the like. From 1778, however, the most important exception was the carronade.

Introduced in the late 1770s, the carronade was a short-barreled and relatively short-range gun, half the weight of equivalent long guns, and was generally mounted on a slide rather than on trucks. The new carronades were generally housed on a vessel&#x27;s upperworks—quarterdeck and forecastle—some as additions to its existing ordnance and some as replacements. When the carronades replaced or were in lieu of carriage-mounted cannon they generally counted in arriving at the rating, but not all were, and so may or may not have been included in the count of guns, though rated vessels might carry up to twelve 18-, 24- or 32-pounder carronades. 

For instance, was rated as a third rate of 74 guns. She carried twenty-eight 32-pounder guns on her gundeck, twenty-eight 18-pounder guns on her upperdeck, four 12-pounder guns and ten 32-pounder carronades on her quarterdeck, two 12-pounder guns and two 32-pounder carronades on her forecastle, and six 18-pounder carronades on her poop deck. In all, this 74-gun vessel carried 80 cannon: 62 guns and 18 carronades.

When carronades formed a ship&#x27;s principal armament, they were included in the count of guns. For instance, was a 20-gun corvette of the French Navy that was captured and recommissioned in the Royal Navy as a sloop and post ship. She carried two 9-pounder cannon and eighteen 32-pounder carronades.

By the Napoleonic Wars there was no exact correlation between formal gun rating and the actual number of cannons any individual vessel might carry. One therefore must distinguish between the &quot;established&quot; armament of a vessel (which rarely altered) and the &quot;actual&quot; guns carried, which might change quite frequently for a variety of reasons: guns might be lost overboard during a storm, be jettisoned to speed the ship during a chase, or explode in service and become useless; they might also be stowed in the hold to allow the carriage of troops, or, for a small vessel such as , to lower the centre of gravity and thus improve stability in bad weather. Some guns would also be removed from ships during peacetime service, to reduce the stress on the ships&#x27; structure, creating a distinction between a ship&#x27;s wartime complement of guns (the figure normally quoted) and her lower peacetime complement.

==Royal Navy rating system in force during the Napoleonic Wars==
===Notes===
The smaller fourth-rates, primarily the 50-gun ships, were, from 1756 on, no longer classified as ships of the line. Since not big enough to stand in the line of battle, were often called frigates, though not classed as frigates by the Royal Navy. They were generally classified, like all smaller warships used primarily in the role of escort and patrol, as &quot;cruisers&quot;, a term that covered everything from the smaller two-deckers down to the small gun-brigs and cutters.

The larger fifth-rates were generally two-decked ships of 40 or 44 guns, and thus &quot;not&quot; &quot;frigates&quot;, although the 40-gun frigates built during the Napoleonic War also fell into this category.

The smaller sixth-rates were often popularly called frigates, though &quot;not&quot; classed as &quot;frigates&quot; by the Admiralty officially. Only the larger sixth-rates (those mounting 28 carriage guns or more) were technically frigates.

The ton in this instance is the burthen tonnage (bm). From c.1650 the burthen of a vessel was calculated using the formula formula_1, where formula_2 was the length, in feet, from the stem to the sternpost, and formula_3 the maximum breadth of the vessel. It was a rough measurement of cargo-carrying capacity by volume, not displacement. Therefore, one should not change a measurement in &quot;tons burthen&quot; into a displacement in &quot;tons&quot; or &quot;tonnes&quot;.

Vessels of less than ten guns were commanded by lieutenants, while those with upwards of ten guns were commanded by commanders.

==1817 changes==
In February 1817 the rating system changed. The recommendation from the Board of Admiralty to the Prince Regent was dated 25 November 1816, but the Order in Council establishing the new ratings was issued in February 1817. From February 1817 all carronades were included in the established number of guns. Until that date, carronades only &quot;counted&quot; if they were in place of long guns; when the carronades replaced &quot;long&quot; guns (e.g. on the upper deck of a sloop or post ship, thus providing its main battery), such carronades were counted.

==1856 changes==
There was a further major change in the rating system in 1856. From that date, the first rate comprised all ships carrying 110 guns and upwards, or the complement of which consisted of 1,000 men or more. The second rate included one of HM&#x27;s royal yachts, and otherwise comprised all ships carrying under 110 guns but more than 80 guns, or the complements of which were under 1,000 but not less than 800 men. 

The third rate included all the rest of HM&#x27;s royal yachts and &quot;all such vessels as may bear the flag of pendant of any Admiral Superintendent or Captain Superintendent of one of HM&#x27;s Dockyards&quot;, and otherwise comprised all ships carrying at most 80 guns but not less than 60 guns, or the complements of which were under 800 but not less than 600 men. The fourth rate comprised all frigate-built ships of which the complement was not more than 600 and not less than 410 men. 

The fifth rate comprised all ships of which the complement was not more than 400 and not less than 300 men. The sixth rate consisted of all other ships bearing a captain. Of unrated vessels, the category of sloops comprised all vessels commanded by commanders. Next followed all other ships commanded by lieutenants, and having complements of not less than 60 men. Finally were &quot;smaller vessels, not classed as above, with such smaller complements as the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty may from time to time direct&quot;.

==Other classifications==
Rating was not the only system of classification used. Through the early modern period, the term &quot;ship&quot; referred to a vessel that carried square sails on three masts. Sailing vessels with only two masts or a single mast were technically not &quot;ships&quot;, and were not described as such at the time. Vessels with fewer than three masts were unrated sloops, generally two-masted vessels rigged as snows or ketches (in the first half of the 18th century), or brigs in succeeding eras. Some sloops were three-masted or &quot;ship-rigged&quot;, and these were known as &quot;ship sloops&quot;.

Vessels were sometimes classified according to the substantive rank of her commanding officer. For instance, when the commanding officer of a gun-brig or even a cutter was a lieutenant with the status of master-and-commander, the custom was to recategorise the vessel as a sloop. For instance, when Pitt Burnaby Greene, the commanding officer of in 1811, received his promotion to post-captain, the Navy reclassed the sloop as a post ship.

==Practices in other navies==
Although the rating system described was only used by the Royal Navy, other major navies used similar means of grading their warships. For example, the French Navy used a system of five rates (&quot;rangs&quot;) which had a similar purpose. British authors might still use &quot;first rate&quot; when referring to the largest ships of other nations or &quot;third rate&quot; to speak of a French seventy-four. By the end of the 18th century, the rating system had mostly fallen out of common use, although technically it remained in existence for nearly another century, ships of the line usually being characterized directly by their nominal number of guns, the numbers even being used as the name of the type, as in &quot;a squadron of three seventy-fours&quot;.

===United States (1905)===
As of 1905, ships of the United States Navy were by law divided into classes called rates. Vessels of the first rate had a displacement tonnage in excess of 8000 tons; second rate, from 4000 to 8000 tons; third rate, from 1000 to 4000 tons; and fourth rate, of less than 1000 tons. Converted merchant vessels that were armed and equipped as cruisers were of the second rate if over 6000 tons, and of the third rate if over 1000 and less than 6000 tons. Auxiliary vessels such as colliers, supply vessels, repair ships, etc., if over 4000 tons, were of the third rate.

Auxiliary vessels of less than 4000 tons—except tugs, sailing ships, and receiving ships which were not rated—were of the fourth rate. Torpedo-boat destroyers, torpedo boats, and similar vessels were not rated. Captains commanded ships of the first rate. Captains or commanders commanded ships of the second rate. Commanders or lieutenant-commanders commanded ships of the third rate. Lieutenant-commanders or lieutenants commanded ships of the fourth rate. Lieutenant-commanders, lieutenants, ensigns, or warrant officers might command unrated vessels, depending on the size of the vessel.

==Other uses==
The term &quot;&quot; has passed into general usage, as an adjective used to mean something of the best or highest quality available. &quot;Second-rate&quot; and &quot;third-rate&quot; are also used as adjectives to mean that something is of inferior quality.

==Notes==
==References==
=== Excerpts ===
=== Footnotes ===
==Bibliography==
*
*

==External links==
* Michael Philips, &quot;Ships of the Old Navy&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1755383" start="4" end="35" title="Rating system of the Royal Navy" label="rating system of the Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="73" end="83" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="183" end="190" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="437" end="446" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q220635" start="807" end="814" title="carrack" label="carrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q544894" start="847" end="856" title="Mary Rose" label="Mary Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116221" start="874" end="891" title="Peter Pomegranate" label="Peter Pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q585517" start="912" end="930" title="Henri Grâce à Dieu" label="Henri Grâce à Dieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q181469" start="1137" end="1144" title="galleon" label="galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1382" end="1392" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q573917" start="1451" end="1463" title="Anthony Roll" label="Anthony Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="1508" end="1516" title="galliass" label="galliass"/>
<link wikidata="Q837139" start="1520" end="1528" title="Full-rigged pinnace" label="pinnaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366054" start="1728" end="1738" title="Stuart era" label="Stuart era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1994" end="2004" title="Royal Ship" label="Royal Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="2238" end="2251" title="Middling ship" label="Middling ship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2280" end="2290" title="Small ship" label="Small ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="2564" end="2573" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q892367" start="2683" end="2705" title="first rate" label="&amp;quot;first rank&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q892368" start="2726" end="2749" title="second rate" label="&amp;quot;second rank&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="2773" end="2795" title="third rate" label="&amp;quot;third rank&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q892562" start="2820" end="2843" title="fourth rate" label="&amp;quot;fourth rank&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q892562" start="3021" end="3027" title="fourth rate" label="fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q892554" start="3029" end="3034" title="fifth rate" label="fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q892278" start="3039" end="3044" title="sixth rate" label="sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="4009" end="4021" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="4045" end="4054" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471117" start="4414" end="4428" title="line of battle" label="line of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135922" start="4630" end="4639" title="carronade" label="carronade"/>
<link wikidata="Q892367" start="5022" end="5028" title="First-rate" label="first-"/>
<link wikidata="Q892368" start="5030" end="5037" title="Second-rate" label="second-"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="5041" end="5051" title="third-rate" label="third-rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="5081" end="5097" title="ship-of-the-line" label="ship-of-the-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="5209" end="5219" title="lower deck" label="lower deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="5221" end="5232" title="middle deck" label="middle deck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5237" end="5247" title="Deck (ship)#Upper deck" label="upper deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516659" start="5292" end="5303" title="quarterdeck" label="quarterdeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="5305" end="5315" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758120" start="5320" end="5324" title="poop deck" label="poop"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="5649" end="5659" title="lower deck" label="lower deck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5664" end="5674" title="Deck (ship)#Upper deck" label="upper deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q892562" start="6581" end="6592" title="fourth rate" label="fourth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035668" start="7082" end="7095" title="East Indiamen" label="East Indiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q892554" start="7942" end="7947" title="Fifth-rate" label="Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q892278" start="7952" end="7962" title="sixth rate" label="sixth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="8098" end="8105" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q370330" start="8281" end="8287" title="convoy" label="convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="8301" end="8309" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233751" start="8713" end="8722" title="post ship" label="post ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399716" start="8883" end="8895" title="post-captain" label="post-captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="9347" end="9359" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloop-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q170013" start="9454" end="9462" title="corvette" label="corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q891771" start="9673" end="9684" title="bomb vessel" label="bomb vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q897986" start="9690" end="9699" title="fire ship" label="fire ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="9713" end="9728" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="10214" end="10220" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256431" start="10386" end="10400" title="Swivel gun" label="swivel-mounted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135922" start="11006" end="11015" title="carronade" label="carronade"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="11698" end="11708" title="third rate" label="third rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="12228" end="12239" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="12300" end="12305" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233751" start="12310" end="12319" title="post ship" label="post ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="12398" end="12413" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394540" start="14388" end="14390" title="Builder&amp;#x27;s Old Measurement" label="bm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458952" start="14523" end="14527" title="Stem (ship)" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401090" start="14535" end="14544" title="sternpost" label="sternpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="17078" end="17097" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581130" start="17114" end="17118" title="Full-rigged ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q210223" start="17374" end="17380" title="sloops" label="sloops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933634" start="17421" end="17425" title="Snow (ship)" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q753784" start="17430" end="17435" title="ketch" label="ketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="17482" end="17486" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="17596" end="17607" title="Sloop of war" label="ship sloops"/>
<link wikidata="Q683363" start="17777" end="17783" title="Cutter (boat)" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="17790" end="17800" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q210223" start="17889" end="17894" title="sloop" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399716" start="17997" end="18009" title="post-captain" label="post-captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233751" start="18045" end="18054" title="post ship" label="post ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="18476" end="18482" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q264934" start="18483" end="18495" title="seventy-four (ship)" label="seventy-four"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="18905" end="18923" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980916" wikidata="Q159918" url="?curid=980916" title="White rhinoceros">
<text>The white rhinoceros, white rhino or square-lipped rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum) is the largest extant species of rhinoceros. It has a wide mouth used for grazing and is the most social of all rhino species. The white rhinoceros consists of two subspecies: the southern white rhinoceros, with an estimated 16,803 
wild-living animals, and the much rarer northern white rhinoceros. The northern subspecies has very few remaining individuals, with only two confirmed left in 2018 (two females: Fatu, 24 and Najin, 29, both in captivity at Ol Pejeta). Sudan, the world&#x27;s last known male northern white rhinoceros, died in Kenya on 19 March 2018 at age 45.

==Naming==
A popular albeit widely discredited theory of the origins of the name &quot;white rhinoceros&quot; is a mistranslation from Dutch to English. The English word &quot;white&quot; is said to have been derived by mistranslation of the Dutch word &quot;wijd&quot;, which means &quot;wide&quot; in English. The word &quot;wide&quot; refers to the width of the rhinoceros&#x27; mouth. So early English-speaking settlers in South Africa misinterpreted the &quot;wijd&quot; for &quot;white&quot; and the rhino with the wide mouth ended up being called the white rhino and the other one, with the narrow pointed mouth, was called the black rhinoceros. Ironically, Dutch (and Afrikaans) later used a calque of the English word, and now also call it a &quot;white&quot; rhino. This suggests the origin of the word was before codification by Dutch writers. A review of Dutch and Afrikaans literature about the rhinoceros has failed to produce any evidence that the word &quot;wijd&quot; was ever used to describe the rhino outside of oral use.

An alternative name for the white rhinoceros, more accurate but rarely used, is the square-lipped rhinoceros. The white rhinoceros&#x27; generic name, &quot;Ceratotherium&quot;, given by the zoologist John Edward Gray in 1868, is derived from the Greek terms &quot;keras&quot; (κέρας) &quot;horn&quot; and &quot;thērion&quot; (θηρίον) &quot;beast&quot;. &quot;Simum&quot;, is derived from the Greek term &quot;simos&quot; (σιμός), meaning &quot;flat nosed&quot;.

==Taxonomy and evolution==

The white rhinoceros of today was said to be likely descended from &quot;Ceratotherium praecox&quot;, which lived around 7 million years ago. Remains of this white rhino have been found at Langebaanweg near Cape Town. A review of fossil rhinos in Africa by Denis Geraads has suggested, however, that the species from Langebaanweg is of the genus &quot;Ceratotherium&quot;, but not &quot;Ceratotherium praecox&quot;, as the type specimen of &quot;Ceratotherium praecox&quot; should, in fact, be &quot;Diceros praecox&quot;, given that it shows closer affinities with the black rhinoceros &quot;Diceros bicornis&quot;. It has been suggested that the modern white rhino&#x27;s skull, which is longer than that of &quot;Ceratotherium praecox&quot;, evolved in order to facilitate consumption of shorter grasses that resulted from the long-term trend to drier conditions in Africa. However, if &quot;Ceratotherium praecox&quot; is in fact &quot;Diceros praecox&quot;, then the shorter skull could indicate a browsing species. Teeth of fossils assigned to &quot;Ceratotherium&quot; found at Makapansgat in South Africa were analysed for carbon isotopes, and the researchers concluded that these animals consumed more than 30% browse in their diet, suggesting that these are not the fossils of the extant &quot;Ceratotherium simum&quot;, which only eats grass. It is suggested that the real lineage of the white rhino should be: &quot;Ceratotherium neumayri&quot; → &quot;Ceratotherium mauritanicum&quot; → &quot;C. simum&quot;, with the Langebaanweg rhinos being &quot;Ceratotherium&quot; sp. (as yet unnamed), and with black rhinos being descended from &quot;C. neumayri&quot; via &quot;Diceros praecox&quot;.

Recently, an alternative scenario has been proposed under which the earliest African &quot;Ceratotherium&quot; is considered to be &quot;Ceratotherium efficax&quot; (now synonymous with &quot;C. mauritanicum)&quot;, known from the Late Pliocene of Ethiopia and the Early Pleistocene of Tanzania. This species is proposed to have been diversified into the Middle Pleistocene species &quot;C. mauritanicum&quot; in northern Africa, &quot;C. germanoafricanum&quot; in East Africa, and the extant &quot;C. simum&quot;. The first two of these are extinct; however, &quot;C. germanoafricanum&quot; is very similar to &quot;C. simum&quot; and has often been considered a fossil and ancestral subspecies to the latter. The study also doubts the ancestry of &quot;C. neumayri&quot; from the Miocene of southern Europe to the African species.
The ancestor of both the black and the white rhino was likely a mixed feeder, with the two lineages then specializing in browsing and grazing, respectively. The oldest definitive record of the white rhinoceros is during the mid-Early Pleistocene at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania, around 1.8 Ma.

===Southern white rhinoceros===

As of 2021, there were an estimated 15,940 southern white rhinos in the wild, making them by far the most abundant subspecies of rhino in the world. The number of southern white rhinos outnumbers all other rhino subspecies combined. South Africa is the stronghold for this subspecies, with 12,968 individuals recorded in 2021. There are smaller reintroduced populations within the historical range of the species in Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Uganda and Eswatini, while a small population survives in Mozambique. Populations have also been introduced outside of the former range of the species to Kenya and Zambia.

===Northern white rhinoceros===
The northern white rhinoceros or northern square-lipped rhinoceros (&quot;Ceratotherium simum cottoni&quot;) is considered critically endangered and possibly extinct in the wild. Formerly found in several countries in East and Central Africa south of the Sahara, this subspecies is a grazer in grasslands and savanna woodlands.

Initially, six northern white rhinoceros lived in the Dvůr Králové Zoo in the Czech Republic. Four of the six rhinos (which were also the only reproductive animals of this subspecies) were transported to Ol Pejeta Conservancy in Kenya, where scientists hoped they would successfully breed and save this subspecies from extinction. One of the two remaining in the Czech Republic died in late May 2011. Both of the last two bulls capable of natural mating died in 2014 (one in Kenya on 18 October and one in San Diego on 15 December). In 2015, the Kenyan government placed the last remaining bull of the subspecies at Ol Pejeta under 24-hour armed guard to deter poachers, but he was put down on 19 March 2018 due to multiple health problems caused by old age, leaving just two cows alive which reside at the Ol Pejeta complex. Staff hope to inseminate the remaining cows with the last bull&#x27;s semen, although the semen is not preferable due to the age of the rhino.

Following the phylogenetic species concept, recent research has led to the hypothesis that the northern white rhinoceros is a different species, rather than a subspecies of white rhinoceros as was previously thought, in which case the correct scientific name for the former should be &quot;Ceratotherium cottoni&quot;. Distinct morphological and genetic differences suggest the two proposed species have been separated for at least a million years. However, the results of the research were not universally accepted by other scientists.

==Description==

The white rhinoceros is the largest of the five living species of rhinoceros. By mean body mass, the white rhinoceros falls behind only the three extant species of elephant as the largest land animal and terrestrial mammal alive today. It weighs more on average than a hippopotamus despite a considerable mass overlap between these two species. It has a massive body and large head, a short neck and broad chest.

The head and body length is in bulls and in cows, with the tail adding another , and the shoulder height is in the bull and in the cow. The bull, averaging about is heavier than the cow, at an average of about . The largest size the species can attain is not definitively known; specimens of up to are considered reliable, while larger sizes up to have been claimed but are not verified. On its snout it has two horn-like growths, one behind the other. These are made of solid keratin, in which they differ from the horns of bovids (cattle and their relatives), which are keratin with a bony core, and deer antlers, which are solid bone. The average weight of a horn is about 4.0 kilograms (8.8 pounds).
The front horn is larger and averages in length, reaching as much as but only in cows. The white rhinoceros also has a noticeable hump on the back of its neck. Each of the four stumpy feet has three toes. The color of the body ranges from yellowish-brown to slate grey. Its only hair is the ear fringes and tail bristles. White rhinos have a distinctive broad, straight mouth which is used for grazing. Its ears can move independently to pick up sounds, but it depends most of all on its sense of smell. The olfactory passages that are responsible for smelling are larger than their entire brain. The white rhinoceros has the widest set of nostrils of any land-based animal.

==Genome ==

The genome size of the white rhinoceros is 2581.22 Mb. A diploid cell has 2 x 40 autosomals and 2 sex chromosomes (XX or XY).

==Behavior and ecology==
White rhinos are grazing herbivores. They are found in grassland and savannah habitat. Preferring the shortest grains, the white rhinoceros is one of the largest pure grazers. It drinks twice a day if water is available, but if conditions are dry it can live four or five days without water. It spends about half of the day eating, one-third resting, and the rest of the day doing various other things. Like all species of rhinoceros, white rhinos enjoy wallowing in mud holes to cool down. The white rhinoceros is thought to have changed the structure and ecology of the savanna&#x27;s grasslands. Comparatively, based on studies of the African elephant, scientists believe the white rhino is a driving factor in its ecosystem. The destruction of the megaherbivore could have serious cascading effects on the ecosystem and harm other animals.

White rhinos produce sounds that include a panting contact call, grunts and snorts during courtship, squeals of distress, and deep bellows or growls when threatened. Threat displays (in bulls mostly) include wiping its horn on the ground and a head-low posture with ears back, combined with snarl threats and shrieking if attacked. The vocalizations of the two species differ between each other, and the panting contact calls between individual white rhinos in each species can vary as well. The differences in these calls aid the white rhinos in identifying each other and communicating over long distances. The white rhinoceros is quick and agile and can run .

White rhinos live in crashes or herds of up to 14 animals (usually mostly cows). Sub-adult bulls will congregate, often in association with an adult cow. Most adult bulls are . Dominant bulls mark their territory with excrement and urine. The dung is laid in well defined piles. It may have 20 to 30 of these piles to alert passing white rhinos that it is his territory. Another way of marking their territory is wiping their horns on bushes or the ground and scraping with their feet before urine spraying. They do this around ten times an hour while patrolling territory. The same ritual as urine marking except without spraying is also commonly used. The territorial bull will scrape-mark every 30 m (100 ft) or so around his territory boundary. Subordinate bulls do not mark territory. The most serious fights break out over mating rights with a cow. Cow territory overlaps extensively, and they do not defend it.

===Reproduction===

Cows reach sexual maturity at 6–7 years of age while bulls reach sexual maturity between 10 and 12 years of age. Courtship is often a difficult affair. The bull stays beyond the point where the cow acts aggressively and will give out a call when approaching her. The bull chases and or blocks the way of the cow while squealing or wailing loudly if the cow tries to leave his territory. When ready to mate, the cow curls her tail and gets into a stiff stance during the half-hour copulation. Breeding pairs stay together between 5–20 days before they part their separate ways. The gestation period of a white rhino is 16 months. A single calf is born and usually weighs . Calves are unsteady for their first two to three days of life. When threatened, the baby will run in front of the mother, which is very protective of her calf and will fight for it vigorously. Weaning starts at two months, but the calf may continue suckling for over 12 months. The birth interval for the white rhino is between two and three years. Before giving birth, the mother will chase off her current calf. White rhinos can live to be up to 40–50 years old.

Due to their size, adult white rhinos have no natural predators (other than humans), and even young rhinos are rarely attacked or preyed on due to the mother&#x27;s presence and their tough skin. One exceptional, successful attack was perpetrated by a lion pride on a sick bull white rhinoceros, which weighed , and occurred in Mala Mala Game Reserve, South Africa.

==Distribution==

The southern white rhino lives in Southern Africa. About 98.5% of white rhinos live in just five countries (South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Kenya, and Uganda). Almost at the edge of extinction in the early 20th century, the southern subspecies have made a tremendous comeback. In 2001, it was estimated that there were 11,670 white rhinos in the wild, with a further 777 in captivity worldwide, making it the most common rhino in the world. By the end of 2007, wild-living southern white rhinos had increased to an estimated 17,480 animals (IUCN 2008).

The northern white rhino (&quot;Ceratotherium simum cottoni&quot;) formerly ranged over parts of northwestern Uganda, southern Chad, southwestern Sudan, the eastern part of Central African Republic, and northeastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). The last surviving population of wild northern white rhinos are or were in Garamba National Park, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) but in August 2005, ground and aerial surveys conducted under the direction of African Parks Foundation and the African Rhino Specialist Group (ARSG) only found four animals: a solitary adult male and a group of one adult male and two adult females. In June 2008, it was reported that the species may have gone extinct in the wild.

Like the black rhino, the white rhino is under threat from habitat loss and poaching, most recently by Janjaweed. Although there are no measurable health benefits, the horn is sought after for traditional medicine and jewelry.

==Poaching==

Historically, the major factor in the decline of white rhinos was uncontrolled hunting in the colonial era, but now poaching for their horn is the primary threat. The white rhino is particularly vulnerable to hunting because it is a large and relatively unaggressive animal with very poor eyesight and generally living in herds.

Despite the lack of scientific evidence, the rhino horn is highly prized in traditional Asian medicine, where it is ground into a fine powder or manufactured into tablets to be used as a treatment for a variety of illnesses such as nosebleeds, strokes, convulsions, and fevers. Due to this demand, several highly organized and very profitable international poaching syndicates came into being and would carry out their poaching missions with advanced technologies ranging from night vision scopes, silenced weapons, darting equipment, and even helicopters. The ongoing conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo and incursions by poachers, primarily coming from Sudan, have further disrupted efforts to protect the few remaining northern rhinos.

In 2013, poaching rates for white rhinos nearly doubled from the previous year. As a result, the white rhino has now received Near Threatened status as its total population tops out at 20,000 members. Poaching of the animal has gone virtually unchecked in most of Africa, and the non-violent nature of the rhinoceros makes it susceptible to poaching. Mozambique, one of the four main countries in which the white rhino lives, is used by poachers as a passageway to South Africa, which holds a fairly large number of white rhinos. Here, rhinos are regularly killed and their horns are smuggled out of the country. As of 2014, Mozambique labels white rhino poaching as a misdemeanor. The white rhino population in South Africa&#x27;s Kruger National Park fell by 60% between 2013 and 2021, to an estimated 3,529 individuals.

In March 2017, poachers broke into the Thoiry Zoo, which is located in France. A southern white rhinoceros named Vince was found shot dead in his enclosure; the poachers had removed one of his horns and had attempted to remove his second horn. This is believed to be the first time that a rhinoceros had been killed in a European zoo.

Even with increased anti-poaching efforts in many African countries, many poachers are still willing to risk death or prison time because of the tremendous amount of money that they stand to make. Rhino horn can fetch tens of thousands of dollars per kilogram on the black market in Asia, and, depending on the exact price, can be worth more than its weight in gold. Poachers are also starting to use social media sites for obtaining information on the location of rhino in popular tourist attractions (such as Kruger National Park) by searching for geotagged photographs posted online by unsuspecting tourists. By using GPS coordinates of rhinos in recent photographs, poachers can more easily find and kill their targets.

==Modern conservation tactics==

The northern white rhino is critically endangered to the point that only two of these rhinos are known to remain in the world, both in captivity. Several conservation tactics have been taken to prevent this subspecies from disappearing from the planet. Perhaps the most notable type of conservation effort for these rhinos is having moved them from Dvur Kralove Zoo in the Czech Republic to Kenya&#x27;s Ol Pejeta Conservancy on 20 December 2009, where they have been under constant watch every day, and have been given favorable climate and diet, to which they have adapted well, to boost their chances of reproducing.

To save the northern white rhino from extinction, Ol Pejeta Conservancy announced that it would introduce a fertile southern white rhino from Lewa Wildlife Conservancy in February 2014. They placed the male rhino in an enclosure with both female northern white rhinos in hopes to cross-breed the subspecies. Having the male rhino with two female rhinos was expected to increase competition for the female rhinos and, in theory, should result in more mating experiences. Ol Pejeta Conservancy did not announce any news of rhino mating.

On 22 August 2019, using (ICSI), eggs from Fatu and Najin &quot;were successfully inseminated&quot; using the seminal fluid from Saut and Suni. The male Sudan&#x27;s sperm was harvested before his death and is still in Kenya. On 11 September 2019, it was announced that &quot;two embryos&quot; were generated and will be kept in a frozen state, until placed in a surrogate female. On 15 January 2020, it was announced that &quot;another embryo&quot; was created using the same techniques; all three embryos are &quot;from Fatu&quot;.

==In captivity==

Most white rhinos in zoos are southern white rhinos; in 2021, it was estimated that there were over 1,000 southern white rhinos in captivity worldwide.
Wild-caught southern whites will readily breed in captivity given appropriate amounts of space and food, as well as the presence of other female rhinos of breeding age. However, for reasons that are not currently understood, the rate of reproduction is extremely low among captive-born southern white females.

The San Diego Zoo Safari Park in San Diego, California, United States, had two northern white rhinos, one of which was wild-caught. On 22 November 2015, a 41-year-old female named Nola (born in 1974), which had been on loan from the Dvůr Králové Zoo in Dvůr Králové, Czech Republic) since 1989, was euthanized after experiencing a downturn in health. On 14 December 2014, a 44-year-old male named Angalifu died of old age at the San Diego Zoo. The other four captive northern white rhinos were loaned to Ol Pejeta Conservancy in Kenya, and only two remain alive. Females Najin and Fatu are still living, while males Suni and Sudan died in 2014 and 2018, respectively. The northern white rhinos had been transferred to Ol Pejeta Conservancy from the Dvůr Králové Zoo in 2009 in an attempt to protect the taxa in their natural habitat. The only two northern white rhinos left are maintained under 24-hour armed guard in Kenya.
==References==
==Notes==
==External links==
*White Rhino Info &amp; White Rhino Pictures on the Rhino Resource Center website.
*White Rhino entry on International Rhino Foundation website.
*White Rhino entry on World Wide Fund for Nature website.
*Honolulu Zoo
*San Diego Zoo
*Philadelphia Zoo
*Narrated video about the White Rhinoceros
*White Rhino description
*First test tube White Rhinoceros born at Budapest Zoo 
*Poachers kill one of last two white rhinos in Zambia
*Rhino Webcam at Zoo Budapest
*New baby rhino from frozen sperm – Madrid
*
*People Not Poaching: The Communities and IWT Learning Platform</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159918" start="4" end="20" title="White rhinoceros" label="white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q159918" start="22" end="33" title="White rhinoceros" label="white rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q159918" start="37" end="61" title="White rhinoceros" label="square-lipped rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="106" end="113" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="117" end="127" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764397" start="158" end="165" title="grazing (behaviour)" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307505" start="182" end="188" title="Sociality" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="248" end="258" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762455" start="264" end="289" title="southern white rhinoceros" label="southern white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614957" start="357" end="382" title="northern white rhinoceros" label="northern white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q19805029" start="552" end="557" title="Sudan (rhinoceros)" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="627" end="632" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q95036" start="1297" end="1313" title="black rhinoceros" label="black rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="1362" end="1368" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="1906" end="1922" title="John Edward Gray" label="John Edward Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1952" end="1957" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820620" start="2386" end="2398" title="Langebaanweg" label="Langebaanweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="2404" end="2413" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2427" end="2433" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q108292940" start="2697" end="2712" title="Diceros praecox" label="Diceros praecox"/>
<link wikidata="Q95036" start="2790" end="2806" title="Diceros bicornis" label="Diceros bicornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071706" start="3282" end="3293" title="Makapansgat" label="Makapansgat"/>
<link wikidata="Q471790" start="3328" end="3343" title="Isotopes of carbon" label="carbon isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q596814" start="3625" end="3647" title="Ceratotherium neumayri" label="Ceratotherium neumayri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063838" start="3662" end="3688" title="Ceratotherium mauritanicum" label="Ceratotherium mauritanicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q514873" start="4134" end="4147" title="Late Pliocene" label="Late Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="4151" end="4159" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q444693" start="4168" end="4185" title="Early Pleistocene" label="Early Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="4189" end="4197" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q492596" start="4258" end="4276" title="Middle Pleistocene" label="Middle Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063838" start="4291" end="4306" title="Ceratotherium mauritanicum" label="C. mauritanicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="4316" end="4331" title="northern Africa" label="northern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4339" end="4358" title="Ceratotherium germanoafricanum" label="C. germanoafricanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="4368" end="4379" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q596814" start="4658" end="4669" title="Ceratotherium neumayri" label="C. neumayri"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="4685" end="4692" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="4696" end="4711" title="southern Europe" label="southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q217043" start="4985" end="4998" title="Olduvai Gorge" label="Olduvai Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="5477" end="5484" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="5486" end="5494" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="5496" end="5504" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="5506" end="5512" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="5517" end="5525" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614957" start="5715" end="5740" title="northern white rhinoceros" label="northern white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="5834" end="5855" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q239509" start="5869" end="5888" title="extinct in the wild" label="extinct in the wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="5966" end="5972" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="6020" end="6027" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698060" start="6094" end="6110" title="Dvůr Králové Zoo" label="Dvůr Králové Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082831" start="6244" end="6265" title="Ol Pejeta Conservancy" label="Ol Pejeta Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="7024" end="7052" title="phylogenetic species concept" label="phylogenetic species concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="7729" end="7737" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="7834" end="7846" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="8456" end="8463" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284752" start="8495" end="8499" title="horn (anatomy)" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25497" start="8504" end="8510" title="Bovidae" label="bovids"/>
<link wikidata="Q192205" start="8512" end="8518" title="Bovini" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="8581" end="8585" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="8586" end="8592" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="8611" end="8615" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180866" start="9376" end="9387" title="genome size" label="genome size"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="9429" end="9441" title="diploid cell" label="diploid cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="9453" end="9462" title="autosomal" label="autosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q667636" start="9470" end="9485" title="sex chromosomes" label="sex chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="9541" end="9548" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="9549" end="9559" title="Herbivore" label="herbivores"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="11225" end="11245" title="territorial marking" label="mark their territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="11525" end="11539" title="urine spraying" label="urine spraying"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="13362" end="13366" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281115" start="13438" end="13460" title="Mala Mala Game Reserve" label="Mala Mala Game Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="13462" end="13474" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="13529" end="13544" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="14266" end="14298" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q308893" start="14381" end="14402" title="Garamba National Park" label="Garamba National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689878" start="14522" end="14546" title="African Parks Foundation" label="African Parks Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q95036" start="14785" end="14796" title="black rhino" label="black rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="14852" end="14860" title="poaching" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q178328" start="14879" end="14888" title="Janjaweed" label="Janjaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q24451" start="16829" end="16849" title="Kruger National Park" label="Kruger National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970796" start="16960" end="16970" title="Château of Thoiry" label="Thoiry Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762455" start="17002" end="17027" title="southern white rhinoceros" label="southern white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q24451" start="17768" end="17788" title="Kruger National Park" label="Kruger National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368751" start="17807" end="17816" title="Geotagged photograph" label="geotagged"/>
<link wikidata="Q28700" start="19197" end="19203" title="Intracytoplasmic sperm injection" label="(ICSI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368242" start="20192" end="20217" title="San Diego Zoo Safari Park" label="San Diego Zoo Safari Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698060" start="20421" end="20437" title="Dvůr Králové Zoo" label="Dvůr Králové Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352334" start="20585" end="20593" title="Angalifu (rhinoceros)" label="Angalifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082831" start="20692" end="20713" title="Ol Pejeta Conservancy" label="Ol Pejeta Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="21106" end="21111" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052767" start="21262" end="21292" title="International Rhino Foundation" label="International Rhino Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="21324" end="21350" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980918" wikidata="Q162749" url="?curid=980918" title="USS Narwhal">
<text>USS &quot;Narwhal&quot; has been the name of more than one United States Navy ship, and may refer to:

* USS &quot;Narwhal&quot;, a submarine renamed in 1911, in commission from 1909 to 1922
* , a submarine in commission from 1930 to 1945, named USS &quot;V-1&quot; (SS-167) from 1930 to 1931
* , a submarine in commission from 1969 to 1999</text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980927" wikidata="Q427593" url="?curid=980927" title="Idris (operating system)">
<text>Idris is a discontinued multi-tasking, Unix-like, multi-user, real-time operating system released by Whitesmiths, of Westford, Massachusetts. The product was commercially available from 1979 through 1988.

==Background==
Idris was originally written for the PDP-11 by P. J. Plauger, who started working on Idris in August 1978. It was binary compatible with Unix V6 on PDP-11, but it could run on non-memory managed systems (like LSI-11 or PDP-11/23) as well. The kernel required 31 KB of RAM, and the C compiler (provided along with the standard V6 toolset) had more or less the same size.

==Ports==
Although Idris was initially available for the PDP-11, it was later ported to run on a number of platforms, such as the VAX, Motorola 68000, System/370 and Intel 8086. There was also a version that used bank-switching for memory management, that ran on the Intel 8080.

In 1986, David M. Stanhope at Computer Tools International ported Idris to the Atari ST and developed its ROM boot cartridge. This work also included a port of X to Idris. Computer Tools and Whitesmiths offered it to Atari as a replacement for Atari TOS, but eventually marketed it directly to ST enthusiasts.

A specific version of Idris (CoIdris) was packaged as a .COM file under DOS and used it for low level I/O services.

Idris was ported to the Apple Macintosh (as MacIdris) by John O&#x27;Brien (of Whitesmiths Australia) and remained available until the early 1990s. MacIdris ran as an application under the Finder or MultiFinder.

After Whitesmiths had been merged with Intermetrics, Idris along with its development toolchain was ported by Real Time Systems Ltd to the INMOS T800 transputer architecture for the Parsytec SN1000 multiprocessor.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q427593" start="0" end="5" title="Idris (operating system)" label="Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="39" end="48" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q213666" start="62" end="88" title="real-time operating system" label="real-time operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053114" start="101" end="112" title="Whitesmiths" label="Whitesmiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="117" end="140" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="Westford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="258" end="264" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117321" start="268" end="281" title="P. J. Plauger" label="P. J. Plauger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13912071" start="335" end="352" title="binary compatible" label="binary compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547270" start="358" end="365" title="Version 6 Unix" label="Unix V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="401" end="415" title="Memory management unit" label="memory managed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="430" end="436" title="PDP-11#LSI-11" label="LSI-11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="440" end="449" title="PDP-11#Models" label="PDP-11/23"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="464" end="470" title="kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="483" end="485" title="Kibibyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="489" end="492" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634850" start="502" end="512" title="C compiler" label="C compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="670" end="676" title="ported" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="722" end="725" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="727" end="741" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="743" end="753" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="758" end="768" title="Intel 8086" label="Intel 8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="859" end="869" title="Intel 8080" label="Intel 8080"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="902" end="930" title="Computer Tools International" label="Computer Tools International"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="951" end="959" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="978" end="981" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="987" end="996" title="ROM cartridge" label="cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="1032" end="1033" title="X Window System" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="1089" end="1094" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574899" start="1116" end="1125" title="Atari TOS" label="Atari TOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q817650" start="1239" end="1248" title=".COM file" label=".COM file"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="1255" end="1258" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="1285" end="1288" title="I/O" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="1324" end="1339" title="Mac (computer)" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q910951" start="1489" end="1495" title="Finder (software)" label="Finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088285" start="1499" end="1510" title="MultiFinder" label="MultiFinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047458" start="1552" end="1564" title="Intermetrics" label="Intermetrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q545406" start="1599" end="1608" title="toolchain" label="toolchain"/>
<link wikidata="Q776861" start="1652" end="1662" title="INMOS T800" label="INMOS T800"/>
<link wikidata="Q776861" start="1663" end="1673" title="transputer" label="transputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250162" start="1695" end="1703" title="Parsytec" label="Parsytec"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980928" wikidata="Q2209" url="?curid=980928" title="Roxas City">
<text>&lt;noinclude&gt;

Roxas (), officially the City of Roxas (Capiznon/; ), is a component city and capital of the province of Capiz, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 179,292 people, making it the most populous city in Capiz and also the second-most populous city in Western Visayas, after Iloilo City.

It is originally known as the Municipality of Capiz (from which the province derives its name), the area became a chartered city on May 12, 1951, and was renamed in honor of native Manuel Acuña Roxas, the fourth president of the Philippines and the first of the independent post-American Third Philippine Republic.

Roxas City is the center of education, trade, economic activities and logistics in Northern Panay. The abundance of marine life makes Roxas City the &quot;Seafood Capital of the Philippines.&quot; It has received Cleanest and Greenest Component City in Western Visayas Award in the Gawad Pangulo sa Kapaligiran (GPK) Cleanliness and Environmental contest. The Department of Health (DOH) awarded the city with the Red Orchid Award for being &quot;100 percent tobacco-free&quot;. It has also gained the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) Seal of Good Housekeeping and won the Best Police Station in the region by the Philippine National Police.

==History==
===Spanish colonial period===
In 1569, Captain Diego de Artieda, who was sent by Miguel López de Legazpi from Cebu, landed on the shores of the town of Panay and proclaimed it as the area&#x27;s capital. Later, the capital was moved to its present site upon realising that the town of Capiz was nearer to the sea and possessed better ground for docking facilities. The Spaniards saw the long coastal cover and envisioned a trading and shipping . Ports were subsequently built in Libas and Culasi.

The Panay River divided the original settlement in two, and had tributaries from the mountains that flowed through communities that sprang up along its shores. The river provided irrigation and gradually fertilized the land, and during high tide, it provided water to the lowlands than became a private and commercial fishponds that exist to this day.

In 1590, the Spanish navy coming from Acapulco, Viceroyalty of Mexico made the port of Capiz its naval yard where ships sought shelter when the sea was rough. Capiz grew into a bustling port and houses of stone were built. The social and political status enjoyed by indigenous rulers of Capiz often resulted in mixed marriages with colonial Spaniards. Their mestizo descendants became the base of the town&#x27;s set of &quot;Principalía&quot;, the colony&#x27;s noble or patrician class. Their privileged status enabled them to build houses near the &quot;población&quot;, the downtown area whose focal points was the plaza, the local chapel along Burgos Street, and the government complex. Their children became the beneficiaries of the Augustinian mission in 1593.

In 1746, Capiz was made the seat of the politico-military government separating from the clutches of Iloilo in almost 200 years, although it was ecclesiastically controlled by the Bishopric of Cebu. In the latter part of 1795, under Gobernadorcillo Miguel Bautista, the old road to Baybay was built as an extension of calle San Roque .

The town was frequently attacked by Muslims that in 1814, stone forts at Baybay Beach (Baluarte) were built through the initiative of Gobernadorcillo José Consolación.

In 1870, ground was broken for the construction of Capiz Cathedral under the guidance of Reverend Apolonio Alvarez. It was built by sturdy hands, sweat and blood of Capizeños, who were pressed into its building by the &quot;polo y servicios&quot; (forced labour) system. In 1876, the Diocese of Jaro in Iloilo was erected, and Capiz came under its jurisdiction. In 1877, the cathedral was finally finished.

During the Philippine Revolution, the Spanish colonial government capitulated on August 31, 1898, when Governor Juan Herrero formally surrendered to General Ananias Diokno along Baybay area.

====Historical account of Pedro G. Gallardo====

Capiz is located on a small island formed by the Panay and Banica rivers. The Panay River was famous, it is said by the great number of caimanes (alligators). The soil is poor in the northern part of the island and is most productive only in the southern part. Fr. Agustin Estrada was named prior that same year. In 1707, it was declared an independent parish under the advocation of Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception.

The private council of 1716 created this town which was originally named El Puerto de Capiz, a vicariate under Fr. Pedro Vivaldi (?) as prior-vicar. In 1728, the convent was relieved from paying any rent to San Agustin Monastery. And likewise, in 1732. This suggests that the convent was rather poor or that the priors were building the parochial edifices. By this time, Loctugan and Ibisan were assigned to it as visitas.

In the middle of the 18th century, Capiz was declared the capital city of the province of the same name which later became “the most famous sea port and the biggest ministry the Augustinians had in that province.” Capiz (or Capis) was renowned all over for its shells, the capis used for capiz-shell window panes on houses and convents all throughout the Philippines. Tradition holds that this is the place where the Visayas dialect is spoken with “more propriety and musicality” and where “women dress with more neatness, and elegance” The Capizeños showed special loyalty to Spain during the British invasion, by sending money and ammunition to Manila and jailing the alcalde mayor, Señor Quintanilla, who was caught “conducting secret negotiation to have the province handed over peacefully to the British.”

In 1732, Capiz had 2,327 souls. In 1760 Capiz had 3,971 of which 16 were Spaniards. By the tail-end of 1700s, Capiz was home to 89 Spanish-Filipino families.

In 1896, its population increased to 17,683. In 1990, it reached 103,171.

Capiz was a progressive city in 1891, its exports through the sea port, reached 1,800,000 pesos and imports were valued at 900,000 pesos. It was a joy to watch, in the old times, the many boats converging, often at the same time, at the port to load rice.”
The primitive church was built before 1698, the year in which the typhoon of January 4 destroyed it together with the convent.
According to a document, the priest found it difficult “to rebuild them because the people were not used to work.” Fortunately, Fr. Domingo Horbegoso, minister of Capiz, started building the church in 1728, the year in which the convent was relieved from paying any rent to San Agustin Monastery. The construction seemed to have continued, at least until 1732.

Capiz was founded in 1693 under the advocation of Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception.

===American colonial period===
After 300 years under Spanish rule, the Philippine Islands came under the sovereignty of the United States of America. By the early 1900s, Protestant missionaries arrived in the Islands, which the various denominations subsequently agreed to divide into mission territories. Western Visayas went to the American Baptists; Baptist institutions such as Filamer Christian University, Central Philippine University, Capiz Emmanuel Hospital were later established. In August 1904, Rev. and Mrs. Joseph Robbins were entrusted with care of three little children. This situation of neglected homeless children touched their hearts which led to the establishment of Capiz Home School, with the first building being a gift from the American Baptist Foreign Mission Society. The Capiz Home School was later renamed Filamer Christian University, &quot;Filamer&quot; being a portmanteau of &quot;Filipino&quot; and &quot;American&quot;.

In 1914, an economic debacle hit the town of Capiz when the Ayala Distillery abruptly stopped operations. What could have been an ambitious forerunner of nationalized industrialization became the victim of the Internal Revenue Law under American control.

In 1917, Division Superintendent of Schools F.E. Hemingway founded Capiz Trade School for intermediate pupils. The institution offered woodworking as the only vocational course. The next division superintendent opened Capiz High School.

In 1926, Division Superintendent Arthur Wittman authorized teaching of complete secondary curriculum in the Capiz Trade School. In the same year, Culasi Port was built to accommodate inter-island ships.

===Cityhood===

Capiz became a chartered city on May 12, 1951, through House Bill 1528, sponsored by Ramón Acuña Arnaldo, the Representative of the First District Capiz. It was approved by President Elpidio Quirino, Roxas&#x27; successor, on April 11, 1951, as Republic Act 603. Consequently, the town was renamed Roxas City after the late Manuel Roxas, the last President of the Commonwealth and the first President of the Third Republic.

The city&#x27;s first appointed Mayor was Lorenzo Acuña Arnaldo, followed by Ramón Berjamin Blanco, José Dorado, and Juliano Alovera Alba. In 1959, Arnaldo became the city&#x27;s first elected head. He was succeeded by Teodoro Roxas Arcenas, who himself was succeeded by Juliano Alovera Alba. Alba was also the Representative of the First District Capiz when President Ferdinand Marcos declared Martial Law nationwide on September 21, 1972.

Antonio A. del Rosario, the former Representative of the First District of Capiz, was elected to three terms as Mayor, serving from 1998 to 2007. Vicente B. Bermejo, the former governor of the Province of Capiz, was elected Mayor and served from 2007 to 2010.

Roxas City&#x27;s current mayor is Ronnie T. Dadivas who was elected in 2019.

==Geography==

Roxas City is situated just east of the north-central coast of Panay Island with geographic coordinates of 11°35&#x27; N, 122°45&#x27; E. Its boundaries are: the Sibuyan Sea to the north, the municipality of Panitan to the south, the municipality of Ivisan to the west, and the municipality of Panay to the east. It is located north of Iloilo City, from Kalibo, from San Jose de Buenavista and southeast of Manila. Travel time from/to Iloilo City takes 2 hours by land, while travel time from/to Manila is 50 minutes by air and 18 hours by sea.

===Climate===
===Barangays===
The city of Roxas is politically subdivided into 47 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios.

Currently, there are 31 barangays which considered urban and the rest are rural.

* Adlawan
* Bago
* Balijuagan
* Banica
* Barangay 1
* Barangay 2
* Barangay 3
* Barangay 4
* Barangay 5
* Barangay 6
* Barangay 7
* Barangay 8
* Barangay 9
* Barangay 10
* Barangay 11
* Barra
* Bato
* Baybay
* Bolo
* Cabugao
* Cagay
* Cogon
* Culajao
* Culasi
* Dumolog
* Dayao
* Dinginan
* Gabu-an
* Inzo Arnaldo Village (Cadimahan)
* Jumaguicjic
* Lanot
* Lawa-an
* Li-ong
* Libas
* Loctugan
* Lonoy
* Milibili
* Mongpong
* Olotayan
* Punta Cogon
* Punta Tabuc
* San Jose
* Sibaguan
* Talon
* Tanque
* Tanza
* Tiza
==Demographics==


In the 2020 census, the population of Roxas City was 179,292 people, with a density of .

===Language===
Languages spoken in Roxas City are Capiznon, Hiligaynon, English, and Tagalog.

==Economy==

Roxas City is one of the selected Digital Cities 2025 by the I.T. and Business Process Association of the Philippines (IBPAP) in partnership with the Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT) and the National ICT Confederation of the Philippines (NICP).

The city gets its power from the Capiz Electric Cooperative (CAPELCO). The Metro Roxas Water District (MRWD) supplies drinking water to the populace, MRWD claims they have the cleanest and safest potable water in the region. Supplementing the water supplied by Metro Roxas Water District (MRWD) are wells with hand pumps and artesian wells which are constructed through the Barangay Water Program (BWP) and Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH).

The city&#x27;s urban area now expanded to the southern part primarily on the site of the master-planned city within a city, Pueblo de Panay, which aims to build a new business district between Lawaan and Sibaguan highways. It is now occupied by several restaurants and hotels, high Sacred Heart of Jesus (Roxas, Capiz) shrine (the tallest in the Philippines), Sitio Uno by Pueblo Residences (Roxas City&#x27;s first condominium), and the Robinsons Place Roxas. The Pueblo de Panay Technopark will house international and national BPO companies such as ePerformax Contact Centers and BPO.

Nearby the decade-old Gaisano Grand Roxas is the location of the first of the many CityMalls of DoubleDragon Properties and SM Prime Holdings. Roxas City is experiencing a &quot;real estate boom&quot; due to rapid conversions of fishponds into subdivisions and commercial areas.

The National Port of Culasi and Roxas Airport serve as the main gateway to the city from the capital city of Manila. Philippine Airlines and Cebu Pacific has a daily flight to/from the capital city, Manila. The M/V Love-1 of Moreta Shipping Lines provides shipping going to Manila North Harbor and The Super Shuttle RoRo and 2GO Travel links Culasi to Batangas.

===Agriculture===
Roxas City has an agri-based economy. Farming and fishing are the major economic activities which claim 37.05% of the city&#x27;s total land area. Although agricultural, the city is now moving towards commercialization and industrialization as it is the center of trade and commerce not only in the province of Capiz but also in the northern part of Panay Island. Rice and melons are the major crops grown in this area. Papaya and jackfruit trees are also cultivated.

===Aquaculture (seafood production)===

Roxas City as Seafood capital of the Philippines exporting seafood products to various countries such as Taiwan, Japan and the United States.
Phillips Seafood Philippines Corporation is the sole seafood production company with processing plant located in Banica, Roxas City. The main aquaculture farms are oyster and milk fish farms that take advantage of natural tidal bays and other low-lying areas near the coast.

=== Banking ===
More than 45 banks, including a branch of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, are operating in the city.

=== Malls in the City ===
There are 7 malls located in Roxas City, includes SM City, Robinsons, Gaisano Grand &amp; Marketplace, Citymalls (Arnaldo Blvd. &amp; Roxas Avenue) &amp; Unitop Shopping Mall.

===Business process outsourcing===
PETRA Academy is a non-voice outsourcing company that serves Korean nationals for an online English tutorial. The company is located in 3/F JC TIU Building, Corner Burgos Street and Inzo Arnaldo, Roxas City.

ePerformax Contact Center and BPO is the largest BPO company in Capiz and Northern Panay, ePerformax Contact Center and BPO - Roxas City opened last June 15, 2018, with over 1,000 employees as of 2020 and is targeting to reach 3,000 employees by 2022. It is located in PEZA-approved 7.4 hectares Pueblo de Panay Technopark inside 670-hectare Pueblo de Panay township. ePerformax Contact Center and BPO has also branches in Metro Manila and Cebu.

Xilium is located in Capiz Government and Business Center. It is a home-grown BPO company from Iloilo City, Philippines. It was founded in 2011. The company has grown steadily from a 5-person startup to a full-scale organization with more than 100 employees and a second branch in Roxas City, Capiz. 

== Infrastructure ==

=== Public transport ===

Roxas City is served mostly by passenger jeepneys, metered taxis and motorized tricycle within the city limits.

The Capiz Cabs (metered taxis) of Roxas City are made of SUV type and can carry seven maximum passengers and serve to any point of Panay Island. Most of them are designed in colorful packaging and can be seen all the time in Roxas Airport.

The Pueblo de Panay Libot Vehicles are new additions to the transportation system primarily within Pueblo de Panay. These vehicles are customized Isuzu NHR Trucks and are bigger than the usual passenger jeepneys.

===Transport terminals ===

Roxas City has two Transport Terminals located at the city&#x27;s perimeter areas, these are:

Roxas City Integrated Terminal located at the Pueblo de Panay in Lawaan is the transport hub serving passengers to/from the provinces of Aklan and Iloilo and roll on-roll off (RORO) buses plying Roxas-Manila(Cubao). The Php 50 million newly erected integrated terminal was done thru PPP by the LGU and Pueblo de Panay Inc.

Roxas City Eastern Terminal located in Banica, Roxas City is the transport hub serving passengers to/from the province of Iloilo.

=== Railroad ===

From 1907 to 1989, Panay Railways operated a railroad from Roxas City to the port area of Muelle Loney along the Iloilo River in Iloilo City. A revival of Panay Railways has been approved by the Regional Development Council - Region VI and is currently under feasibility study.

=== Roxas Airport ===
Roxas Airport (RXS) is an airport serving the general area of Roxas City, the entire province of Capiz, and Northern Iloilo in the Philippines. The airport is classified as a Class 1 principal airport by the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines.

In 2013, the national government has approved the Php 215 million budget for the expansion of the Roxas Airport including installation of night landing facilities.

Roxas Airport has three-four daily flight bound to Manila, three flights by Cebu Pacific and one flight by Philippine Airlines and Air Asia.

=== Port of Culasi ===

The Port of Culasi is the port serving the entire area of Roxas City and the gateway port of Northern Panay. This port is the trading and shipping center during the Spanish Colonialism. Currently, it has routes from Roxas City to Romblon, Sibuyan, Dumaguit, Cadiz, Estancia, Carles, Batangas and Manila. The Philippine Coast Guard-Roxas and the 1st Search and Rescue Hub of the PCG and a mini-hospital are also located here. In 1926, Culasi Port was built by the construction firm Pedro Siochi and Company to serve as trans-shipment point for inter-island vessel that carries vital products for the people living in Capiz, and its neighboring provinces such as Aklan and Northern Iloilo as well.

Currently, 2 RORO vessels are operating the port namely: 2GO Travel and Starlite Ferries both are bound to Batangas.

=== Domestic seaports and Fishing (marine) port facilities ===

The Port of Libas or Libas Fishing Port, provides anchorage to fishing vessel; and serves as center for trade of marine products in the province.

The Port of Banica, serves as a trading route from Roxas City to different parts of Masbate Island. This wharf is said to be the site where Captain Diego de Artieda who was sent by Miguel Lopez de Legazpi from Cebu landed in 1569.

=== Communication ===
Available communication services in Roxas City are: telephone services including domestic and international direct dial, facsimile; mobile communications, internet, telegraph and telex stations, post offices and other messengerial and courier services.

There are three telephone Service provider in Roxas City providing landline connections to almost all of the municipalities. These are: Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company, INNOVE (Globe Telecom) and Bayan Telecommunications.

Cellular telephone facilities are also provided by three cellular companies namely Smart Communications, Globe Telecom and Dito Telecommunity.

=== Convention facilities ===

&quot;El Circulo Convention Center&quot;, the Mediterranean-inspired convention center is the latest infrastructure of Pueblo de Panay. The convention center hosts wedding and other important events. Pueblo de Panay proposes to add resorts and hotels near the convention center by 2017. Currently, it houses the University of the Philippines Visayas College of Management – Master of Management Program Roxas Extension and holds classes every Saturday.

&quot;Gerry Roxas Foundation Resource Center&quot; at the Roxas City Center, serves as host of several symposia, meetings, and convention for government sectors.

&quot;CAP Auditorium&quot;, owned by College Assurance Plan also hosts major events such as national, regional and local conventions and serves as a venue for cultural presentations and educational events.

Other big venues in Roxas City that can accommodate International and National gatherings are the Capis Mansion Ballroom at Banica, the Main Hall at La Hacienda Hotel and MVW Restaurant and Hotel.

=== Sports venues and stadium ===

&quot;Villareal Stadium&quot; - is the biggest stadium in Western Visayas. Built in 1962, the 20,000 seating capacity stadium has an Olympic-sized swimming pool, fully air-conditioned 6,000 capacity gym (Capiz Gymnasium), rubberized oval and paved tennis, volleyball, football and basketball courts. The 10-hectare sports complex has become the official venue of various events aside from sports such as the 2nd Annual One Visayas Festival in 2010. It has also become a major forerunner in promoting sports tourism in the province of Capiz. The sports complex had hosted the Palarong Pambansa in 1963, Philippine University Games (Unigames) in 2011 and numerous WVRAA and WVPRISAA events.

&quot;Dinggoy Roxas Civic Center&quot; - the civic center has 5,000 seating capacity and a host for Regional and Local basketball sports events like WVRAA, WVPRISAA and Intercollegiate basketball leagues in the city.
The civic center usually serves as the venue for Mutya sa Sinadya sang Halaran beauty pageant.

&quot;Capiz Gymnasium&quot; - this gym has 6,000 seating capacity and has been a host of several sports events such as Philippine Basketball Association (PBA), WVRAA, WVPRISAA, Unigames, etc. The gymnasium serves also a venue for various National, Regional, and Local events.

=== New road networks ===

The Roxas City Government, thru the Capiz Provincial Government, identified Roxas City Circumferential Road as one of their priority projects. Roxas City Circumferential Road would serve as a by-pass road for traffic of goods and passengers going to and from Culasi Port and Panay town and the adjoining northeastern towns of Capiz, without passing thru the central business area of Roxas City. The Roxas City Circumferential Road is one of four road projects being proposed by DPWH VI under the Panay Roads Investment Development (PRIDE) to be funded by the Japan Bank of International Cooperation. Although most of the construction on the road projects is done by hand. Many of the road projects are politically motivated and cause undo stress and burden on the locals who live alongside the major roads. Some locals have lost there property to the government in road projects with little to no compensation.

Roxas City Circumferential Road is divided into two sections:

Section I starts at the Culasi Port and passing at the side of Cadimahan River, crosses the said river wherein two bridges will be constructed.
Section II starts at the junction of the Ivisan-Roxas National Road and eventually joins the national highway going to Panay and Pontevedra towns.

&quot;Pueblo de Panay Road Network&quot; - a four-lane to six-lane high impact roads connecting the national highway in Lawaan to the highways in Brgys. Dinginan and Sibaguan.

&quot;The Health Centrum Complex Road Network&quot; - newly access roads developed by the Health Centrum Inc. to connect direct access from the main highway of Banica to the complex recently. The roads are also connected to the bridge that connects Tiza and Banica.

== Plazas and public parks ==

=== Capiz Provincial Park ===
This landmark is located within the perimeter of Barangay Tiza, Roxas City fronting the Capiz National High School. It has lush greeneries and houses several pocket gardens. The park has three monuments that represent the historical and cultural diversities of Roxas City. A turtle-shape outdoor theater nests at the Western part of the park. Another platform is situated at the Southern area, which can accommodate numerous public events. This park perfectly resembles a simple yet picturesque nook for local and foreign tourists.

=== Roxas City Plaza/Halaran Plaza ===

Located at the heart of the city, this park has two divisions. The first division lies near the Panay River banks. It houses a famous landmark (Roxas City Bandstand), where it is the exact location were signing of MOA, chartering Municipality of Capiz into City of Roxas. At the right-end of the first division, stands the life-size chess plaza.

The second division of Roxas City Plaza faces the right side of Roxas City Hall. It has several pine trees, but after the ravaging Super Typhoon Yolanda hit the Seafood Capital of the Philippines, several trees were uprooted and only few are currently existing. Travelers can visit Manuel A. Roxas Monument in this park. The monument faces with Jose Rizal Monument at the far-end of the Capitol. Few steps from M.A.Roxas monument is the only water-tank turned into Museum in the Philippines. The Panublion Museum serves as the &quot;Story Teller&quot; of Roxas City&#x27;s History.

=== La Playa de Roxas People&#x27;s Park ===
This public park is situated at Barangay Baybay, Roxas City. It faces the Sibuyan Sea and the scenic coastline of Northern Panay. At the left-end of the Park showcases the colorful dancing fountain. There is a beach that people swim at and the park has grass area and security both. The park also has cheap street food and a children&#x27;s playground. At the right-end of the park is the kapis shells-inspired Seafood Court, where the city&#x27;s marine products are served fresh at very reasonable prices.

==Healthcare==
Roxas City is gearing up toward a medical-hub in Northern Panay as several hospitals and health institutions are upgrading. Currently, the city has one government-owned hospital with two sites and four private hospitals.
Through the aid of public empowerment, City of Roxas took off its landfall in the Hall of Famer for Red Orchid (Smoke Free City) in the Philippines. With the partnership of Private and Government sectors, several health propaganda were established to strengthen the health care delivery system.

# Capiz Emmanuel Hospital (Filamer Christian University - Capiz Emmanuel Hospital), founded by the American Baptist Mission in Capiz. Dr. Frederick Meyer, a former administrator of the hospital, also wrote the early history of Capiz. This 100-bed capacity tertiary hospital was founded in 1908. Capiz Emmanuel Hospital is the first Baptist hospital in the Philippines. It is affiliated with Filamer Christian University.
# Saint Anthony College Hospital of Roxas City, The 135-bed capacity was founded in June 1956 by Mr. and Mrs. Pio Bernas who, having realized the need for more health care facilities in Roxas City and in Capiz, initiated the project with the help of Dr. Gaudencio Ortañez.
# Roxas Memorial Provincial (General) Hospital, The 150-bed capacity public hospital is moving to Capitol Hills, Lanot, Roxas City. The new 300-bed capacity hospital is currently under-construction while the OPD is already completed.
# Capiz Doctors&#x27; Hospital is in Water Village, Lawaan, Roxas City. The facility is a 100-bed capacity hospital.
# The Health Centrum Hospital and Wellness Center is a 40-bed capacity level 2 hospital and is open for expansion in the future.

== Education ==
Roxas City is considered as the center of Education in Northern Panay. The city hosts 4 universities and various colleges.

=== Universities ===
The city has one national (program extension) university, one state university, one private university, and one satellite campus of a private university.
*Capiz State University - Roxas City Main Campus 
**Capiz State University - Dayao Satellite College 
*Filamer Christian University - Roxas Avenue, Roxas City
*University of the Philippines Visayas (Master of Management Program Roxas Extension) - Pueblo de Panay, Lawaan, Roxas City
*University of Perpetual Help System - Pueblo de Panay, Lawaan, Roxas City

===Colleges===

==Festivals==
===&quot;Sinadya Sa Halaran&quot;===
The &quot;Sinadya sa Halaran Festival&quot; is celebrated the first week of December in commemoration of the founding of the city followed by the &quot;Diwal Festival&quot; signifying the city&#x27;s importance as the country&#x27;s &quot;Seafood Capital&quot; along with the &quot;Aswang Festival&quot; that symbolizes the heritage of myth and folklore in the province. But it is now discontinued.

There used to be two separate festivals, the Halaran (&quot;Offering&quot;) and the &quot;Sinadya&quot; (&quot;Celebration&quot;), the former is celebrated by the Province of Capiz and the latter by the City of Roxas. The &quot;Sinadya&quot; was formerly held at the same time as the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, which was celebrated by the Immaculate Conception Metropolitan Cathedral. The &quot;Halaran&quot; was usually held by the last week of October each year (A prelude to All Souls Day and All Saints Day festivals). However, because of the costs of holding two separate festivals year, the two festivals were merged, with both the Province of Capiz and the City of Roxas contributing to the expenses.

===&quot;Diwal&quot; Festival===
The Roxas City Seafood Festival is held to commemorate and promote the resurgence of the Angel Wing or &quot;diwal&quot;, which neared extinction in Capiz until protected and cultivated in Roxas City.

===&quot;Capiztahan&quot; Festival===
The &quot;Capiztahan&quot; is celebrated every second week of April combined joint forces from City of Roxas, Province of Capiz and One Capiz..

==Notable personalities==
===Politics===
* Pedro Gil, was a physician, journalist, and legislator. He was elected representative for the south District Manila on the Democratra party ticket. He became Minority Floor Leader in the House of Representatives of the Philippines.
* Manuel Roxas (1892–1948), first President of the independent Republic of the Philippines
* Gerardo Roxas (1924–1982), Philippine Senator and son of President Manuel Roxas
* Manuel Roxas II (born 1957), Philippine Senator, grandson of President Manuel Roxas and former Department of the Interior and Local Government secretary
* Gerardo Roxas Jr. (1960-1993), grandson of President Manuel Roxas and former Congressman

===Business===
* Edgar Sia, is the chairman of DoubleDragon Properties and the founder of Mang Inasal fast food restaurant chain

===Entertainment===
* Gina Alajar, actress and director
* Daisy Avellana (1917–2013), actress and theater director
* Sharmaine Arnaiz (born 1974), actress
* Paolo Bediones (born 1974), commercial model, television host, journalist, newscaster, and radio announcer
* Noreen Joyce Guerra (born 1991), actress, host, commercial model (based in South Korea)

===Sports===
*Jeckster Apinan, a professional basketball player

===Music===
* Emil Mijares, was a jazz vibraphonist and pianist, and was a musical director on Filipino television, as well as a composer, arranger, bandleader and producer.
* Barbie Almalbis (born 1977), singer, former frontman of Hungry Young Poets and Barbie&#x27;s Cradle.
* Mikoy Morales, is an actor, singer &amp; model. He joined the Protégé: The Battle For The Big Artista Break.
*Jovita Fuentes, Dubbed the First Lady of Philippine Music. The first female recipient of the National Artist Award.

===Social sciences===
* Josepha Abiertas (1894–1929), feminist and lawyer who was born and raised in Capiz
==Sister cities==
Roxas City has the following sister cities:

===Local===
* Quezon City, since March 2013

===International===
* San Bernardino, California, U.S.A.
* Guam, U.S.A.
* Balıkesir, Turkey

==See also==
*List of renamed cities and municipalities in the Philippines
* Capiz

==References==
==External links==
* [ Philippine Standard Geographic Code]
* Philippine census information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2209" start="19" end="24" title="Roxas City" label="Roxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209" start="44" end="57" title="Roxas City" label="City of Roxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937525" start="59" end="67" title="Capiznon language" label="Capiznon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78" end="92" title="Cities of the Philippines#Legal classification" label="component city"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="112" end="120" title="Provinces of the Philippines" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13772" start="124" end="129" title="Capiz" label="Capiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="131" end="142" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13665" start="297" end="312" title="Western Visayas" label="Western Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q459787" start="320" end="331" title="Iloilo City" label="Iloilo City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209" start="380" end="385" title="Roxas City" label="Capiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q223419" start="515" end="533" title="Manuel Acuña Roxas" label="Manuel Acuña Roxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q269860" start="539" end="545" title="List of presidents of the Philippines" label="fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="546" end="574" title="president of the Philippines" label="president of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q146328" start="608" end="621" title="Commonwealth of the Philippines" label="post-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q111220073" start="622" end="647" title="History of the Philippines (1946-1965)" label="Third Philippine Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q332359" start="742" end="747" title="Panay" label="Panay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545669" start="1010" end="1030" title="Department of Health (Philippines)" label="Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543505" start="1151" end="1198" title="Department of the Interior and Local Government" label="Department of the Interior and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q963772" start="1285" end="1311" title="Philippine National Police" label="Philippine National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q318500" start="1407" end="1430" title="Miguel López de Legazpi" label="Miguel López de Legazpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13786" start="1436" end="1440" title="Cebu" label="Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q356204" start="1478" end="1483" title="Panay, Capiz" label="Panay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049155" start="1828" end="1839" title="Panay River" label="Panay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="2215" end="2223" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="2225" end="2246" title="Viceroyalty of Mexico" label="Viceroyalty of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q916917" start="2603" end="2614" title="Principalía" label="Principalía"/>
<link wikidata="Q652541" start="2734" end="2743" title="poblacion" label="población"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="2796" end="2801" title="plaza" label="plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13825" start="3047" end="3053" title="Iloilo" label="Iloilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364327" start="3126" end="3143" title="Archdiocese of Cebu" label="Bishopric of Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q105754802" start="3503" end="3518" title="Roxas Cathedral" label="Capiz Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3676" end="3692" title="Corvée#The Philippines" label="polo y servicios"/>
<link wikidata="Q630859" start="3736" end="3751" title="Archdiocese of Jaro" label="Diocese of Jaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q422082" start="3871" end="3892" title="Philippine Revolution" label="Philippine Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q129642864" start="5237" end="5255" title="Capiz shell window" label="capiz-shell window"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857726" start="7165" end="7182" title="Baptists in the United States" label="American Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448276" start="7213" end="7241" title="Filamer Christian University" label="Filamer Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053944" start="7243" end="7272" title="Central Philippine University" label="Central Philippine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15932096" start="7584" end="7624" title="American Baptist International Ministries" label="American Baptist Foreign Mission Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="7724" end="7735" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="8674" end="8683" title="President of the Philippines" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q319943" start="8684" end="8699" title="Elpidio Quirino" label="Elpidio Quirino"/>
<link wikidata="Q223419" start="8825" end="8837" title="Manuel Roxas" label="Manuel Roxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q146328" start="8865" end="8877" title="Commonwealth of the Philippines" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="9295" end="9311" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247438" start="9312" end="9320" title="Proclamation No. 1081" label="declared"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774719" start="9321" end="9332" title="Martial law in the Philippines" label="Martial Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q332359" start="9786" end="9798" title="Panay Island" label="Panay Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q594834" start="9885" end="9896" title="Sibuyan Sea" label="Sibuyan Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q459787" start="10059" end="10070" title="Iloilo City" label="Iloilo City"/>
<link wikidata="Q626721" start="10077" end="10083" title="Kalibo" label="Kalibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q492619" start="10090" end="10112" title="San Jose de Buenavista" label="San Jose de Buenavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="10130" end="10136" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="10351" end="10359" title="barangay" label="barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261368" start="10388" end="10393" title="purok" label="purok"/>
<link wikidata="Q572784" start="10409" end="10415" title="sitios" label="sitios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937525" start="11176" end="11184" title="Capiznon language" label="Capiznon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35978" start="11186" end="11196" title="Hiligaynon language" label="Hiligaynon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="11198" end="11205" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="11211" end="11218" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338953" start="11384" end="11439" title="Department of Information and Communications Technology" label="Department of Information and Communications Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258475" start="12091" end="12106" title="Pueblo de Panay" label="Pueblo de Panay"/>
<link wikidata="Q20058671" start="12249" end="12285" title="Sacred Heart of Jesus (Roxas, Capiz)" label="Sacred Heart of Jesus (Roxas, Capiz)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059639" start="12405" end="12426" title="Robinsons Place Roxas" label="Robinsons Place Roxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017608" start="12497" end="12500" title="Business process outsourcing" label="BPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q30640951" start="12652" end="12675" title="DoubleDragon Properties" label="DoubleDragon Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391503" start="12680" end="12697" title="SM Prime" label="SM Prime Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321733" start="12868" end="12881" title="Roxas Airport" label="Roxas Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="12945" end="12951" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q846910" start="12953" end="12972" title="Philippine Airlines" label="Philippine Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q995151" start="12977" end="12989" title="Cebu Pacific" label="Cebu Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q13744" start="13188" end="13196" title="Batangas" label="Batangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853468" start="14202" end="14229" title="Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas" label="Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674945" start="16003" end="16012" title="Isuzu Elf" label="Isuzu NHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079561" start="16686" end="16700" title="Panay Railways" label="Panay Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314710" start="16757" end="16769" title="Muelle Loney Street" label="Muelle Loney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000949" start="16780" end="16792" title="Iloilo River" label="Iloilo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321733" start="16968" end="16981" title="Roxas Airport" label="Roxas Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q13772" start="17065" end="17070" title="Capiz" label="Capiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124432" start="17176" end="17219" title="Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines" label="Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q995151" start="17463" end="17475" title="Cebu Pacific" label="Cebu Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q846910" start="17494" end="17513" title="Philippine Airlines" label="Philippine Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q406643" start="17518" end="17526" title="Air Asia" label="Air Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185007" start="17861" end="17883" title="Philippine Coast Guard" label="Philippine Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q644167" start="19223" end="19265" title="Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company" label="Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543983" start="19275" end="19288" title="Globe Telecom" label="Globe Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874287" start="19294" end="19318" title="Bayan Telecommunications" label="Bayan Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543955" start="19404" end="19424" title="Smart Communications" label="Smart Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543983" start="19426" end="19439" title="Globe Telecom" label="Globe Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q64734142" start="19444" end="19462" title="Dito Telecommunity" label="Dito Telecommunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707494" start="19808" end="19914" title="University of the Philippines Visayas" label="University of the Philippines Visayas College of Management – Master of Management Program Roxas Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036027" start="27712" end="27734" title="Capiz State University" label="Capiz State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036027" start="27763" end="27785" title="Capiz State University" label="Capiz State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448276" start="27814" end="27842" title="Filamer Christian University" label="Filamer Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707494" start="27871" end="27908" title="University of the Philippines Visayas" label="University of the Philippines Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579276" start="27995" end="28030" title="University of Perpetual Help System" label="University of Perpetual Help System"/>
<link wikidata="Q752542" start="28419" end="28425" title="Aswang" label="Aswang"/>
<link wikidata="Q947026" start="28473" end="28490" title="Philippine mythology" label="myth and folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538509" start="28821" end="28855" title="Feast of the Immaculate Conception" label="Feast of the Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q105754802" start="28885" end="28929" title="Roxas Cathedral" label="Immaculate Conception Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033140" start="29024" end="29037" title="All Souls Day" label="All Souls Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="29042" end="29056" title="All Saints Day" label="All Saints Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015714" start="29377" end="29387" title="Pholadidae" label="Angel Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159603" start="29716" end="29725" title="Pedro Gil" label="Pedro Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="29825" end="29831" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q678545" start="29903" end="29946" title="House of Representatives of the Philippines" label="House of Representatives of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q223419" start="29950" end="29962" title="Manuel Roxas" label="Manuel Roxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="29982" end="29991" title="President of the Philippines" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q517438" start="30041" end="30054" title="Gerardo Roxas" label="Gerardo Roxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396213" start="30123" end="30138" title="Mar Roxas" label="Manuel Roxas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543505" start="30218" end="30265" title="Department of the Interior and Local Government" label="Department of the Interior and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463948" start="30278" end="30295" title="Gerardo Roxas Jr." label="Gerardo Roxas Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q30005721" start="30385" end="30394" title="Edgar Sia" label="Edgar Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30640951" start="30415" end="30438" title="DoubleDragon Properties" label="DoubleDragon Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748573" start="30458" end="30469" title="Mang Inasal" label="Mang Inasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562833" start="30520" end="30531" title="Gina Alajar" label="Gina Alajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12963094" start="30556" end="30570" title="Daisy Avellana" label="Daisy Avellana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489913" start="30615" end="30631" title="Sharmaine Arnaiz" label="Sharmaine Arnaiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132149" start="30655" end="30669" title="Paolo Bediones" label="Paolo Bediones"/>
<link wikidata="Q62390130" start="30867" end="30882" title="Jeckster Apinan" label="Jeckster Apinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371374" start="30932" end="30944" title="Emil Mijares" label="Emil Mijares"/>
<link wikidata="Q206987" start="30957" end="30969" title="Vibraphone" label="vibraphonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q486748" start="30974" end="30981" title="pianist" label="pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544182" start="31094" end="31109" title="Barbie Almalbis" label="Barbie Almalbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845649" start="31150" end="31168" title="Hungry Young Poets" label="Hungry Young Poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859658" start="31173" end="31193" title="Barbie&amp;#x27;s Cradle" label="Barbie&amp;#x27;s Cradle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19968887" start="31197" end="31210" title="Mikoy Morales" label="Mikoy Morales"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31259" end="31304" title="Protégé: The Battle For The Big Artista Break" label="Protégé: The Battle For The Big Artista Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q9242220" start="31307" end="31321" title="Jovita Fuentes" label="Jovita Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359033" start="31400" end="31421" title="National Artist of the Philippines" label="National Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288263" start="31448" end="31464" title="Josepha Abiertas" label="Josepha Abiertas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="31608" end="31619" title="Quezon City" label="Quezon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="31661" end="31687" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="31698" end="31702" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q199723" start="31713" end="31722" title="Balıkesir" label="Balıkesir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347399" start="31746" end="31806" title="List of renamed cities and municipalities in the Philippines" label="List of renamed cities and municipalities in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13772" start="31809" end="31814" title="Capiz" label="Capiz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980931" wikidata="Q47383" url="?curid=980931" title="Charleville-Mézières">
<text>Charleville-Mézières () is a commune of northern France, capital of the Ardennes department, Grand Est.
Charleville-Mézières is located on the banks of the river Meuse.

==History==

Charleville and Mézières were originally separate communities on opposite banks of the Meuse, about from one another.

Charleville was founded by Charles Gonzaga, the 8th duke of Mantua, in 1606. Its inhabitants were known as Carolopolitans (&quot;&quot; or &quot;Carolopolitaines&quot;). It was prosperous from the 17th century, although its fortifications were dismantled under Louis XIV in 1687 and it passed into French hands in 1708. It was plundered by the Prussians in 1815. France&#x27;s royal armaments factory was formerly located there and gave its name to the Charleville musket, before being relocated and divided between Tulle and Châtellerault. In the 19th century, the city continued to produce arms through private firms, as well as nails, hardware, wine, spirits, coal, iron, and slate. It boasted a spacious port, a theatre, a large public library, and a museum of natural history.

The inhabitants of Mézières were known as Macerians (&quot;&quot; or &quot;Macériennes&quot;).

By the mid-19th century, the two towns were linked by a suspension bridge. It was occupied by the German Empire in the First World War and by Nazi Germany in World War II - the town served as the center of the Oberste Heeresleitung (OHL) for 26 days during World War I. The present commune was established in 1966, the year after another commune, Le Theux, had been merged into Mézières. The entire resultant commune has a population of about 51,000.

==Climate==

With an annual average of , Charleville-Mézières is generally the coolest city of France. Winters are long, cold and gloomy while summers are interchangeably warm or hot but sometimes, even in the middle of July, night temperatures can drop below 5 °C (41 °F). Under the Köppen-Geiger climate classification, Charleville-Mézières features a temperate oceanic climate (&quot;Cfb&quot;) with strong continental influences (&quot;Dfb&quot;). The climate is vastly affected by the low mountain Ardennes range nearby. The proximity results in moisture being trapped and excessive precipitation occurs as a result when compared to other parts of northern France. Temperature inversion is also common, which results in strong cold snaps compared to the oceanic climates further west. This results in overnight temperatures below happening during most winters as the cold air descends at night. Similar patterns replicate year round, causing Charleville-Mezières to have cooler summer nights than Nordic coastal areas near the Arctic Circle. The intermittent frosts in May and September also result in a short growing season.

==Population==

In the table and graph below, data for 1962 and earlier refer to the old commune of Charleville, before the merger with Étion, Mézières, Mohon and Montcy-Saint-Pierre.

==Culture==
Puppetry is an important part of the cultural life of Charleville-Mézières, which is called the &quot;World Capital of Puppetry Arts&quot;. An international puppet festival has been held there every three years since 1961, and became a biennial event in 2011. The town is also home to the world headquarters of UNIMA as well as the International Puppetry Institute (French: Institut International de la Marionnette), which is housed in a historic building featuring a giant automaton of a puppeteer who performs a puppet show every hour on the hour. The École Nationale Supérieure des Arts de la Marionnette (ESNAM), a college which offers a higher education in puppetry, is also situated in Charleville-Mézières.
The poet Arthur Rimbaud (1854–1891) was born in Charleville. The &quot;&quot; is located in the old water mill (&quot;Le Vieux Moulin&quot;) to the north of the town.

Charleville served as the starting location for two seasons of the travel competition show &quot;Jet Lag: The Game&quot;.
==Transport==
The local network of public buses within the Ardenne Métropole, TAC, is operated by RATP Dev. The Charleville-Mézières railway station offers connections to Paris (by TGV), Reims, Lille, Metz and regional destinations.

==Sport==
OFC Charleville represent the town at association football. Étoile de Charleville-Mézières is a basketball club.

==Famous residents==
* Louise Bellocq (1919–1968), French writer, winner of the 1960 Prix Femina, was born in Charleville
* Olivier Brochard (born 1967), former football player
* Antoine Louis Dugès (1797–1838), obstetrician and naturalist
* François Habeneck (1781–1849), violinist born in Mézières
* Adolphe-Hippolyte Couveley (1802–1867), painter born in Charleville
* Edmond Louis Alexis Dubois-Crancé (1747–1814), general, French revolutionary, minister of war, 12th President of the National Convention.
* Louis Dufour (1652–1733), the abbé of Longuerue, was born in Charleville.
* Jean Nicolas Pierre Hachette (1769–1834), mathematician born in Mézières.
* Henri Mialaret (1855–1919), sailor
* Gaspard Monge (1746–1818), mathematician, taught at the École royale du génie de Mézières.
* Étienne Riché (1883–1934), politician and banker, twice under-secretary of state and deputy for the Ardennes, born in Charleville
* Arthur Rimbaud (1854–1891), the French poet, was born in Charleville.
* Félix Savart (1791–1841), physicist and mathematician born in Mézières
* Louis Tirman (1837–1899), lawyer and civil servant, Governor General of Algeria from 1881 to 1891
* Natalis de Wailly (1805–1886), 19th-century historian and palaeographer born in Charleville

==International relations==
Charleville-Mézières is twinned with:

* Dülmen, Germany
* Euskirchen, Germany
* Nordhausen, Germany
* Nevers, France
* Mantua, Italy
* Tolosa, Spain
==See also==
* Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard
* Clément-Bayard
*Communes of the Ardennes department

==Notes==
==References==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47383" start="0" end="20" title="Charleville-Mézières" label="Charleville-Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="29" end="36" title="communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164" start="72" end="80" title="Ardennes (department)" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="81" end="91" title="departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677983" start="93" end="102" title="Grand Est" label="Grand Est"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="162" end="167" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="270" end="275" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q547017" start="329" end="344" title="Charles Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua and Montferrat" label="Charles Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164727" start="354" end="368" title="duke of Mantua" label="duke of Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="563" end="572" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="600" end="606" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="646" end="655" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899116" start="755" end="773" title="Charleville musket" label="Charleville musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q17194713" start="818" end="823" title="Manufacture Nationale d&amp;#x27;Armes de Tulle" label="Tulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146759" start="828" end="841" title="Manufacture d&amp;#x27;armes de Châtellerault" label="Châtellerault"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="1237" end="1254" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1279" end="1292" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1300" end="1315" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1323" end="1335" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1339" end="1351" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q641853" start="1391" end="1418" title="Oberste Heeresleitung" label="Oberste Heeresleitung (OHL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="1463" end="1470" title="Commune in France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1917" end="1953" title="Köppen-Geiger climate classification" label="Köppen-Geiger climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="1997" end="2012" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="2043" end="2054" title="continental climate" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="2136" end="2144" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="2303" end="2324" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="Temperature inversion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2642" end="2678" title="Bothnian Bay#Climate" label="coastal areas near the Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q732240" start="2748" end="2762" title="growing season" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357967" start="3273" end="3278" title="UNIMA" label="UNIMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q787116" start="3436" end="3445" title="automaton" label="automaton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3516" end="3569" title="École Nationale Supérieure des Arts de la Marionnette" label="École Nationale Supérieure des Arts de la Marionnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="3685" end="3699" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3941" end="3958" title="Jet Lag: The Game" label="Jet Lag: The Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16541506" start="4025" end="4042" title="Ardenne Métropole" label="Ardenne Métropole"/>
<link wikidata="Q643290" start="4064" end="4072" title="RATP Dev" label="RATP Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395722" start="4078" end="4114" title="Charleville-Mézières station" label="Charleville-Mézières railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006188" start="4210" end="4225" title="OFC Charleville" label="OFC Charleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="4248" end="4268" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592481" start="4270" end="4300" title="Étoile de Charleville-Mézières" label="Étoile de Charleville-Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263671" start="4347" end="4361" title="Louise Bellocq" label="Louise Bellocq"/>
<link wikidata="Q18945" start="4409" end="4420" title="Prix Femina" label="Prix Femina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088129" start="4448" end="4464" title="Olivier Brochard" label="Olivier Brochard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854173" start="4503" end="4522" title="Antoine Louis Dugès" label="Antoine Louis Dugès"/>
<link wikidata="Q957041" start="4566" end="4583" title="François Habeneck" label="François Habeneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824751" start="4626" end="4652" title="Adolphe-Hippolyte Couveley" label="Adolphe-Hippolyte Couveley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285564" start="4696" end="4729" title="Edmond Louis Alexis Dubois-Crancé" label="Edmond Louis Alexis Dubois-Crancé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4752" end="4772" title="French Revolution" label="French revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215099" start="4774" end="4789" title="Minister of the Armed Forces (France)" label="minister of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253670" start="4796" end="4832" title="List of presidents of the National Convention" label="President of the National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261757" start="4836" end="4848" title="Louis Du Four de Longuerue" label="Louis Dufour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248339" start="4912" end="4940" title="Jean Nicolas Pierre Hachette" label="Jean Nicolas Pierre Hachette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842128" start="4988" end="5002" title="Henri Mialaret" label="Henri Mialaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q206832" start="5025" end="5038" title="Gaspard Monge" label="Gaspard Monge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578345" start="5081" end="5114" title="École royale du génie de Mézières" label="École royale du génie de Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5118" end="5131" title=":fr:Étienne Riché" label="Étienne Riché"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="5250" end="5264" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q711509" start="5322" end="5334" title="Félix Savart" label="Félix Savart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263198" start="5395" end="5407" title="Louis Tirman" label="Louis Tirman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434892" start="5447" end="5474" title="List of French governors of Algeria" label="Governor General of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q279425" start="5495" end="5512" title="Natalis de Wailly" label="Natalis de Wailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910" start="5657" end="5663" title="Dülmen" label="Dülmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4074" start="5675" end="5685" title="Euskirchen" label="Euskirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033" start="5697" end="5707" title="Nordhausen, Thuringia" label="Nordhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q166997" start="5719" end="5725" title="Nevers" label="Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="5736" end="5742" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q497801" start="5752" end="5758" title="Tolosa, Gipuzkoa" label="Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q552017" start="5781" end="5815" title="Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard" label="Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q288710" start="5818" end="5832" title="Clément-Bayard" label="Clément-Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q241947" start="5834" end="5869" title="Communes of the Ardennes department" label="Communes of the Ardennes department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980934" wikidata="Q461830" url="?curid=980934" title="John Mearsheimer">
<text>John Joseph Mearsheimer (; born December 14, 1947) is an American political scientist and international relations scholar. He is the R. Wendell Harrison Distinguished Service Professor at the University of Chicago.

Mearsheimer is best known for developing the theory of offensive realism, which describes the interaction between great powers as being primarily driven by the rational desire to achieve regional hegemony in an anarchic international system. In accordance with his theory, Mearsheimer believes that China&#x27;s growing power will likely bring it into conflict with the United States.

In his 2007 book &quot;The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy&quot;, Mearsheimer argues that the Israel lobby wields disproportionate influence over U.S. foreign policy. His more recent work focuses on criticism of the &quot;liberal international order&quot; and why he believes the West is to blame for the Russo-Ukrainian War.

==Early life and education==
Mearsheimer was born in December 1947 in Brooklyn, New York City to a family of German and Irish descent. When he was eight, he moved with his family to Croton-on-Hudson, New York, a suburb in Westchester County. When he was 17, Mearsheimer enlisted in the US Army. After one year as an enlisted man, he obtained an appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point, which he attended from 1966 to 1970. Commissioned at graduation, Mearsheimer then served five years as an officer in the United States Air Force.

In 1974, while in the Air Force, Mearsheimer earned a master&#x27;s degree in international relations from the University of Southern California. He entered Cornell University and in 1980 earned a doctorate in government, concentrating his studies in international relations. From 1978 to 1979, he was a research fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, DC. From 1980 to 1982, Mearsheimer was a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University&#x27;s Center for International Affairs.

==Career==
Since 1982, Mearsheimer has been a member of the faculty of the Department of Political Science at the University of Chicago. He became an associate professor in 1984 and a full professor in 1987 and was appointed the R. Wendell Harrison Distinguished Service Professor in 1996. From 1989 to 1992, he served as chairman of the department. He also holds a position as a faculty member in the Committee on International Relations graduate program, and he is a co-director of the Program on International Security Policy.

Mearsheimer&#x27;s books include &quot;Conventional Deterrence&quot; (1983), which won the Edgar S. Furniss Jr. Book Award; &quot;Nuclear Deterrence: Ethics and Strategy&quot; (co-editor, 1985); &quot;Liddell Hart and the Weight of History&quot; (1988); &quot;The Tragedy of Great Power Politics&quot; (2001), which won the Lepgold Book Prize; &quot;The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy&quot; (2007); and &quot;Why Leaders Lie: The Truth About Lying in International Politics&quot; (2011). His articles have appeared in academic journals like &quot;International Security&quot; and popular magazines like the &quot;London Review of Books&quot;. He has written op-ed pieces for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, and the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;.

Mearsheimer has won several teaching awards. He received the Clark Award for Distinguished Teaching when he was a graduate student at Cornell in 1977, and he won the Quantrell Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching at the University of Chicago in 1985. In addition, he was selected as a Phi Beta Kappa Visiting Scholar for the 1993–1994 academic year. In that capacity, he gave a series of talks at eight colleges and universities. During the 1998–1999 academic year, he was the Whitney H. Shepardson Fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York City. In 2003, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is the recipient of the American Political Science Association&#x27;s 2020 James Madison Award, which is presented every three years to an American political scientist who has made distinguished scholarly contributions. The Award Committee noted that Mearsheimer is &quot;one of the most cited International Relations scholars in the discipline, but his works are read well beyond the academy as well.&quot; A 2017 survey of US international relations faculty ranks him third among &quot;scholars whose work has had the greatest influence on the field of International Relations in the past 20 years.&quot;

==Work==
Mearsheimer popularized the term rollback to describe the geopolitical strategy of inciting unrest in a rival country while supporting government change covertly or overtly.

===&quot;Conventional Deterrence&quot;===
Mearsheimer&#x27;s first book, &quot;Conventional Deterrence&quot; (1983), addresses the issue of how the decision to start a war depends on the projected outcome of the war, in other words, how the decision makers&#x27; beliefs about the outcome of the war affect the success or failure of deterrence. Mearsheimer&#x27;s basic argument is that deterrence is likely to work when the potential attacker believes that an attack will be costly and is unlikely to succeed. However, if the potential attacker has reason to believe the attack will entail low costs and is likely to succeed, deterrence is likely to break down, which is now widely accepted to be how the principle of deterrence works. Specifically, Mearsheimer argues that the success of deterrence is determined by the strategy available to the potential attacker. He lays out three strategies. Firstly, an attrition strategy entails a high level of uncertainty about the outcome of war and high costs for the attacker. Secondly, a limited-aims strategy entails fewer risks and lower costs. Thirdly, a &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; strategy provides a way to defeat the enemy rapidly and decisively with relatively low costs. For Mearsheimer, failures in the modern battlefield are caused mostly by the potential attacker&#x27;s belief that it can successfully implement a &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; strategy in which tanks and other mechanized forces are employed swiftly to cause deep penetration and to disrupt the enemy&#x27;s rear. The two other strategies are unlikely to lead to deterrence failures because they entail a low probability of success, accompanied by high costs (attrition warfare) or limited gains and the possibility of the conflict turning into a war of attrition (limited aims). However, if the attacker has a coherent &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; strategy available, an attack is likely to ensue because its potential benefits outweigh the costs and risks of starting a war.

Besides analyzing cases from World War II and the Arab–Israeli conflict, Mearsheimer&#x27;s 1983 book extrapolates implications from his theory for the prospects of conventional deterrence in Central Europe during the late Cold War. It argues that a Soviet attack is unlikely because the Soviet military would be unable to successfully implement a &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; strategy. The book argues that the balance of forces, the difficulty of advancing rapidly with mechanized forces through Central Europe, and the formidable NATO forces opposing such a Soviet attack results in low chances for the Soviets to start a conventional war in Europe.

===&quot;Liddell Hart and the Weight of History&quot;===
Mearsheimer&#x27;s second book, &quot;Liddell Hart and the Weight of History&quot; (1988), reassesses the intellectual legacies of the 20th century British military theorist B. H. Liddell Hart. While acknowledging that his own research had &quot;profited greatly from his stimulating writings&quot; and that Liddell Hart&#x27;s works should still be considered &quot;essential reading for serious students of strategy and warfare&quot;, Mearsheimer argues that much of the conventional wisdom on Liddell Hart&#x27;s contributions to modern military thought was flawed. In particular, the theory of the indirect approach, which Liddell Hart developed in the 1930s, is so vague and tautological that &quot;virtually every military victory can be ascribed to [it].&quot; Moreover, Liddell Hart&#x27;s limited attempts to operationalize the theory clearly indicated that what he primarily had in mind was to &quot;indirectly&quot; defeat a continental adversary by &quot;break[ing] the morale of the enemy&#x27;s civilian population, not to destroy his military forces, which of course is what the blitzkrieg is concerned with&quot;. The common practice of tracing the intellectual origins of the blitzkrieg strategy to the indirect approach is thus mistaken since there was &quot;no evidence ... that Liddell Hart understood the importance of the deep strategic penetration [that distinguishes &quot;blitzkrieg&quot;] &quot;before&quot; World War II&quot;. Not surprisingly, Liddell Hart was proven utterly wrong on the fundamental military questions of the interwar period (he dismissed the possibility of a decisive German offensive in the Western front) and fell into disrepute in the immediate aftermath of the war.

Mearsheimer shows that Liddell Hart managed to salvage his intellectual stature by convincing former Wehrmacht generals to credit him with the ideas that led to the development of Germany&#x27;s blitzkrieg strategy. Eager to restore their own tarnished reputation after the war, retired German generals such as Heinz Guderian allowed Liddell Hart to exaggerate his influence on &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; in their memoirs in exchange for helping them promote an image of themselves as having been military innovators first and foremost rather than Nazi henchmen. In the case of Guderian, Liddell Hart effectively acted as his &quot;literary agent&quot; for the English-speaking world. Fritz Bayerlein, who served as General Erwin Rommel&#x27;s chief of staff in the North African campaign, similarly helped Liddell Hart manipulate the historical record for a false portrayal of Rommel as having been his &quot;pupil&quot;. Mearsheimer concludes by emphasizing the importance of a robust intellectual community that can hold &quot;defense intellectuals&quot; accountable:

Defense intellectuals need to know that informed judgments will be passed on their views and their overall conduct and that charlatanism will be exposed. Absence of penalties for misbehavior means no brake on the spread of false ideas. Liddell Hart actually was held accountable at one point. The significant ebbing of his influence during and immediately after World War II was, in effect, punishment for offering flawed ideas for how to deal with the Third Reich. What is disturbing about Liddell Hart&#x27;s case, however, is that eventually he was able to escape from this predicament by rewriting history. The national security community, especially its historians, need to be alert to historical manipulation for selfish reasons.

Mearsheimer&#x27;s arguments about Liddell Hart generated varied responses. For example, the founder of the Israel Defense Forces Operational Theory Research Institute, Simon Naveh, concurred in a separate study, which found that &quot;by distorting the actual historical circumstances of the &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; formation [Liddell Hart] obscured its temporal and cognitive origins... The early-1950s display of the transformed version of &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; as a historical fact, carrying the joint signature of Liddell Hart and Guderian, lent it an authentic touch and a professional legitimacy that could not be shaken.&quot; In contrast, Richard Swain of the US Army Command and General Staff College argued that while &quot;there is a good deal about which Mearsheimer is correct,&quot; he likely overstates the extent to which Liddell Hart&#x27;s historical distortions were consciously self-serving: &quot;To charge Liddell Hart with cleverly creating a deception requires one first to accept that Liddell Hart knew he had been wrong. There is little or no evidence of that.&quot;

===Nuclear proliferation and deterrence===
In 1990, Mearsheimer published an essay in which he predicted that Europe would revert to a multipolar environment, similar to that of the first half of the 20th century, if American and Soviet forces left after the end of the Cold War. In another article that year in &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, he predicted that the multipolar environment would increase nuclear proliferation in Europe, especially in Germany.

In that essay and in the 1993 &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; article &quot;The case for a Ukrainian nuclear deterrent&quot;, he argues that to reduce the dangers of war, the US should accept the possibility of Germany and Ukraine developing a nuclear arsenal and work to prevent the rise of excessive nationalism. Mearsheimer presents several possible scenarios for a Europe after the departure of American and Russian forces. He states that a Europe with nuclear proliferation was most likely to remain at peace because without a nuclear deterrent, Germany would be likely to once more try to conquer the continent. Mearsheimer argues it to be strategically unwise for Ukraine to surrender its nuclear arsenal (remnants of the Soviet stockpile). However, in 1994 a series of agreements required Ukraine to agree to get rid of its entire former Soviet nuclear stockpile, a process that was complete by 1996. When challenged on the former assertion at a lecture given to the International Politics department at the University of Wales in Aberystwyth, he maintained that in spite of European integration and expansion, he still believed that his predictions would come true if the US military left Europe.

In op-ed pieces written in 1998 and 2000 for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Mearsheimer explains why it makes sense for India to pursue nuclear weapons. He argues that India has good strategic reasons to want a nuclear deterrent, especially to balance against China and Pakistan and to guarantee regional stability. He also criticized the American counterproliferation policy towards India, which he considers to be unrealistic and harmful to American interests in the region. At the Korea Global Forum 2023 organized by South Korea&#x27;s Ministry of Unification in Seoul, Mearsheimer stated at keynote speech that North Korea possessing nuclear weapons is not an ideal situation, but can be seen as &quot;force of stability&quot;. This is because the US provides a nuclear umbrella to South Korea while North Korea has their own nuclear weapons as a necessary deterrent against the US and other adversaries. Mearsheimer also stated that possession of nuclear weapons by the US and the Soviet Union during the Cold War played a big role in both sides not attacking each other.

===&quot;The False Promise of International Institutions&quot;===
In a widely cited 1994 article, &quot;The False Promise of International Institutions&quot;, Mearsheimer tackles popular arguments about the ability of institutions to discourage war and promote peace among states. He recognizes that states often find institutions to be useful, but the imperative of relentless security competition under anarchy means that state behavior is primarily a function of the distribution of power in the international system. Institutions, at best, are &quot;merely an intervening variable in the process.&quot; Mearsheimer maintains that &quot;institutionalist theories&quot; offered poor alternatives to this grim picture of international politics. In particular, influential neoliberal institutionalist arguments ignore relative-gains concerns as a barrier to cooperation and fail to provide evidence that instances of cooperation, which are commonly attributed to institutions, would not have taken place in their absence. Other theories such as collective security theory and critical theory likewise fell short on logical and empirical grounds.

In a response article, the prominent neoliberal institutionalist scholars Robert Keohane and Lisa Martin acknowledge that seminal institutionalist works tended to neglect the problem of relative gains but maintain that the debate spawned by realist challenges &quot;has made distributional and bargaining issues more salient than they were in early neoliberal thinking.&quot; Mearsheimer charges that &quot;a careful look at Keohane and Martin&#x27;s response reveals that liberal institutionalism in its latest form is no longer a clear alternative to realism, but has, in fact, been swallowed up by it.&quot;

===Offensive realism===
Mearsheimer is the leading proponent of offensive realism. The structural theory, unlike the classical realism of Hans Morgenthau, places the principal emphasis on security competition among great powers within the anarchy of the international system, not on the human nature of statesmen and diplomats. In contrast to another structural realist theory, the defensive realism of Kenneth Waltz, offensive realism maintains that states are not satisfied with a given amount of power but seek hegemony for security because the anarchic makeup of the international system creates strong incentives for states to seek opportunities to gain power at the expense of competitors. Mearsheimer summarized that view in his 2001 book &quot;The Tragedy of Great Power Politics&quot;:

Given the difficulty of determining how much power is enough for today and tomorrow, great powers recognize that the best way to ensure their security is to achieve hegemony now, thus eliminating any possibility of a challenge by another great power. Only a misguided state would pass up an opportunity to be the hegemon in the system because it thought it already had sufficient power to survive.

Mearsheimer dismisses democratic peace theory, which claims that democracies never or rarely go to war with each other. He also does not believe it to be possible for a state to become a global hegemon. Although that is theoretically possible, there is too much landmass and too many oceans, which he posits as having effective stopping power and acting as giant moats. Instead, he believes that states can achieve only regional hegemony. Furthermore, he argues that regional hegemons attempt to prevent other states from gaining hegemony in their region since peer competitors would be free to roam and thus could interfere in the established regional hegemon&#x27;s neighborhood. States that have achieved regional hegemony, such as the United States (see Monroe Doctrine), will act as offshore balancers by interfering in other regions if the great powers in those regions cannot prevent the rise of a hegemon. Mearsheimer&#x27;s theory of offensive realism has become a popular explanation of the American strategic approach in resisting China as a growing superpower that might one day unseat America&#x27;s dominant position.

===Night watchman===
&quot;Night watchman&quot; in Mearsheimer&#x27;s terminology is a &quot;global hegemon&quot;, a theoretical impossibility according to &quot;The Tragedy of Great Power Politics&quot;. Nevertheless, Mearsheimer mentioned in 1990 the existence of a &quot;watchman&quot;. Democracies lived at peace because &quot;America&#x27;s hegemonic position in NATO ... mitigated the effects of anarchy on the Western democracies and induced cooperation among them ... With the United States serving as a night watchman, fears about relative gains among the Western European states were mitigated[.]&quot;

Afterwards, Mearsheimer did not mention the &quot;watchman&quot; for some time. A decade later, he described the &quot;international anarchy&quot; as having not changed with the end of the Cold War, and that &quot;there are few signs that such change is likely any time soon. States remain the principal actors in world politics and there is still no &quot;night watchman&quot; standing above them.&quot; Five more years later, Mearsheimer confirmed that &quot;in an anarchic system there is no &quot;night watchman&quot; for a state to call when trouble comes knocking at their door.&quot; Precisely two decades after Mearsheimer had detected the watchman in the world for the last time, he rediscovered the watchman, which exists and keeps Europe at peace. The article &quot;Why Is Europe Peaceful Today?&quot; unambiguously answers, &quot;The reason is simple: the United States is by far the most powerful country in the world and it effectively acts as a &quot;night watchman&quot;.&quot;

===Persian Gulf War===
In January and early February 1991, Mearsheimer published two op-eds in the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; and the &quot;New York Times&quot; and argued that the war to liberate Kuwait from Iraqi forces would be quick and lead to a decisive US victory, with less than 1,000 American casualties. Mearsheimer&#x27;s argument was based on several points. Firstly, the Iraqi Army was a Third World military that was unprepared to fight mobile armored battles. Secondly, US armored forces were better equipped and trained. Thirdly, US artillery was also far better than its Iraqi counterpart. Fourthly, US airpower, unfettered by the weak Iraqi air force, should prove devastating against Iraqi ground forces. Fifthly and finally, the forward deployment of Iraqi reserves boded ill for their ability to counter US efforts to penetrate the Iraqi defense line along the Saudi–Kuwaiti border. All of those predictions came true during the course of the war.&lt;ref name=&quot;why-john-j-mearsheimer-is-right-about-some-things/8839&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

===&quot;The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy&quot;===
In March 2006, Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt, the former academic dean and professor of international relations at the Harvard Kennedy School, published a working paper, as well as a &quot;London Review of Books&quot; article, discussing the power of the Israel lobby shaping the U.S. foreign policy. They define the Israel lobby as &quot;a loose coalition of individuals and organizations who actively work to steer US foreign policy in a pro-Israel direction.&quot; They state that it is not appropriate to label it a &quot;Jewish lobby&quot; because not all Jews feel a strong attachment to Israel, and because some of the individuals and groups who work to foster US support for Israel are not Jewish. For example, Christian Zionists also play an important role. Finally, they emphasize that the lobby is not a cabal or a conspiracy but simply a powerful interest group, like the National Rifle Association of America or the farm lobby. Their core argument is that the policies pushed by the lobby are not in the national interest of the US or ultimately of Israel. Those pieces generated extensive media coverage and led to a wide-ranging and often heated debate, including charges of antisemitism, between supporters and opponents of their argument. The article was subsequently turned into a book, &quot;The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy.&quot;

====Statements on Israeli wars and Palestinian statehood====
Mearsheimer was critical of the 2006 Lebanon War. He argued that Israel&#x27;s strategy was &quot;doomed to fail&quot; because it was based on the &quot;faulty assumption&quot; that Israeli air power could defeat Hezbollah, which was essentially a guerrilla force. The war, he argued, was a disaster for the Lebanese people, as well as a &quot;major setback&quot; for the United States and Israel. He said that the Israel lobby played a key role in enabling Israel&#x27;s counterproductive response by preventing the US from exercising independent influence. Mearsheimer was also critical of Israel&#x27;s offensive against Hamas in the Gaza Strip that began in December 2008. He argued that it would not eliminate Hamas&#x27;s capability to fire missiles and rockets at Israel and that it would not cause Hamas to end its fight with Israel. In fact, he argued that relations between Israel and the Palestinians were likely to get worse in the years ahead.

Mearsheimer emphasizes that the only hope for Israel to end its conflict with the Palestinians is to end the occupation and to allow the Palestinians to have their own state in Gaza and the West Bank; otherwise, Israel will turn itself into an &quot;apartheid state&quot;, which would be a disastrous outcome for Israel, the United States, and especially for the Palestinians. Mearsheimer&#x27;s criticisms of Israel further extended to its possession of nuclear weapons. In remarks made at the International Spy Museum in 2010, Mearsheimer asserted that a nuclear Israel was contrary to US interests and questioned Israel&#x27;s accountability in the matter. He stated that there was &quot;no accountability for Israel on any issue&quot; because he surmised, &quot;The Israelis can do almost anything and get away with it.&quot;

====&quot;The Future of Palestine&quot;====
In April 2010, Mearsheimer delivered the Hisham B. Sharabi Memorial Lecture at the Palestine Center in Washington, D.C., which he titled &quot;The Future of Palestine: Righteous Jews vs. the New Afrikaners.&quot; He argued that &quot;the two-state solution is now a fantasy&quot; because Israel will incorporate the Gaza Strip and the West Bank into a &quot;Greater Israel&quot;, which would become an apartheid state. According to Mearsheimer, such a state would not be politically viable, most American Jews would not support it, and it would eventually become a democratic binational state politically dominated by its Palestinian majority. He suggested that &quot;American Jews who care deeply about Israel&quot; could be divided into three categories: the &quot;new Afrikaners&quot;, who will support Israel even if it is an apartheid state; &quot;righteous Jews&quot;, who believe that individual rights are universal and apply equally to Jews and Palestinians; and the largest group, which he called the &quot;great ambivalent middle&quot;. He concluded that most of the &quot;great ambivalent middle&quot; would not defend an apartheid Israel because &quot;American Jews are among the staunchest defenders of traditional liberal values.&quot; Accordingly, the &quot;new Afrikaners&quot; would become increasingly marginalized over time. Mearsheimer stated that he &quot;would classify most of the individuals who head the Israel lobby&#x27;s major organizations as &quot;&#x27;new Afrikaners&#x27;&quot; and specifically listed a number of prominent Jews and Jewish organizations, including Abraham Foxman of the Anti-Defamation League, David Harris of the American Jewish Committee, Malcolm Hoenlein of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, Ronald Lauder of the World Jewish Congress, Morton Klein of the Zionist Organization of America, as well as businessmen such as Sheldon Adelson, Lester Crown, and Mortimer Zuckerman and &quot;media personalities&quot; like Fred Hiatt, Charles Krauthammer, Bret Stephens, and Martin Peretz.

====&quot;The Wandering Who?&quot;====
In 2011, John Mearsheimer wrote a back-cover blurb for controversial author Gilad Atzmon&#x27;s book &quot;The Wandering Who? A Study of Jewish Identity Politics&quot;: &quot;Gilad Atzmon has written a fascinating and provocative book on Jewish identity in the modern world. He shows how assimilation and liberalism are making it increasingly difficult for Jews in the Diaspora to maintain a powerful sense of their &#x27;Jewishness.&#x27; Panicked Jewish leaders, he argues, have turned to Zionism (blind loyalty to Israel) and scaremongering (the threat of another Holocaust) to keep the tribe united and distinct from the surrounding goyim. As Atzmon&#x27;s own case demonstrates, this strategy is not working and is causing many Jews great anguish. &quot;The Wandering Who?&quot; should be widely read by Jews and non-Jews alike.&quot;

Mearsheimer&#x27;s endorsement of Atzmon&#x27;s book was met with accusations of antisemitism by prominent Jewish writers and intellectuals. Alan Dershowitz wrote an article in response, &quot;Why are John Mearsheimer and Richard Falk Endorsing a Blatantly Anti-Semitic Book?&quot; He stated that the book &quot;argues that Jews seek to control the world.&quot; Mearsheimer denied the charges of antisemitism in that he had &quot;no reason to amend it or embellish&quot; his blurb and defended his position. Responding to the charge by Jeffrey Goldberg in The Atlantic that Atzmon is antisemitic and, by implication, so is his positive review of Atzmon&#x27;s book, Mearsheimer wrote: &quot;Atzmon&#x27;s basic point is that Jews often talk in universalistic terms, but many of them think and act in particularistic terms. One might say they talk like liberals but act like nationalists... It is in this context that he discusses what he calls the &#x27;Holocaust religion,&#x27; Zionism, and Israel&#x27;s treatment of the Palestinians. Again, to be perfectly clear, he has no animus toward Judaism as a religion or with individuals who are Jewish by birth.&quot;

===Rise and containment of China===
Mearsheimer asserts that China&#x27;s rise will not be peaceful, and that the US will seek to contain China and to prevent it from achieving regional hegemony. Mearsheimer argues that although containing China militarily is possible, economic containment of China is not. Mearsheimer believes that China will attempt to dominate the Indo-Pacific region just as the US set out to dominate the Western Hemisphere. China&#x27;s goal will be to gain a position of military superiority over its neighbors, which it sees as potentially dangerous threats. Additionally, he maintains that the US will attempt to form a balancing coalition that consists primarily of India, Japan, the Philippines, South Korea, Vietnam, and Indonesia to counter the growing strength and power projection capabilities of China.

Mearsheimer presented a fuller statement of his views on China&#x27;s rise in his 2014 updated edition of &quot;The Tragedy of Great Power Politics&quot;, arguing that &quot;if China continues its striking economic growth over the next few decades, it is likely to act in accordance with the logic of offensive realism... Specifically, it will try to dominate Asia the way the United States dominates the Western Hemisphere.&quot; In accordance with the theory&#x27;s structural logic, China will pursue regional hegemony not because its domestic politics or ideology inclines it toward aggression but because &quot;domination offers the best way to survive under international anarchy&quot;. Mearsheimer stressed that China was simply following America&#x27;s example in that regard:

These ambitious goals make good strategic sense for China (although this is not to say China will necessarily be able to achieve them). Beijing should want a militarily weak and isolated India, Japan, and Russia as its neighbors, just as the United States prefers a militarily weak Canada and Mexico on its borders. What state in its right mind would want other powerful countries located in its region? All Chinese surely remember what happened over the last century when Japan was powerful and China was weak... [They also] surely remember what happened in the hundred years between the First Opium War (1832–42) and the end of World War II (1945), when the United States and the European great powers took advantage of a weak China and not only violated its sovereignty but also imposed unfair treaties on it and exploited it economically. Why should we expect China to act differently than the United States? Are the Chinese more principled than we are? More ethical? Are they less nationalistic? Less concerned about their survival? They are none of these things, of course, which is why China is likely to follow basic realist logic and attempt to become a regional hegemon in Asia.

In a subsequent debate with former US National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski in &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; magazine, Mearsheimer clarified, &quot;It is unlikely that China will go on a rampage and conquer other Asian countries. Instead, China will want to dictate the boundaries of acceptable behavior to neighboring countries, much the way the United States does in the Americas. An increasingly powerful China is also likely to try to push the United States out of Asia, much the way the United States pushed the European great powers out of the Western Hemisphere.&quot; In his response, Brzezinski argued, &quot;How great powers behave is not predetermined... For its part, the Chinese leadership appears much more flexible and sophisticated than many previous aspirants to great power status.&quot; Mearsheimer responded that Chinese leaders are indeed prudent and have no incentive to &quot;pick a fight&quot; with the United States at the moment, but &quot;what we are talking about is the situation in 2025 or 2030, when China has the military muscle to take on the United States. What happens then, when China has a much larger gross national product and a much more formidable military than it has today? The history of great powers offers a straightforward answer[.]&quot;

In a widely debated 2021 &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; article, Mearsheimer observed that the United States was destined to compete aggressively with China as long as the latter continued to grow into a militarily and economically powerful state in East Asia. However, contrary to realist logic, the US in the post-Cold War period had &quot;promoted investment in China and welcomed the country into the global trading system, thinking it would become a peace-loving democracy and a responsible stakeholder in a US-led international order&quot;. In effect, by pursuing a policy of engagement, the US had facilitated China&#x27;s dangerous rise to great-power status and hastened the onset of a new Cold War:

Nobody can say that engagement wasn&#x27;t given ample opportunity to work, nor can anyone argue that China emerged as a threat because the United States was not accommodating enough...China&#x27;s economy experienced unprecedented growth, but the country did not turn into a liberal democracy or a responsible stakeholder. To the contrary, Chinese leaders view liberal values as a threat to their country&#x27;s stability, and as rulers of rising powers normally do, they are pursuing an increasingly aggressive foreign policy. There is no way around it: engagement was a colossal strategic mistake.

In a 2015 review of Mearsheimer&#x27;s arguments on China, the sociologist Amitai Etzioni charged that the two powers &quot;have very little &#x27;real&#x27; reason to confront each other&quot; and that the &quot;main value of Mearsheimer&#x27;s provocative thesis is that it alerts those of us on both sides of the power divide to redouble our efforts to prevent his dire predictions from coming true.&quot; By contrast, Executive Director Tom Switzer of the Sydney-based Centre for Independent Studies opined in May 2020, &quot;Rarely in history has an academic been as intellectually vindicated as John Mearsheimer, [He] accurately foresaw the intense Sino-American security competition that the coronavirus crisis has exposed.&quot; 

In the early 2000s, after Mearsheimer argued in &quot;Tragedy&quot; that China could not rise peacefully, he was invited by Chinese policymakers and academics to give talks in the country. Having attained stardom in China, he told the &quot;New Statesman&quot; in 2023: &quot;When I go to Beijing, I feel more at home intellectually, and in terms of thinking about foreign policy, than I am in Washington. The Chinese are realists to the core.&quot; Mearsheimer notes that Chinese interlocutors often challenge him on his assertion of China&#x27;s unpeaceful rise, with some elites citing economic interdependence theory to dispute his realist views.

===&quot;Why Leaders Lie&quot;===
Mearsheimer wrote a book, &quot;Why Leaders Lie&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2011), which analyzes lying in international politics. He argues that leaders lie to foreign audiences because they think that it is good for their country. For example, he maintains that US President Franklin D. Roosevelt lied about the &quot;Greer&quot; incident in September 1941 because he was deeply committed to getting America into World War II, which he thought was in its national interest.

His two main findings are that leaders actually do not lie very much to other countries and that democratic leaders are actually more likely than autocrats to lie to their own people. Thus, he starts his book by saying that it is not surprising that Saddam Hussein did not lie about Iraq having no weapons of mass destruction but that George W. Bush and some of his key advisors lied to the American people about the threat from Iraq. Mearsheimer argues that leaders are most likely to lie to their own people in democracies that fight wars of choice in distant places. He says that it is difficult for leaders to lie to other countries because there is not much trust among them, especially when security issues are at stake, and trust is needed for lying to be effective. Mearsheimer states that it is easier for leaders to lie to their own people because there is usually a good deal of trust between them.

Mearsheimer does not consider the moral dimension of international lying, which he views from a utilitarian perspective. He argues that there are five types of international lies.
# &quot;Inter-state lies&quot; occur if the leader of one country lies to a leader of another country or, more generally, any foreign audience, to induce a desired reaction.
# &quot;Fear-mongering&quot; occurs if a leader lies to his or her own domestic public.
# &quot;Strategic cover-ups&quot; are lies to prevent controversial policies and deals from being made known publicly.
# &quot;Nationalist myths&quot; are stories about a country&#x27;s past that portray that country in a positive light and its adversaries in a negative light.
# &quot;Liberal lies&quot; are given to clear up the negative reputation of institutions, individuals, or actions.

Mearsheimer explains the reasons for leaders pursuing each of the different kinds of lies. His central thesis is that leaders lie more frequently to domestic audiences than to leaders of other states. That is because international lying can have negative effects, including &quot;blowback&quot; and &quot;backfiring&quot;. Blowback occurs if telling international lies helps cause a culture of deceit at home. Backfiring occurs if telling a lie leads to a failed policy. He also emphasizes that there are two other kinds of deception besides lying: &quot;concealment&quot;, a leader remaining silent about an important matter, and &quot;spinning&quot;, a leader telling a story that emphasizes the positive and downplays or ignores the negative.

===Ukraine===

====&quot;The Case for a Ukrainian Nuclear Deterrent&quot;====
When the Soviet Union ended, the newly-independent Ukraine was left with a large arsenal of Soviet nuclear weapons. In his 1993 article, &quot;The Case for a Ukrainian Nuclear Deterrent&quot;, Mearsheimer argued that Ukraine should not give up its nuclear weapons, because he believed that without a nuclear deterrent it would be subjected to Russian aggression. He proposed that the United States change its policy and enable Ukraine to become an independent nuclear power, saying &quot;Ukrainian nuclear weapons are the only reliable deterrent to Russian aggression&quot;. Mearsheimer wrote that &quot;Russia has dominated an unwilling and angry Ukraine for more than two centuries, and has attempted to crush Ukraine&#x27;s sense of self-identity&quot;, and that some Russian officials &quot;reject the idea of an independent Ukraine&quot;. He said that a Russian war against Ukraine might lead Russia to &quot;reconquer other parts of the former Soviet Union&quot;. Mearsheimer wrote that, if Russia attacked Ukraine, &quot;great powers would move quickly and sharply to contain further Russian expansion&quot;.

====&quot;Why the Ukraine Crisis is the West&#x27;s Fault&quot;====

The Russo-Ukrainian War started in 2014. Amid the Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity, Russia occupied and annexed Crimea from Ukraine, and supported pro-Russian separatists who launched a war in eastern Ukraine. In his August 2014 article, &quot;Why the Ukraine Crisis is the West&#x27;s Fault&quot;, Mearsheimer said the United States and its European allies were mainly to blame for the conflict:

&quot;The taproot of the trouble is NATO enlargement, the central element of a larger strategy to move Ukraine out of Russia&#x27;s orbit and integrate it into the West. ... the EU&#x27;s expansion eastward and the West&#x27;s backing of the pro-democracy movement in Ukraine ... were critical elements, too. Since the mid-1990s, Russian leaders have adamantly opposed NATO enlargement, and in recent years, they have made it clear that they would not stand by while their strategically important neighbor turned into a Western bastion. For Putin, the illegal overthrow of Ukraine&#x27;s democratically elected and pro-Russian president (Viktor Yanukovych)—which he rightly labeled a &quot;coup&quot;—was the final straw. He responded by taking Crimea, a peninsula he feared would host a NATO naval base, and working to destabilize Ukraine until it abandoned its efforts to join the West. Putin&#x27;s pushback should have come as no surprise.&quot;

Mearsheimer called Putin &quot;a first-class strategist who should be feared and respected&quot; on foreign policy. He argued that Putin is driven by &quot;legitimate security concerns&quot; and does not want to occupy Ukraine. Mearsheimer argued that Russia&#x27;s annexation of Crimea was driven by fears of losing its Sevastopol Naval Base. He highlighted Russian opposition to Ukrainian NATO membership over the years, and the Western analysts who warned against it. He argued that the United States would react the same way to a rival military alliance on its border: &quot;Imagine the American outrage if China built an impressive military alliance and tried to include Canada and Mexico&quot;. Mearsheimer says Russia&#x27;s concerns about Ukraine eventually joining NATO are similar to US concerns about Soviet nuclear weapons being deployed in Cuba during the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis: &quot;Did Cuba have the right to form a military alliance with the Soviet Union during the Cold War? The United States certainly did not think so, and the Russians think the same way about Ukraine joining the West&quot;.

Mearsheimer wrote that the US and its allies have pushed for the eastward enlargement of NATO and the EU despite Russian opposition, pointing to the 2008 Bucharest summit and the 2009 Eastern Partnership initiative. He concluded that they &quot;should abandon their plan to westernize Ukraine and instead aim to make it a neutral buffer state between NATO and Russia&quot;. Regarding &quot;the claim that Ukraine has the right to determine whom it wants to ally with&quot;, Mearsheimer says &quot;This is a dangerous way for Ukraine to think about its foreign policy choices. The sad truth is that might often makes right when great-power politics are at play&quot;. 

Michael McFaul and Stephen Sestanovich published their response to Mearsheimer in the November/December 2014 issue of &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;. They argued that Russian foreign policy was not a reaction to the US, but was driven by internal Russian politics. They rejected his description of the Ukrainian revolution as a &quot;coup&quot;, countering that &quot;after police killed scores of demonstrators in downtown Kiev, the whole country turned against him [Yanukovych], effectively ending his political career. Parliament removed him by a unanimous vote&quot;.

In the book, &quot;War in Ukraine: Conflict, Strategy, and the Return of a Fractured World&quot;, McFaul and Robert Person criticize Mearsheimer&#x27;s arguments. They write that if Putin believed NATO was a military threat, he would not have deepened co-operation in the early 2000s and again in 2010, when NATO enlargement was ongoing. They point to Putin&#x27;s statements in the early 2000s, when he said Ukraine in NATO would not concern Russia. They also wrote that Ukraine&#x27;s parliament only revoked its neutral status in late 2014, &quot;&quot;after&quot; Russia had invaded Crimea and the Donbas&quot;. In their view, Putin&#x27;s actions are more driven by Russian neo-imperialism.

Political scientist Filip Kostelka said Mearsheimer &quot;ignores the fact that Ukrainians – like other Eastern Europeans – have been actively seeking NATO membership to protect themselves from the Russian threat. They did not need to be pushed&quot;. National security expert Joe Cirincione also said that Mearsheimer ignored this, writing &quot;America did not pull them into an anti-Russian pact&quot;. Following calls to provide weapons to Ukraine to deter Putin, Mearsheimer spoke against the idea. In a February 2015 opinion piece in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, he said that Ukraine&#x27;s strategic importance to Russia is so great that Russia will continue the conflict at any cost, up to and including the use of nuclear weapons.

====Russian invasion of Ukraine====

When Russia invaded Ukraine in February 2022, Mearsheimer re-affirmed his belief that the West were largely to blame. In March 2022, he was interviewed by Isaac Chotiner of &quot;The New Yorker&quot;. Mearsheimer again blamed the invasion on &quot;NATO expansion, EU expansion&quot;, and attempts to &quot;turn Ukraine into a pro-American liberal democracy&quot;, arguing that &quot;from a Russian perspective, this is an existential threat&quot;. He said Putin was not interested in conquering Ukraine and that Ukraine should &quot;break off its close relations with the West ... and try to accommodate the Russians.&quot;

Soon after the invasion began, the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs endorsed Mearsheimer&#x27;s view on why they invaded. Historian Anne Applebaum criticized Mearsheimer, saying &quot;now wondering if the Russians didn&#x27;t actually get their narrative from Mearsheimer &quot;et al&quot;. Moscow needed to say West was responsible for Russian invasions (Chechnya, Georgia, Syria, Ukraine), and not their own greed and imperialism. American academics provided the narrative.&quot; Adam Tooze wrote that Applebaum offered no evidence for her allegation.

In June 2022, Mearsheimer delivered a speech on &quot;The Causes and Consequences of the Ukraine War&quot;. He said there is no evidence that Putin wants to conquer Ukraine, and no evidence that Russia wants to install a puppet government. Mearsheimer argued that if Putin did want to conquer Ukraine, he would have used a larger army. Mearsheimer believes Putin has been telling the truth about his motives, saying Putin &quot;does not have a history of lying to other leaders&quot; or to foreign audiences.

Joe Cirincione called Mearsheimer &quot;dangerously wrong&quot;. He wrote that Putin recently likened himself to Tsar Peter the Great, who, Putin said, had justly returned land to Russia; and that Russia&#x27;s foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said that Russia&#x27;s goal was to &quot;free Ukraine’s people from the &#x27;unacceptable regime&#x27; in Kyiv&quot;. For Cirincione, the &quot;greatest flaw&quot; in Mearsheimer&#x27;s argument is that &quot;he must minimize Russian atrocities&quot; and &quot;excuse Russian behavior as an understandable reaction to the threats it perceives&quot; in order to make his case. Political scientist Filip Kostelka said &quot;By publicly defending his scientifically unsound thesis, Mearsheimer legitimizes Russia&#x27;s propaganda and violates the fundamental values of social responsibility that all academics should respect&quot;. He wrote that Mearsheimer cherry-picked official statements by Russia&#x27;s leadership and takes them at face value. Kostelka accused Mearsheimer of double standards, saying he does not give the same importance to &quot;Russia’s imperial ambitions&quot; or denial of Ukraine&#x27;s right to exist. Kostelka also said that Mearsheimer &quot;remained oblivious to Russia’s numerous lies on public record, including Putin&#x27;s original denial of any involvement in Crimea in 2014, which was followed by open boasting about the annexation a few months later&quot;. He wrote that Russia only failed to take over the country because of a &quot;disastrous miscalculation by the Kremlin&quot;.

Mearsheimer was interviewed by Chotiner again in November 2022, after Russia annexed four provinces of Ukraine. He said that Putin only wanted to control those four provinces and &quot;to make sure that the Ukrainian rump state that is left is neutral and is not associated with NATO in any formal or informal way&quot;. In his view, Russia&#x27;s attack on Kyiv was meant to force the Ukrainian government to give up its plans of joining NATO. Mearsheimer was challenged by Chotiner, who said his arguments were contradicted by Putin&#x27;s statements and actions. Mearsheimer replied that there was currently no evidence that Putin had any imperial ambitions but that there was &quot;a huge amount of evidence that it was NATO expansion and the more general policy of making Ukraine a western bulwark on Russia’s border that motivated [Putin] to attack on February 24th&quot;.

Mearsheimer doubts that a &quot;meaningful&quot; peace agreement could be reached because of &quot;maximalist objectives&quot;. He believes that the best outcome would be a volatile frozen conflict, while the worst outcome would be nuclear war, which he considered unlikely. According to Michael Lawriwsky, former chair of the Ukrainian Studies Foundation at Monash University and former editor for the &quot;Australian Ukrainian Review&quot;, Mearsheimer accepts &quot;Putin’s rhetoric, which downplays the complexities of Ukraine’s stance on NATO&quot; and &quot;align[s] closely with Putin’s misleading narrative that portrays NATO expansion as a direct threat to Russia&quot;.

===Liberal international order===
In &quot;The Great Delusion: Liberal Dreams and International Realities&quot; (Yale University Press, 2018) Mearsheimer presents a critique of the geopolitical strategy he refers to as &quot;liberal hegemony&quot;. His definition of liberal hegemony includes a three-part designation of it as an extension of Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s original initiatives to make the world safe by turning its governments into democracies, turning geopolitical economic initiatives towards open markets compatible with democratic governments, and opening up and promoting other democratically liberal international social and culture societies on a global scale of inclusion. Mearsheimer stated in an interview broadcast on C-SPAN that liberal hegemony represents a &quot;great delusion&quot; and that much more weight should be associated with nationalism as a policy of enduring geopolitical value than the delusions he associated with liberal hegemony. 

In a related 2019 article, Mearsheimer argued that the US-led liberal international order had been destined to collapse from its inception. Contrary to scholars such as John Ikenberry, who trace the origins of the liberal international order to the early Cold War, he asserted that the Cold War liberal order had in fact been a &quot;bounded order&quot;, designed to help the US and its allies compete more effectively against the Communist bloc. Although the US-led order became truly international after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the policies that undergird the order tended to precipitate its demise to the point that &quot;[e]ven if Western policymakers had been wiser stewards of that order, they could not have extended its longevity in any meaningful way&quot;. In particular, US-led efforts to expand the order&#x27;s membership by spreading democracy were bound to backfire by provoking nationalist resistance, embroiling the US in disastrous military adventures, and stoking hostility among rival powers such as Russia and China. Liberal internationalist policies also tended to collide with nationalism and economic concerns within the liberal countries themselves, as illustrated by key events such as Brexit and the election of Donald Trump to the US presidency. Finally, the drive to integrate rising powers such as China into the liberal international order effectively &quot;helped China become a great power, thus undercutting unipolarity, which is essential for maintaining a liberal world order&quot;. Mearsheimer concluded by predicting that the liberal international order would be replaced by three distinct &quot;realist orders&quot; in the near term: &quot;a thin international order&quot;, primarily concerned with arms control and managing the global economy, and two bounded orders, led respectively by China and the United States.

His claims about the liberal international order have sparked a lively debate and prompted responses from scholars such as Robert Jervis, Christopher Layne, Jennifer Pitts, Jack Snyder, William C. Wohlforth, and C. William Walldorf. In a critique of &quot;The Great Delusion&quot;, Wohlforth writes that the book fails to make good on its core claim: &quot;First, you cannot establish a causal connection between liberalism and imprudent foreign policy by looking at only liberalism and imprudent foreign policy. Because Mearsheimer subjects no other ideology to the same scrutiny to which he subjects liberalism, there is no way to know whether liberalism stands out this regard... Second, you cannot establish that a permissive systemic environment is a necessary condition by looking only at cases that occur in a permissive strategic environment.&quot; Wohlforth also argues that &quot;The Great Delusion&quot; is inconsistent with Mearsheimer&#x27;s &quot;Tragedy of Great Power Politics&quot;: &quot;Given that other great powers were destined to come back, and the theory&#x27;s stipulation that their preferences (i.e., revisionism) are independent of anything the U.S. does (because nothing the U.S. does can reduce their uncertainty about U.S. intentions, and vice-versa), why would a unipolar U.S. not seek to expand and lock in gains when it had the opportunity to do so?&quot;

Mearsheimer makes important reference to Laurence Lampert&#x27;s nihilistic Strauss interpretation in his book &quot;The Great Delusion&quot;.

===Hypothesis testing in international relations===
In 2013, Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt published &quot;Leaving theory behind: Why simplistic hypothesis testing is bad for International Relations&quot;. They observe that in recent years, scholars of international relations have devoted less effort to creating and refining theories or using them to guide empirical research. Instead is a focus on what they call a simplistic hypothesis testing, which emphasizes discovering well-verified empirical regularities. They state that to be a mistake because insufficient attention to theory leads to misspecified empirical models or misleading measures of key concepts. They also point out that because of the poor quality data in international relations, it is less likely that the efforts will produce cumulative knowledge. It will lead to only a short-term gain and will make scholarship less useful to concerned citizens and policymakers.

Theories give a scholar an overarching framework of the myriad realms of activity. Theories are like maps and aim to simplify a complex reality, but unlike maps, theories provide a causal story by saying that one or more factors can explain a particular phenomenon. Theories attempt to simplify assumptions about the most relevant factors in the aim to explain how the world works. Some grand theories like realism or liberalism claim to explain broad patterns of state behavior, and middle-range theories focus on more narrowly defined phenomena like coercion, deterrence, and economic sanctions.

They list eight reasons why theories are important. The problems that arise from inadequate attention to theory is that it is impossible to construct good models or interpret statistical findings correctly. By privileging hypothesis testing, that is overlooked. It might make sense to pay more attention to hypothesis testing if it produced much useful knowledge about international relations, but Mearsheimer and Walt claim that this is not the case and that the simplistic hypothesis test is inherently flawed. Selection bias is also a problem that arise from inadequate attention to theory. To examine that more clearly, the authors point out James Fearson&#x27;s critique of Paul Huth and Bruce Russett&#x27;s analyses of extended deterrence. Mearsheimer and Walt also point out that contemporary international relations scholarship faces challenging measurement issues because of inadequate attention to theory and cause misleading measures. A few examples are given to support their claim, including Dan Reiter and Allan Stam&#x27;s &quot;Democracies at War&quot;.

Mearsheimer and Walt state that it is a sophisticated study but contains questionable measures of key concepts and that the measures to test their idea do not capture the theories&#x27; core concepts. Poor data, the absence of explanation, and the lack of cumulation are other problems, arising from inadequate attention to theory and focusing too much on simplistic hypothesis testing.

==Personal politics==
In 2019, Mearsheimer said that his preferred candidate in the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries was Bernie Sanders and that economic inequality was the greatest problem faced by the United States. He has said that he has very liberal views on gay rights and gay marriage, and expressed support of gender equality.

In a 2004 speech, Mearsheimer praised the British historian E. H. Carr for his 1939 book &quot;The Twenty Years&#x27; Crisis&quot; and argued that Carr was correct when he argued that international relations were a struggle of all against all, with states always placing their own interests first. Mearsheimer maintained that Carr&#x27;s points were still as relevant for 2004 as for 1939 and went on to deplore what he claimed was the dominance of &quot;idealist&quot; thinking about international relations in British academic life.

===Noelle-Neumann controversy===
In October 1991, Mearsheimer was drawn into a bitter controversy at the University of Chicago regarding Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann, then a visiting professor from Germany. Noelle-Neumann was a prominent German pollster and a leading academic on public opinion research, who authored the highly regarded book, &quot;The Spiral of Silence.&quot; The debate centered on an article written for &quot;Commentary&quot; magazine by Leo Bogart, &quot;The Pollster and the Nazis&quot;, which described Noelle-Neumann&#x27;s past employment as a writer and editor for the Nazi newspaper &quot;Das Reich&quot; from 1940 to 1942. Noelle-Neumann&#x27;s response to the article was to claim that &quot;texts written under a dictatorship more than 50 years ago cannot be read as they were in 1937, 1939 or 1941. Severed from the time and place where they were written, they are no longer real, for reality is in part based on time and place.&quot;

As chairman of Chicago&#x27;s political science department at the time, Mearsheimer sat down with Noelle-Neumann to discuss the article and the allegations. After meeting with her for over three hours, Mearsheimer publicly declared, &quot;I believe that Noelle-Neumann was an anti-Semite&quot;, and he spearheaded a campaign to ask her for an apology. He joined other University of Chicago faculty in writing a joint piece for &quot;Commentary&quot; that reacted to Noelle-Neumann&#x27;s reply to the accusation against her. They declared that &quot;by providing rhetorical support for the exclusion of Jews, her words helped make the disreputable reputable, the indecent decent, the uncivilized civilized, and the unthinkable thinkable.&quot; Mearsheimer said, &quot;Knowing what we know now about the Holocaust, there is no reason for her not to apologize. To ask somebody who played a contributing role in the greatest crime of the 20th century to say &#x27;I&#x27;m sorry&#x27; is not unreasonable.&quot;

==Selected works==
===Books===
* 
* &quot;The Tragedy of Great Power Politics&quot;. W.W. Norton &amp; Company. 2001. . .
* &quot;The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy&quot;. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 2007. . .
* &quot;Why Leaders Lie: The Truth About Lying in International Politics&quot;. Oxford University Press. 2011. . .
* &quot;How States Think: The Rationality of Foreign Policy&quot;. Yale University Press. 2023. ISBN 978-0300269307.

===Journal articles===
* 
* &quot;Why the Soviets Can&#x27;t Win Quickly in Central Europe&quot;. &quot;International Security&quot;. 7 (1): 3–39. 1982. . . .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Revised version published as 
* 
* 
* 

==See also==
* Power (international relations)

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q461830" start="0" end="23" title="John Mearsheimer" label="John Joseph Mearsheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="66" end="85" title="political science" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="90" end="113" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="192" end="213" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054672" start="271" end="288" title="offensive realism" label="offensive realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="330" end="341" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139524" start="376" end="391" title="Rational choice theory" label="rational desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="412" end="420" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371005" start="427" end="456" title="Anarchy (international relations)" label="anarchic international system"/>
<link wikidata="Q738022" start="625" end="665" title="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy" label="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076444" start="701" end="713" title="Israel lobby in the United States" label="Israel lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q744448" start="753" end="772" title="U.S. foreign policy" label="U.S. foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540844" start="829" end="856" title="liberal international order" label="liberal international order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="883" end="903" title="#Ukraine" label="the West is to blame"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="912" end="931" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1004" end="1012" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="1043" end="1049" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="1054" end="1059" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876630" start="1116" end="1142" title="Croton-on-Hudson, New York" label="Croton-on-Hudson, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="1156" end="1174" title="Westchester County" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1220" end="1227" title="United States Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="1298" end="1328" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="1332" end="1342" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1465" end="1488" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="1545" end="1565" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="1569" end="1592" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="1602" end="1635" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="1648" end="1666" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1688" end="1697" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="1818" end="1839" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1843" end="1857" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125292" start="1896" end="1915" title="postdoctoral fellow" label="postdoctoral fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1919" end="1937" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978292" start="1945" end="1977" title="Weatherhead Center for International Affairs" label="Center for International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q180958" start="2040" end="2047" title="Faculty (division)" label="faculty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2094" end="2115" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="2130" end="2149" title="associate professor" label="associate professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="2164" end="2178" title="Professor" label="full professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153072" start="2382" end="2418" title="Committee on International Relations (University of Chicago)" label="Committee on International Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="2712" end="2724" title="Liddell Hart" label="Liddell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769849" start="2771" end="2806" title="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics" label="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914411" start="2835" end="2853" title="Lepgold Book Prize" label="Lepgold Book Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q738022" start="2861" end="2901" title="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy" label="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2926" end="2990" title="Why Leaders Lie: The Truth About Lying in International Politics" label="Why Leaders Lie: The Truth About Lying in International Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053144" start="3064" end="3086" title="International Security" label="International Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869064" start="3130" end="3152" title="London Review of Books" label="London Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="3198" end="3216" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="3234" end="3251" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="3273" end="3288" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="3592" end="3606" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="3820" end="3848" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="3898" end="3935" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="3964" end="4002" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678782" start="4590" end="4598" title="rollback" label="rollback"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="5843" end="5853" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="6407" end="6424" title="attrition warfare" label="attrition warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247326" start="6512" end="6524" title="Limited war" label="limited aims"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6748" end="6760" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="6769" end="6790" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="6911" end="6925" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6942" end="6950" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6969" end="6975" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7246" end="7250" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="7338" end="7354" title="conventional war" label="conventional war"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="7598" end="7616" title="B. H. Liddell Hart" label="B. H. Liddell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917565" start="8026" end="8043" title="indirect approach" label="indirect approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="8617" end="8627" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8858" end="8870" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="8979" end="8994" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="9030" end="9076" title="Battle of France" label="decisive German offensive in the Western front"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="9243" end="9252" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="9453" end="9467" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="9686" end="9690" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q60973" start="9823" end="9838" title="Fritz Bayerlein" label="Fritz Bayerlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="9862" end="9874" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="9904" end="9926" title="North African campaign" label="North African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10663" end="10674" title="Nazi Germany" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="11055" end="11076" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="11616" end="11657" title="United States Army Command and General Staff College" label="US Army Command and General Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112585" start="12177" end="12187" title="Polarity (international relations)" label="multipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12312" end="12320" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="12360" end="12372" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="12533" end="12548" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="12716" end="12723" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="12737" end="12752" title="nuclear arsenal" label="nuclear arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="12795" end="12806" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="13164" end="13171" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000658" start="13258" end="13280" title="Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances" label="a series of agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072029" start="13509" end="13528" title="University of Wales" label="University of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q213154" start="13532" end="13543" title="Aberystwyth" label="Aberystwyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="13576" end="13596" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="13971" end="13979" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176894" start="14049" end="14069" title="counterproliferation" label="counterproliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q276612" start="14241" end="14264" title="Ministry of Unification" label="Ministry of Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q852160" start="14468" end="14484" title="nuclear umbrella" label="nuclear umbrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984000" start="15553" end="15580" title="Liberal institutionalism" label="neoliberal institutionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237584" start="15825" end="15844" title="collective security" label="collective security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186732" start="15856" end="15871" title="Critical international relations theory" label="critical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q544500" start="16001" end="16015" title="Robert Keohane" label="Robert Keohane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347969" start="16020" end="16031" title="Lisa Martin (political scientist)" label="Lisa Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054672" start="16603" end="16620" title="offensive realism" label="offensive realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128352" start="16656" end="16673" title="Classical realism (international relations)" label="classical realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q77161" start="16677" end="16692" title="Hans Morgenthau" label="Hans Morgenthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251484" start="16921" end="16938" title="defensive realism" label="defensive realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q356069" start="16942" end="16955" title="Kenneth Waltz" label="Kenneth Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769849" start="17291" end="17326" title="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics" label="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186378" start="17756" end="17779" title="democratic peace theory" label="democratic peace theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="17799" end="17810" title="Democracy" label="democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="17928" end="17935" title="Hegemony" label="hegemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039835" start="18154" end="18171" title="regional hegemony" label="regional hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="18492" end="18507" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769849" start="19029" end="19064" title="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics" label="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="20654" end="20698" title="Gulf War" label="the war to liberate Kuwait from Iraqi forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="20878" end="20889" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q535356" start="21632" end="21644" title="Stephen Walt" label="Stephen Walt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="21719" end="21741" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869064" start="21789" end="21811" title="London Review of Books" label="London Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076444" start="21855" end="21867" title="Israel lobby in the United States" label="Israel lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q764452" start="22126" end="22138" title="Jewish lobby" label="Jewish lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="22161" end="22165" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="22194" end="22200" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084152" start="22319" end="22337" title="Christian Zionists" label="Christian Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416414" start="22415" end="22420" title="cabal" label="cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="22484" end="22521" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q622857" start="22617" end="22634" title="national interest" label="national interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="22662" end="22668" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q738022" start="22911" end="22951" title="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy" label="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="23053" end="23069" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="2006 Lebanon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="23234" end="23243" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170682" start="23627" end="23668" title="Gaza War (2008–2009)" label="offensive against Hamas in the Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="23736" end="23741" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668693" start="24474" end="24498" title="International Spy Museum" label="International Spy Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166602" start="24895" end="24912" title="Hisham B. Sharabi" label="Hisham B. Sharabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127291" start="24937" end="24953" title="Palestine Center" label="Palestine Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="25092" end="25110" title="two-state solution" label="two-state solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44526" start="25212" end="25226" title="Greater Israel" label="Greater Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="25256" end="25265" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="25625" end="25635" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914838" start="26453" end="26467" title="Abraham Foxman" label="Abraham Foxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="26475" end="26497" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234740" start="26499" end="26511" title="David Harris (advocate)" label="David Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q465308" start="26519" end="26544" title="American Jewish Committee" label="American Jewish Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409231" start="26546" end="26562" title="Malcolm Hoenlein" label="Malcolm Hoenlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125145" start="26570" end="26633" title="Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations" label="Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q699565" start="26635" end="26648" title="Ronald Lauder" label="Ronald Lauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q541010" start="26656" end="26677" title="World Jewish Congress" label="World Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914898" start="26679" end="26691" title="Morton Klein" label="Morton Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q205366" start="26699" end="26730" title="Zionist Organization of America" label="Zionist Organization of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q319137" start="26763" end="26778" title="Sheldon Adelson" label="Sheldon Adelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531834" start="26780" end="26792" title="Lester Crown" label="Lester Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693671" start="26798" end="26816" title="Mortimer Zuckerman" label="Mortimer Zuckerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186702" start="26858" end="26868" title="Fred Hiatt" label="Fred Hiatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065216" start="26870" end="26889" title="Charles Krauthammer" label="Charles Krauthammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961960" start="26891" end="26904" title="Bret Stephens" label="Bret Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892029" start="26910" end="26923" title="Martin Peretz" label="Martin Peretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389497" start="27041" end="27053" title="Gilad Atzmon" label="Gilad Atzmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183058" start="27947" end="27962" title="Alan Dershowitz" label="Alan Dershowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123574" start="29033" end="29050" title="Chinese Century" label="China&amp;#x27;s rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="29201" end="29211" title="Containment" label="containing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="29341" end="29353" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="29400" end="29418" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509344" start="29769" end="29785" title="power projection" label="power projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769849" start="29922" end="29957" title="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics" label="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054672" start="30111" end="30128" title="offensive realism" label="offensive realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="31185" end="31200" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31226" end="31238" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="31850" end="31869" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="31879" end="31893" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510383" start="33770" end="33782" title="Second Cold War" label="new Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q213652" start="34462" end="34476" title="Amitai Etzioni" label="Amitai Etzioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213799" start="34828" end="34839" title="Tom Switzer" label="Tom Switzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062466" start="34860" end="34890" title="Centre for Independent Studies" label="Centre for Independent Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769849" start="35180" end="35187" title="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics" label="Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="35367" end="35380" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333516" start="35715" end="35739" title="economic interdependence" label="economic interdependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="36093" end="36114" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36130" end="36156" title="USS Greer (DD-145)#The Greer incident, September 1941" label="&amp;quot;Greer&amp;quot; incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36231" end="36243" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="36439" end="36448" title="Autocracy" label="autocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="36543" end="36557" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="36591" end="36618" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="36628" end="36642" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291690" start="39165" end="39182" title="nuclear deterrent" label="nuclear deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="39325" end="39338" title="List of states with nuclear weapons" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680807" start="39956" end="39973" title="Russian irredentism" label="Russian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="40055" end="40074" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733401" start="40111" end="40132" title="Revolution of Dignity" label="Revolution of Dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15859754" start="40141" end="40149" title="Russian occupation of Crimea" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="40154" end="40161" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029471" start="40197" end="40220" title="Russian separatist forces in Ukraine" label="pro-Russian separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335075" start="40236" end="40258" title="War in Donbas" label="war in eastern Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367724" start="40484" end="40500" title="Enlargement of NATO" label="NATO enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47232" start="40626" end="40645" title="Enlargement of the European Union" label="EU&amp;#x27;s expansion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41008" end="41017" title="Revolution of Dignity#Removal of Yanukovych" label="overthrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459658" start="41086" end="41103" title="Viktor Yanukovych" label="Viktor Yanukovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411903" start="41720" end="41741" title="Sevastopol Naval Base" label="Sevastopol Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624961" start="41758" end="41805" title="Russian opposition to Ukrainian NATO membership" label="Russian opposition to Ukrainian NATO membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="42273" end="42293" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718864" start="42666" end="42687" title="2008 Bucharest summit" label="2008 Bucharest summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208019" start="42701" end="42720" title="Eastern Partnership" label="Eastern Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q587252" start="42847" end="42859" title="buffer state" label="buffer state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496096" start="42938" end="42956" title="Charter for European Security" label="right to determine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258484" start="43115" end="43138" title="Might makes right" label="might often makes right"/>
<link wikidata="Q769921" start="43186" end="43200" title="Michael McFaul" label="Michael McFaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610497" start="43205" end="43224" title="Stephen Sestanovich" label="Stephen Sestanovich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43716" end="43747" title="Viktor Yanukovych#Removal from presidency" label="removed him by a unanimous vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959840" start="44008" end="44020" title="Russia–NATO relations" label="co-operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="44271" end="44285" title="Neutral country" label="neutral status"/>
<link wikidata="Q114240134" start="44427" end="44450" title="Russian neo-imperialism" label="Russian neo-imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="44999" end="45017" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="45239" end="45278" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia invaded Ukraine in February 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q85235691" start="45389" end="45403" title="Isaac Chotiner" label="Isaac Chotiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="45413" end="45427" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q789889" start="45894" end="45929" title="Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs" label="Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q233479" start="45994" end="46008" title="Anne Applebaum" label="Anne Applebaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q114240134" start="46282" end="46293" title="Russian neo-imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q351075" start="46344" end="46354" title="Adam Tooze" label="Adam Tooze"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="47045" end="47060" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q58217" start="47155" end="47168" title="Sergei Lavrov" label="Sergei Lavrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q111018958" start="47397" end="47415" title="War crimes in the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006765" start="47827" end="47840" title="Cherry picking" label="cherry-picked"/>
<link wikidata="Q603742" start="47951" end="47967" title="double standards" label="double standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q114096220" start="48568" end="48601" title="Russian annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts" label="annexed four provinces of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111030945" start="49420" end="49435" title="Peace negotiations in the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="peace agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q14395607" start="49553" end="49568" title="frozen conflict" label="frozen conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q598841" start="49730" end="49747" title="Monash University" label="Monash University"/>
<link wikidata="Q127308118" start="50096" end="50158" title="The Great Delusion" label="The Great Delusion: Liberal Dreams and International Realities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="50396" end="50410" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="50791" end="50797" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="50912" end="50923" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540844" start="51087" end="51114" title="liberal international order" label="liberal international order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809362" start="51194" end="51208" title="John Ikenberry" label="John Ikenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="52247" end="52253" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="52274" end="52286" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435538" start="53016" end="53029" title="Robert Jervis" label="Robert Jervis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112714" start="53031" end="53048" title="Christopher Layne" label="Christopher Layne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11309846" start="53066" end="53077" title="Jack Snyder (political scientist)" label="Jack Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020508" start="53079" end="53099" title="William Wohlforth" label="William C. Wohlforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500690" start="54325" end="54341" title="Laurence Lampert" label="Laurence Lampert"/>
<link wikidata="Q535356" start="54505" end="54517" title="Stephen Walt" label="Stephen Walt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38051551" start="57512" end="57556" title="2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="57561" end="57575" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q950001" start="57585" end="57604" title="Income inequality in the United States" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q664194" start="57704" end="57714" title="LGBT rights in the United States" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="57719" end="57731" title="Same-sex marriage" label="gay marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="57758" end="57773" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q274764" start="57836" end="57846" title="E. H. Carr" label="E. H. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108321" start="57871" end="57900" title="The Twenty Years&amp;#x27; Crisis" label="The Twenty Years&amp;#x27; Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745901" start="58231" end="58239" title="idealism in international relations" label="idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60804" start="58449" end="58473" title="Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann" label="Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q540742" start="58658" end="58679" title="Spiral of silence" label="The Spiral of Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115290" start="58739" end="58749" title="Commentary (magazine)" label="Commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523570" start="58768" end="58778" title="Leo Bogart" label="Leo Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q562229" start="58926" end="58935" title="Das Reich (newspaper)" label="Das Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769849" start="60329" end="60364" title="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics" label="The Tragedy of Great Power Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282208" start="60372" end="60397" title="W.W. Norton &amp;amp; Company" label="W.W. Norton &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q738022" start="60417" end="60457" title="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy" label="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067003" start="60465" end="60490" title="Farrar, Straus and Giroux" label="Farrar, Straus and Giroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997815" start="60510" end="60574" title="Why Leaders Lie" label="Why Leaders Lie: The Truth About Lying in International Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="60582" end="60605" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q132745989" start="60769" end="60825" title="Why the Soviets Can&amp;#x27;t Win Quickly in Central Europe" label="Why the Soviets Can&amp;#x27;t Win Quickly in Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345203" start="60966" end="60997" title="Power (international relations)" label="Power (international relations)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980942" wikidata="Q887229" url="?curid=980942" title="Charles W. Bryan">
<text>Charles Wayland Bryan (February 10, 1867 – March 4, 1945) was an American businessman and politician who served as the 20th and 23rd Governor of Nebraska, and Mayor of Lincoln, Nebraska, and was the Democratic nominee for Vice President in 1924. He was the younger brother of William Jennings Bryan.

==Early life==

Charles Wayland Bryan was born in Salem, Illinois on February 10, 1867, to Silas Lillard Bryan and Mariah Elizabeth (Jennings) Bryan. Silas Bryan had been born in 1822 and had established a legal practice in Salem in 1851. He married Mariah, a former student of his at McKendree College, in 1852. Of Scots-Irish and English ancestry, Silas Bryan was an avid Jacksonian Democrat. He won election as a state circuit judge and in 1866 moved his family to a farm north of Salem, living in a ten-room house that was the envy of Marion County. Silas served in various local positions and sought election to Congress in 1872, but was narrowly defeated by the Republican candidate. An admirer of Andrew Jackson and Stephen A. Douglas, Silas passed on his Democratic affiliation to his son, William, who would remain a life-long Democrat. Charles&#x27; cousin, William Sherman Jennings, was also a prominent Democrat.

Charles was one of nine children of Silas and Mariah, the first three of their children died during infancy. He had four of whom lived to adulthood. Silas was a Baptist and Mariah was a Methodist.

Bryan attended both the University of Chicago and Illinois College in Jacksonville. He married Elizabeth Louise Brokaw and they had three children. Bryan worked as a tobacco broker and insurance salesman, farmed, and raised purebred livestock.

==Career==
Bryan moved to Lincoln, Nebraska in 1889, and became business manager and political secretary for his brother, William Jennings Bryan. From 1901 to 1923, he was publisher and associate editor of his brother&#x27;s newspaper, &quot;The Commoner&quot;. Elected to the Lincoln City Commission in 1915 and 1921, he also served as mayor of Lincoln, Nebraska from 1915 to 1917 (again from 1935 to 1937). During his first term as mayor, several progressive reforms were carried out. 

Bryan first ran for governor in 1916, though he lost in the primary to Keith Neville. Bryan was elected the Governor of Nebraska in 1922, and served from 1923 to 1925. He was the Democratic vice presidential candidate in 1924, picked largely because of his name to serve as running mate to conservative easterner John W. Davis. The ticket was overwhelmingly defeated by Republican incumbent Calvin Coolidge and his running mate Charles G. Dawes.

He was the unsuccessful Democratic nominee for Governor in 1926 and 1928. He won the 1930 and 1932 gubernatorial elections, serving as Governor again from 1931 to 1935. During his tenure, the state&#x27;s economy flourished, state spending was limited, and taxes were reduced. He unsuccessfully ran as a Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate in 1934, and was elected to another term as Mayor of Lincoln in 1935. He unsuccessfully ran for Governor in 1938 as an independent candidate, ran for the U.S. House in 1940, and was the Democratic nominee for Governor in 1942.

==Death==
Bryan died on March 4, 1945, in Lincoln, Nebraska, and is interred there at Wyuka Cemetery.

== Notes ==
== References ==
Bibliography
* 

==External links==
* Encyclopedia of Nebraska
* Charles W. Bryan at National Governors Association



|-


|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q887229" start="0" end="21" title="Charles W. Bryan" label="Charles Wayland Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q878585" start="133" end="153" title="List of governors of Nebraska" label="Governor of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627579" start="159" end="164" title="List of mayors of Lincoln, Nebraska" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28260" start="168" end="185" title="Lincoln, Nebraska" label="Lincoln, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q699360" start="240" end="244" title="1924 United States presidential election" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="276" end="298" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q120783" start="351" end="366" title="Salem, Illinois" label="Salem, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514118" start="392" end="411" title="Silas Bryan" label="Silas Lillard Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061548" start="586" end="603" title="McKendree University" label="McKendree College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="617" end="628" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="675" end="694" title="Jacksonian Democrat" label="Jacksonian Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q378438" start="840" end="853" title="Marion County, Illinois" label="Marion County"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="1005" end="1019" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="1024" end="1042" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen A. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q885747" start="1169" end="1193" title="William Sherman Jennings" label="William Sherman Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857726" start="1388" end="1395" title="Baptists in the United States" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004691" start="1413" end="1422" title="History of Methodism in the United States" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="1449" end="1470" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q574316" start="1475" end="1491" title="Illinois College" label="Illinois College"/>
<link wikidata="Q28260" start="2016" end="2033" title="Lincoln, Nebraska" label="Lincoln, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q885826" start="2230" end="2243" title="Keith Neville" label="Keith Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q878585" start="2267" end="2287" title="Governor of Nebraska" label="Governor of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="2349" end="2376" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice presidential candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q699360" start="2380" end="2384" title="1924 United States presidential election" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332779" start="2472" end="2485" title="John W. Davis" label="John W. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2529" end="2539" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="2550" end="2565" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q184565" start="2587" end="2603" title="Charles G. Dawes" label="Charles G. Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916902" start="2665" end="2669" title="1926 Nebraska gubernatorial election" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916899" start="2674" end="2678" title="1928 Nebraska gubernatorial election" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916894" start="2691" end="2695" title="1930 Nebraska gubernatorial election" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916885" start="2700" end="2704" title="1932 Nebraska gubernatorial election" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q104946929" start="2954" end="2958" title="1934 United States Senate elections in Nebraska" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916874" start="3059" end="3063" title="1938 Nebraska gubernatorial election" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916871" start="3172" end="3176" title="1942 Nebraska gubernatorial election" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040683" start="3265" end="3279" title="Wyuka Cemetery" label="Wyuka Cemetery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980951" wikidata="Q795617" url="?curid=980951" title="BBEdit">
<text>BBEdit is a proprietary text editor made by Bare Bones Software, originally developed for Macintosh System Software 6, and currently supporting macOS.

==History==
The first version of BBEdit was created as a &quot;bare bones&quot; text editor to serve as a &quot;proof of concept&quot;; the intention was to demonstrate the programming capabilities of an experimental version of Pascal for the Macintosh. The original prototypes of BBEdit used the TextEdit control available in versions of the classic Mac OS of the time. The TextEdit control could not load files larger than 32 KB. The Macintosh Pascal project was ultimately terminated, but the demonstration program was reworked to use the THINK Technologies &quot;PE&quot; text editing engine used for THINK C, which was much faster and could read larger files. BBEdit was the first freestanding text editor to use the &quot;PE&quot; editing engine, and is the only one still being developed.

BBEdit was available at no charge upon its initial release in 1992 but was commercialized in May 1993 with the release of version 2.5. At the same time, Bare Bones Software also made a less-featured version of BBEdit 2.5 called BBEdit Lite available at no cost. BBEdit Lite lacked plugin support, scriptability, syntax coloring and other features then deemed as mainly for advanced users. Bare Bones Software discontinued BBEdit Lite at version 6.1 and replaced it with TextWrangler, which was available for a fee, although significantly less than BBEdit. In 2005, TextWrangler 2.0 was released as freeware and subsequent versions continued to be distributed as such up until 2017, when it was sunsetted and incorporated into BBEdit.

Throughout its history, BBEdit has supported many Apple technologies that failed to gain traction, including OpenDoc and PowerTalk. The failure of PowerTalk, and the desire of developers to have email integrated to their text editor, led to the development of Mailsmith, an email client that uses BBEdit&#x27;s editor component. Formerly developed by Bare Bones as a commercial application, in 2009 Mailsmith was transferred to Stickshift Software LLC and would continue to be developed as a labor of love and released as freeware. Development of Mailsmith ceased in 2018.

In 1994, taking advantage of BBEdit&#x27;s then-novel plugin support, third party developers started writing plug-ins to easily create and format HTML code. In fact, the developers at Bare Bones Software first learned of the existence of HTML through users inquiring about these plug-ins. Barebones later bought the rights to the plugin code from their author and included them as part of the standard BBEdit package. The tools were included as an optional palette in version 4, and were progressively more integrated, gaining their own menu in version 5.0. In version 4.5, Bare Bones introduced BBEdit Table Builder as an additional tool for web designers and developers to visually design HTML tables, then the main technique for layout control on web pages. Table Builder was removed in version 6.0, since enhancing it would involve replicating the features of existing visual HTML editors, and BBEdit was at this time bundled with Dreamweaver. BBEdit&#x27;s plugin support was removed in version 9.6, in favor of the expanded selection of scripting languages available on Mac OS X.

BBEdit was one of the first applications to be made available for Mac OS X, as a Carbon app. On macOS, BBEdit takes advantage of the operating system&#x27;s Unix underpinnings by integrating scripts written in Python, Perl, or other common Unix scripting languages, as well as adding features such as shell worksheets that provide a screen editor interface to command line functionality similar to MPW Worksheets and Emacs shell buffers.

BBEdit&#x27;s creator code codice_1 refers to Rich Siegel, one of Bare Bones Software&#x27;s founders and the original author of BBEdit.

==Features==
BBEdit is designed for use by software developers and web designers. It has native support for many programming languages and custom modules can be created by users to support any language. BBEdit is not a word processor, meaning it does not have text formatting or page layout features.

The application contains multi-file text searching capabilities including support for Perl-compatible regular expressions. BBEdit allows previewing and built-in validation of HTML markup and also provides prototypes for most HTML constructs that can be entered into a dialog box. It also includes FTP and SFTP tools and integrates with code management systems. BBEdit shows differences between file versions and allows for the merging of changes. Support for version control, including Git, Perforce, and Subversion is built in.

A number of applications and developer tools provide direct support for using BBEdit as a third-party source-code editor.

BBEdit supports the Open Scripting Architecture and can be scripted and recorded using AppleScript and other languages, as well as having the ability to execute AppleScripts itself.

==Language support==
BBEdit supports syntax highlighting for a wide variety of popular computer languages. As of version 10.1, these include: ANSI C, C++, CSS, Fortran 95, HTML, Java, JavaScript, JSP, Lasso, Object Pascal, Objective-C, Objective-C++, Perl, PHP, Python, Rez, Ruby, Setext, SQL (including Transact-SQL, PL/SQL, MySQL, and PostgreSQL), Tcl, TeX, UNIX shell scripts, XML, and YAML. BBEdit&#x27;s SDK allows users to develop additional language modules.

With the release of version 14.0, BBEdit offered support for the Language Server Protocol allowing users to employ their own programming language servers or to utilise preexisting servers. 

==Freeware versions==

===BBEdit Lite===
BBEdit Lite was a freeware stripped-down version of BBEdit, that ceased development in 2003. BBEdit Lite had many of the same features as BBEdit such as regular expressions, a plug-in architecture and the same text editing engine, but no programming and web-oriented tools such as syntax highlighting, command line shell, HTML tools or FTP support. BBEdit Lite 6.1 comes in two forms: a &quot;Classic&quot; version for use under Mac OS 7.5.5 to Mac OS 9, and a &quot;Carbon&quot; version that runs under Mac OS X natively. Note: the &quot;Classic&quot; version does not run under the Classic environment.

===TextWrangler===

In 2003, Bare Bones introduced the commercial text editor TextWrangler, an enhanced version of BBEdit Lite, which ceased further development. Later TextWrangler 2.0 was made available free of charge. In 2016, BBEdit 11.6 introduced a free mode that matched TextWrangler&#x27;s feature set, and in 2017, Bare Bones sunsetted support and development for TextWrangler.

A plain text editor like BBEdit, TextWrangler did not have a robust set of formatting and style options. It has features common to most programming text editors, such as syntax highlighting for various programming languages, a find and replace function with regular expression support, spell check, and data comparison. TextWrangler also included scripting support using AppleScript, Python, Perl, shell scripts, and BBEdit&#x27;s native Text Factories. It supported text reformatting, and could read and save files in encodings including various Unicode encodings, ASCII, Latin-1 and Latin-9.

===BBEdit 11.6 and up===
In the Summer of 2016, with the release of BBEdit 11.6, Bare Bones Software introduced a free mode of BBEdit that even after the expiration of the 30-day evaluation period of BBEdit&#x27;s full features would continue to offer TextWrangler&#x27;s features and some additional features beyond TextWrangler&#x27;s. In response to a user question, author Rich Siegel confirmed that TextWrangler would eventually be phased out, given that the free mode of BBEdit now incorporates all functions of TextWrangler.

==References==
==External links==
* – official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q795617" start="0" end="6" title="BBEdit" label="BBEdit"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="12" end="23" title="Proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="24" end="35" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860280" start="44" end="63" title="Bare Bones Software" label="Bare Bones Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="90" end="99" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q420785" start="100" end="117" title="System 6" label="System Software 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="144" end="149" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201019" start="264" end="280" title="proof of concept" label="proof of concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="380" end="386" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="395" end="404" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708388" start="449" end="457" title="TextEdit (API)" label="TextEdit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="495" end="509" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050584" start="757" end="764" title="THINK C" label="THINK C"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="1547" end="1555" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500846" start="1793" end="1800" title="OpenDoc" label="OpenDoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620914" start="1805" end="1814" title="PowerTalk" label="PowerTalk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1944" end="1953" title="Mailsmith" label="Mailsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q570871" start="1958" end="1970" title="email client" label="email client"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="2176" end="2189" title="Hobby" label="labor of love"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="2206" end="2214" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="2312" end="2318" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="plugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="2404" end="2408" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357944" start="2715" end="2722" title="Palette (computing)" label="palette"/>
<link wikidata="Q179551" start="2949" end="2959" title="HTML table" label="HTML table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020767" start="3180" end="3187" title="bundled software" label="bundled"/>
<link wikidata="Q192324" start="3193" end="3204" title="Adobe Dreamweaver" label="Dreamweaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="3301" end="3319" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="3411" end="3419" title="macOS" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035519" start="3426" end="3432" title="Carbon (API)" label="Carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274644" start="3743" end="3746" title="Macintosh Programmer&amp;#x27;s Workshop" label="MPW"/>
<link wikidata="Q189722" start="3762" end="3767" title="Emacs" label="Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183612" start="3798" end="3810" title="creator code" label="creator code"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="3965" end="3983" title="software developer" label="software developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190637" start="3989" end="3999" title="web design" label="web design"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="4141" end="4155" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="4201" end="4221" title="desktop publishing" label="page layout features"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="4310" end="4314" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="4326" end="4344" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q86915" start="4492" end="4502" title="dialog box" label="dialog box"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="4521" end="4524" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126823" start="4529" end="4533" title="SSH File Transfer Protocol" label="SFTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153495" start="4560" end="4583" title="Configuration management" label="code management systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q300901" start="4598" end="4631" title="diff" label="differences between file versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q186055" start="4710" end="4713" title="Git" label="Git"/>
<link wikidata="Q20063746" start="4715" end="4723" title="Perforce" label="Perforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q46794" start="4729" end="4739" title="Apache Subversion" label="Subversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="4844" end="4855" title="Third-party developer" label="third-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q522972" start="4856" end="4874" title="source-code editor" label="source-code editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q129137" start="4897" end="4924" title="Open Scripting Architecture" label="Open Scripting Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q129137" start="4964" end="4975" title="AppleScript" label="AppleScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q747907" start="5097" end="5116" title="syntax highlighting" label="syntax highlighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931402" start="5202" end="5208" title="ANSI C" label="ANSI C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="5210" end="5213" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="5215" end="5218" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="5220" end="5230" title="Fortran 95" label="Fortran 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="5238" end="5242" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="5244" end="5254" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q183169" start="5256" end="5259" title="JavaServer Pages" label="JSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218363" start="5261" end="5266" title="Lasso (programming language)" label="Lasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q633894" start="5268" end="5281" title="Object Pascal" label="Object Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="5283" end="5294" title="Objective-C" label="Objective-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="5296" end="5309" title="Objective-C++" label="Objective-C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="5311" end="5315" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="5317" end="5320" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="5322" end="5328" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="5335" end="5339" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263410" start="5341" end="5347" title="Setext" label="Setext"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="5349" end="5352" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411245" start="5364" end="5376" title="Transact-SQL" label="Transact-SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41574" start="5378" end="5384" title="PL/SQL" label="PL/SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q850" start="5386" end="5391" title="MySQL" label="MySQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q192490" start="5397" end="5407" title="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288" start="5410" end="5413" title="Tcl" label="Tcl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="5415" end="5418" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="5440" end="5443" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q281876" start="5449" end="5453" title="YAML" label="YAML"/>
<link wikidata="Q30251139" start="5592" end="5616" title="Language Server Protocol" label="Language Server Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="6061" end="6073" title="command line" label="command line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="6074" end="6079" title="shell (computing)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6343" end="6362" title="List of macOS components#Classic" label="Classic environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="6754" end="6764" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990323" start="7055" end="7070" title="data comparison" label="data comparison"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="7150" end="7162" title="shell script" label="shell script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="7299" end="7306" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="7318" end="7323" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="7325" end="7332" title="ISO/IEC 8859-1" label="Latin-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="7337" end="7344" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15" label="Latin-9"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980953" wikidata="Q2084104" url="?curid=980953" title="Sandman Mystery Theatre">
<text>Sandman Mystery Theatre was an ongoing comic book series published by Vertigo Comics, the mature-readers imprint of DC Comics. It ran for 70 issues, one annual, and a cross-over special between 1993 and 1999 and retells the adventures of the Sandman, a vigilante whose main weapon is a gun that fires sleeping gas, originally created by DC in the Golden Age of Comic Books. In a similar vein to Batman, the Sandman possesses little to no superhuman powers, though he has minor precognitive abilities through his prophetic dreams, and relies on his detective skills and inventions.

In this film noir-like series by writers Matt Wagner and Steven T. Seagle, Wesley Dodds (the Sandman) and his girlfriend Dian Belmont (daughter of the District Attorney) encountered several, often grotesque, foes in multi-issue storylines. The team of Dodds and Belmont were a nod to Nick and Nora Charles of &quot;The Thin Man&quot; novel and movies.

==Art==
The first artist was Guy Davis, who defined the visual look of the character. Davis changed Dodds from the traditional portrayal as a tall, square-jawed figure, making him shorter, round-faced and slightly overweight. He also gave Dodds a pair of round spectacles, visually echoing the round eyepieces of the gas mask he wore as the Sandman.

Davis also redesigned the Sandman costume. In the original 1930s comics, the Sandman wore a green suit, purple cape, orange fedora and blue-and-yellow gas mask. For &quot;Sandman Mystery Theatre&quot;, the color palette was toned down to gray, olive green and brown. The super-heroic trappings were downplayed in favor of a &quot;real-world&quot; sensibility, such as a trench coat instead of the cape.

For the second and third story arcs, &quot;The Face&quot; and &quot;The Brute&quot;, art was provided by John Watkiss and R. G. Taylor respectively.

A minor controversy developed around the second storyline, &quot;The Face&quot;. A coloring error resulted in Asian characters being portrayed with bright yellow skin. The editor apologized for the error in the letter column of a subsequent issue.

Guy Davis returned for the fourth arc and the remainder of the series with occasional additional work from Vince Locke and Warren Pleece.

==Themes and guest stars==
Set during the late 1930s, before Dodds became a founding member of the Justice Society of America, this series dealt with mature themes such as abortion, racism, and anti-Semitism, as well as historical themes such as the rise of Nazism and international appeasement. As the series progressed Wesley encountered in his adventures other &quot;mystery men&quot; of the era, including the Crimson Avenger, Starman, Blackhawk and the Hourman. In issue #23 the Sandman interrogates a boxer outside Grant&#x27;s Gym, and the man mentions the name &quot;Ted&quot;, a reference to Ted Grant, the original Wildcat. A reference is made to Detective Jim Corrigan, later to be known as the Spectre. Doctor Mid-Nite, alias Dr. Charles McNider is also mentioned as the physician that treated Wesley in issue #27.

Dodds and Belmont would themselves guest star in the popular comic &quot;Starman&quot; (set in the present day), appearing as older versions of themselves, and in flashbacks done by Davis himself in the same art-style as &quot;Sandman Mystery Theatre&quot;. They also guest-starred in the &quot;Exodus Noir&quot; storyline of &quot;Madame Xanadu&quot;, set during the 1940s.

==Differences==

The series introduced many changes to previous representations of Sandman&#x27;s early years; however, as the title is under the Vertigo imprint it is not bound by standard DC Universe continuity. Relating to standard continuity these changes would be considered retcons, but the series is instead intended to serve as an alternative telling of Sandman&#x27;s origin. One such change in the series included Wesley Dodds&#x27; portrayal as a quiet man who is considered odd by others instead of a playboy socialite. Some of the retcons introduced in &quot;Sandman Mystery Theatre&quot; have been reflected in modern DC continuity. One such retcon that was later overturned was that of the character of Sandy Hawkins being nothing more than a fictional comic book character with Dian Belmont instead acting as Sandman&#x27;s sidekick &quot;Sandy&quot; on at least one occasion. Also, Dian&#x27;s death had previously been recounted in &quot;All-Star Squadron&quot; #18, but in this new continuity she lives well into old age and remains Dodds&#x27;s companion for life.

==Dream==
The revival of the character was due in part to the success of a later, related character created by Neil Gaiman: Dream of the Endless, whose adventures were then being published under the title of &quot;The Sandman&quot; (hence the need for a more elaborate title for the older character&#x27;s adventures). Dream made numerous cameo appearances in Wesley Dodds&#x27; dreams throughout the series.

The two characters met briefly in a one-shot special, &quot;Sandman Midnight Theatre&quot;, co-written by Gaiman and Wagner.

==Reception==
In their review of &quot;Sandman Mystery Theatre&quot; #41–48, &quot;Wizard&quot; gave the series a 5 on a scale of 1 to 6, particularly praising the historical authenticity of the lingo and cultural norms, as well as the intricately developed characters, &quot;horrific&quot; villains, and unique atmosphere. Their one major criticism was that it is too difficult for new readers to follow what is going on if they begin reading the series in the middle of a story arc.

==2007 revival series==
DC published a new five-issue limited series, &quot;Sandman Mystery Theatre: Sleep of Reason&quot;, set in 2007 and featuring a new character taking up the Sandman mantle.

==Collected editions==
The comics have been collected in a number of trade paperbacks:
* &quot;Sandman Mystery Theatre&quot;:
** &quot;The Tarantula&quot; (by Matt Wagner, with art by Guy Davis, collects #1–4, 112 pages, May 2005, )
** &quot;The Face and The Brute&quot; (by Matt Wagner, with art by John Watkiss and R.G. Taylor, collects #5–12, 208 pages, November 2004, )
** &quot;The Vamp&quot; (by Matt Wagner and Steven T. Seagle, with art by Guy Davis, collects #13–16, 104 pages, July 2005, )
** &quot;The Scorpion&quot; (by Matt Wagner and Steven T. Seagle, with art by Guy Davis, collects #17–20, 104 pages, May 2006, )
** &quot;Dr. Death and The Night of the Butcher&quot; (by Matt Wagner and Steven T. Seagle, with art by Guy Davis and Vince Locke, collects #21–28, 208 pages, April 2007, )
** &quot;The Hourman and The Python&quot; (by Matt Wagner and Steven T. Seagle, with art by Guy Davis and Warren Pleece, collects #29–36, 200 pages, March 2008, )
** &quot;The Mist and The Phantom of the Fair&quot; (by Matt Wagner and Steven T. Seagle, with art by Guy Davis, collects #37–44, 200 pages, March 2009, )
** &quot;The Blackhawk and The Return of the Scarlet Ghost&quot; (by Matt Wagner and Steven T. Seagle, with art by Matthew Smith and Guy Davis, collects #45–52, 224 pages, April 2010, )
** &quot;Book One&quot; (collects #1–12, 328 pages, June 2016, )
** &quot;Book Two&quot; (collects #13–24 and Annual #1, 384 pages, January 2017, )
** &quot;Compendium One&quot; (collects #1–36 and Annual #1, 981 pages, May 2023, )

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7093850" start="31" end="38" title="ongoing series" label="ongoing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="39" end="49" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q122669" start="70" end="84" title="Vertigo Comics" label="Vertigo Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="116" end="125" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q567357" start="153" end="159" title="Annual publication" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813155" start="194" end="198" title="1993 in comics" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813373" start="203" end="207" title="1999 in comics" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q338182" start="242" end="249" title="Sandman (Wesley Dodds)" label="Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q784877" start="347" end="372" title="Golden Age of Comic Books" label="Golden Age of Comic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="395" end="401" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="590" end="599" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q285938" start="623" end="634" title="Matt Wagner" label="Matt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615312" start="639" end="655" title="Steven T. Seagle" label="Steven T. Seagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q338182" start="657" end="669" title="Wesley Dodds" label="Wesley Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385118" start="703" end="715" title="Dian Belmont" label="Dian Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041980" start="866" end="887" title="Nick and Nora Charles" label="Nick and Nora Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198493" start="897" end="909" title="The Thin Man" label="The Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="964" end="973" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q638335" start="1410" end="1416" title="Fedora (hat)" label="fedora"/>
<link wikidata="Q654290" start="1656" end="1667" title="trench coat" label="trench coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263200" start="1795" end="1807" title="John Watkiss" label="John Watkiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151784" start="2051" end="2064" title="Comic book letter column" label="letter column"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="2089" end="2098" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428271" start="2196" end="2207" title="Vince Locke" label="Vince Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970428" start="2212" end="2225" title="Warren Pleece" label="Warren Pleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536659" start="2327" end="2353" title="Justice Society of America" label="Justice Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="2400" end="2408" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2486" end="2492" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="2511" end="2522" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545045" start="2642" end="2657" title="Crimson Avenger" label="Crimson Avenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968379" start="2659" end="2666" title="Starman (Ted Knight)" label="Starman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606017" start="2668" end="2677" title="Blackhawk (DC Comics)" label="Blackhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q48781707" start="2686" end="2693" title="Hourman" label="Hourman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24684" start="2853" end="2860" title="Wildcat (DC Comics)" label="Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194362" start="2895" end="2907" title="Jim Corrigan" label="Jim Corrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q496879" start="2934" end="2941" title="Spectre (DC Comics character)" label="Spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624722" start="2943" end="2958" title="Doctor Mid-Nite" label="Doctor Mid-Nite"/>
<link wikidata="Q195927" start="3129" end="3136" title="Starman (Jack Knight)" label="Starman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726352" start="3388" end="3401" title="Madame Xanadu" label="Madame Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152150" start="3622" end="3633" title="DC Universe" label="DC Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="3712" end="3719" title="retcons" label="retcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="4088" end="4094" title="retcon" label="retcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773836" start="4150" end="4163" title="Sandy Hawkins" label="Sandy Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q780667" start="4388" end="4405" title="All-Star Squadron" label="All-Star Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="4629" end="4640" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528136" start="4642" end="4662" title="Dream of the Endless" label="Dream of the Endless"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="4732" end="4743" title="The Sandman (comic book)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3948123" start="4988" end="5012" title="Sandman Midnight Theatre" label="Sandman Midnight Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q508569" start="5137" end="5143" title="Wizard (magazine)" label="Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="5528" end="5537" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297186" start="5594" end="5608" title="Limited series (comics)" label="limited series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="5806" end="5822" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q285938" start="5896" end="5907" title="Matt Wagner" label="Matt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="5921" end="5930" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q285938" start="6012" end="6023" title="Matt Wagner" label="Matt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263200" start="6037" end="6049" title="John Watkiss" label="John Watkiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q285938" start="6139" end="6150" title="Matt Wagner" label="Matt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615312" start="6155" end="6171" title="Steven T. Seagle" label="Steven T. Seagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="6185" end="6194" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q285938" start="6269" end="6280" title="Matt Wagner" label="Matt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615312" start="6285" end="6301" title="Steven T. Seagle" label="Steven T. Seagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="6315" end="6324" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q285938" start="6424" end="6435" title="Matt Wagner" label="Matt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615312" start="6440" end="6456" title="Steven T. Seagle" label="Steven T. Seagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="6470" end="6479" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428271" start="6484" end="6495" title="Vince Locke" label="Vince Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q285938" start="6585" end="6596" title="Matt Wagner" label="Matt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615312" start="6601" end="6617" title="Steven T. Seagle" label="Steven T. Seagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="6631" end="6640" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970428" start="6645" end="6658" title="Warren Pleece" label="Warren Pleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q285938" start="6758" end="6769" title="Matt Wagner" label="Matt Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615312" start="6774" end="6790" title="Steven T. Seagle" label="Steven T. Seagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q599530" start="6804" end="6813" title="Guy Davis (comics)" label="Guy Davis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980961" wikidata="Q20531202" url="?curid=980961" title="Bodom">
<text>Bodom can refer to:

* Lake Bodom, a lake in Finland
* &quot;Bodom&quot; (film), a 2016 Finnish horror film

== See also ==
* Children of Bodom</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20531202" start="0" end="5" title="Bodom" label="Bodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q826447" start="23" end="33" title="Lake Bodom" label="Lake Bodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q20916085" start="55" end="79" title="Bodom (film)" label="&amp;quot;Bodom&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q171718" start="126" end="143" title="Children of Bodom" label="Children of Bodom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980962" wikidata="Q454957" url="?curid=980962" title="John W. Kern">
<text>John Worth Kern (December 20, 1849 – August 17, 1917) was a Democratic United States Senator from Indiana. While the title was not official, he is considered to be the first Senate majority leader (and in turn, the first Senate Democratic Leader), while serving concurrently as chairman of the Senate Democratic Caucus. He was also the Democratic vice presidential nominee in the 1908 presidential election.

Born in Alto, Indiana, Kern practiced law in Kokomo, Indiana, after graduating from the University of Michigan Law School. He won election to the Indiana Senate before serving as the city solicitor of Indianapolis. After running unsuccessfully for the position of Governor of Indiana, Kern was selected as the vice presidential nominee at the 1908 Democratic National Convention. The Democratic ticket of William Jennings Bryan and Kern was defeated by the Republican ticket of William Howard Taft and James S. Sherman.

Kern won election to the United States Senate in 1910, becoming a progressive ally of President Woodrow Wilson. He was elected Chairman of the Senate Democratic Caucus and helped pass several major pieces of legislation, including the Clayton Antitrust Act, the Revenue Act of 1913, and the Federal Reserve Act. He also introduced the Kern Resolution, which led to the investigation of conditions in coal mines, and supported passage of the Seventeenth Amendment. He was defeated for re-election in 1916, losing to Republican Harry Stewart New, and Kern died the following year.

==Early life==
Born in Alto, Indiana, Kern was the eldest of eight boys. He studied at the University of Michigan Law School, and began the practice of law in Kokomo, Indiana.

==Early career==
He served as Kokomo&#x27;s city attorney from 1871 to 1884. Kern was elected to the Indiana Senate in 1893, serving for four years, serving at the same time as assistant U.S. Attorney for Indiana. In that body, he established a reputation as a &quot;pro-union progressive defender of the poor.&quot; He helped pass legislation to protect employees who attempted to form a union, an employer liability law, and a child labor law.

In 1895 he went to Europe to rest from his health problems. When in London, he met Alton B. Parker, with whom he established a lasting friendship. In 1896, he initially was not a fan of the idea of free silver, but when the Democrats adopted it in their 1896 party platform, he stuck with the platform. He also met the Democratic nominee for president that year, William Jennings Bryan, and they became close friends as well.

From 1897 to 1901 he was city solicitor of Indianapolis. He was the unsuccessful Democratic candidate for Governor of Indiana in 1900 and 1904. In 1904, he was asked to run by Parker, who by that time was on his way to becoming the Democratic nominee for president that year, to run for governor to try and boost the party in Indiana. However, it did not work, with both Parker and Kern losing the state in a landslide. After these defeats, he returned to his law practice, traveled to Europe, and spent six months at a sanatorium in Asheville, North Carolina, for reasons of health.

In the 1908 election, he was the Democratic candidate for Vice President, the running mate to Bryan on his third try to the presidency. His friendship with Bryan, as well as the fact that he was from the electorally important region of the Midwest, helped secure his place on the ticket, even over his objection. Thomas R. Marshall was the one who nominated Kern for the second spot on the ticket. In the end, the Bryan/Kern ticket was defeated by William Howard Taft. Kern then sought election to the United States Senate from Indiana (the legislature then being Democratic-controlled), but was outmaneuvered by fellow Democrat Benjamin F. Shively.

==United States Senate==
Indiana&#x27;s other Senate seat came up for election in 1910, and this time, the legislature elected Kern. He entered the Senate in 1911, one of ten new Democrats, most of them progressives. Joining Shively, Kern became a progressive Democrat and an opponent of monopolistic corporate power. He quickly became involved in an effort to shake up his party&#x27;s conservative leadership. In 1912, he helped write the Democratic platform, which had progressive planks in favor of banking and tariff reform and direct popular election of senators.

In the election of 1912, Woodrow Wilson was elected president, Democrats gained a majority in the House, and eleven more progressive Democrats entered the Senate. Kern&#x27;s national stature as a progressive, his skill at conciliation, and his personal popularity resulted in his unanimous election as Chairman of the Democratic Caucus and &quot;de facto&quot; majority leader. He worked closely with Wilson and often met with him privately. He kept the peace and promoted unity that helped propel Wilson&#x27;s initiatives through the Senate. They included tariff reform, the nation&#x27;s first income tax (as permitted by the Sixteenth Amendment), the Federal Reserve Act, antitrust laws, and the Federal Trade Commission.

In 1913, Kern was contacted by the labor activist Mary Harris Jones (&quot;Mother Jones&quot;), who had been imprisoned by a military court in West Virginia during the Paint Creek–Cabin Creek strike of 1912. In response, Kern introduced the Kern Resolution, adopted by the Senate on May 27. The resolution led to the Senate Committee on Education and Labor investigation into conditions in West Virginia coal mines. Congress almost immediately authorized two similar investigations: into conditions in copper mining in Michigan and coal mining in Colorado.

Kern advocated direct popular election of senators and helped enact the Seventeenth Amendment to establish it in 1913. However, when Kern sought re-election in 1916 under the new system, he was defeated by the Republican Harry S. New and narrowly lost the popular vote (47.8% to 46.1%).

==Retirement and death==
At Bryan&#x27;s urging, Wilson considered Kern for appointment to various offices, but Kern was in poor health and unable to serve. He died on August 17, 1917, in Asheville, five months after leaving the Senate. He was originally interred at his summer home near Hollins, Virginia, and re-interred in Crown Hill Cemetery in Indianapolis twelve years later. He was survived by his wife Araminta C. Kern, who died at age 85 in 1951, and his son John W. Kern Jr., a future judge and mayor of Indianapolis.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==


|-
|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q454957" start="0" end="15" title="John W. Kern" label="John Worth Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="60" end="70" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="71" end="92" title="United States Senator" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="98" end="105" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="174" end="196" title="Party leaders of the United States Senate" label="Senate majority leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117832" start="294" end="318" title="Senate Democratic Caucus" label="Senate Democratic Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q72835" start="380" end="406" title="1908 United States presidential election" label="1908 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736766" start="417" end="430" title="Alto, Indiana" label="Alto, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q913209" start="454" end="469" title="Kokomo, Indiana" label="Kokomo, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q911830" start="497" end="530" title="University of Michigan Law School" label="University of Michigan Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408760" start="555" end="569" title="Indiana Senate" label="Indiana Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="610" end="622" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147601" start="673" end="692" title="Governor of Indiana" label="Governor of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558844" start="752" end="787" title="1908 Democratic National Convention" label="1908 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="814" end="836" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="866" end="876" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="887" end="906" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q310831" start="911" end="927" title="James S. Sherman" label="James S. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="996" end="1007" title="progressivism in the United States" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="1026" end="1040" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q972653" start="1165" end="1186" title="Clayton Antitrust Act" label="Clayton Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317966" start="1192" end="1211" title="Revenue Act of 1913" label="Revenue Act of 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982567" start="1221" end="1240" title="Federal Reserve Act" label="Federal Reserve Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394143" start="1265" end="1280" title="Kern Resolution" label="Kern Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="1371" end="1392" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586757" start="1456" end="1473" title="Harry Stewart New" label="Harry Stewart New"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736766" start="1533" end="1546" title="Alto, Indiana" label="Alto, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q911830" start="1601" end="1634" title="University of Michigan Law School" label="University of Michigan Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q913209" start="1669" end="1684" title="Kokomo, Indiana" label="Kokomo, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408760" start="1788" end="1802" title="Indiana Senate" label="Indiana Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="1874" end="1887" title="United States Attorney" label="U.S. Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2153" end="2159" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2202" end="2208" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q443866" start="2217" end="2232" title="Alton B. Parker" label="Alton B. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="2497" end="2519" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="2604" end="2616" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147601" start="2667" end="2686" title="Governor of Indiana" label="Governor of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q42917081" start="2690" end="2694" title="1900 Indiana gubernatorial election" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q42917084" start="2699" end="2703" title="1904 Indiana gubernatorial election" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="3095" end="3120" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357023" start="3149" end="3166" title="1908 United States elections" label="the 1908 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="3204" end="3218" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="3386" end="3393" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q299001" start="3459" end="3477" title="Thomas R. Marshall" label="Thomas R. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="3594" end="3613" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3648" end="3668" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q817473" start="3775" end="3794" title="Benjamin F. Shively" label="Benjamin F. Shively"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="4000" end="4012" title="Progressive Era" label="progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="4312" end="4318" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357028" start="4371" end="4391" title="1912 United States elections" label="the election of 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="4393" end="4407" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4466" end="4471" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117832" start="4671" end="4704" title="Democratic Caucus of the United States Senate" label="Chairman of the Democratic Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="4998" end="5017" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982567" start="5024" end="5043" title="Federal Reserve Act" label="Federal Reserve Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="5069" end="5093" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q107082" start="5146" end="5163" title="Mary Harris Jones" label="Mary Harris Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="5239" end="5252" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092301" start="5264" end="5302" title="Paint Creek–Cabin Creek strike of 1912" label="Paint Creek–Cabin Creek strike of 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394143" start="5337" end="5352" title="Kern Resolution" label="Kern Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="5500" end="5504" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="5598" end="5604" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="5615" end="5623" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="5643" end="5651" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="5726" end="5747" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Seventeenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5864" end="5874" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586757" start="5875" end="5887" title="Harry Stewart New" label="Harry S. New"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375071" start="6230" end="6247" title="Hollins, Virginia" label="Hollins, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189371" start="6268" end="6287" title="Crown Hill Cemetery" label="Crown Hill Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16856210" start="6410" end="6426" title="John W. Kern Jr." label="John W. Kern Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="6456" end="6468" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980964" wikidata="Q6242961" url="?curid=980964" title="John Kern">
<text>John Kern may refer to:
*John Kern (Iowa politician) (1833–1889), member of the Iowa Senate
*John W. Kern (1849–1917), American Democratic politician from Indiana
*John W. Kern Jr. (1900–1971), mayor of the city of Indianapolis, Indiana
*John W. Kern III (1928–2018), judge of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals
*John Kern (chef), Dutch Michelin starred chef of &quot;De Hooge Heerlijkheid&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q112682969" start="25" end="52" title="John Kern (Iowa politician)" label="John Kern (Iowa politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q454957" start="93" end="105" title="John W. Kern" label="John W. Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q16856210" start="164" end="180" title="John W. Kern Jr." label="John W. Kern Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q33671520" start="238" end="254" title="John W. Kern III" label="John W. Kern III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="320" end="336" title="John Kern (chef)" label="John Kern (chef)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244447" start="375" end="396" title="De Hooge Heerlijkheid" label="De Hooge Heerlijkheid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980971" wikidata="Q387767" url="?curid=980971" title="Schismogenesis">
<text>Schismogenesis is a term in anthropology that describes the formation of social divisions and differentiation. Literally meaning &quot;creation of division&quot;, the term derives from the Greek words σχίσμα &quot;skhisma&quot; &quot;cleft&quot; (borrowed into English as schism, &quot;division into opposing factions&quot;), and γένεσις &quot;genesis&quot; &quot;generation, creation&quot; (deriving in turn from &quot;gignesthai&quot; &quot;be born or produced, creation, a coming into being&quot;). The term was introduced by anthropologist Gregory Bateson and has been applied to various fields.

==Concepts==
===In anthropology===
Gregory Bateson developed the concept of schismogenesis in the 1930s in reference to certain forms of social behavior between groups of the Iatmul people of the Sepik River in New Guinea. Bateson first used the term in a publication in 1935, but elaborated on the concept in his classic 1936 ethnography &quot;Naven: A Survey of the Problems suggested by a Composite Picture of the Culture of a New Guinea Tribe drawn from Three Points of View&quot; (reissued with a new epilogue in 1958). The word &quot;naven&quot; refers to an honorific ceremony among the Iatmul whereby certain categories of kin celebrate first-time cultural achievements. In a schematic summary, Bateson focused on how groups of women and groups of men (especially the honorees&#x27; mothers&#x27; brothers) seemingly inverted their everyday, gendered-norms for dress, behavior, and emotional expression. For the most part, these groups of people belonged to different patrilineages who not only did not regularly renew their marriage alliances, but also interacted through the mode he called schismogenesis. Men and women, too, interacted in this mode. And thus the naven ritual served to correct schismogenesis, enabling the society to endure.

In his 1936 book &quot;Naven&quot;, Bateson defined schismogenesis as &quot;a process of differentiation in the norms of individual behaviour resulting from cumulative interaction between individuals&quot; (p. 175). He continued:


Bateson understood the symmetrical form of schismogenic behavior among Iatmul men – somewhat analogously to Émile Durkheim&#x27;s concepts of mechanical and organic solidarity (see functionalism) – as a competitive relationship between categorical equals (e.g., rivalry). Thus one man, or a group of men, boast, and another man/group must offer an equal or better boast, prompting the first group to respond accordingly, and so forth. Complementary schismogenesis among the Iatmul was observed by Bateson between mainly men and women, or between categorical unequals (e.g., dominance and submission). Men would act dominant, leading women to act submissive, to which men responded with more dominance, and so forth. In both types of schismogenesis, the everyday emotional norms or ethos of Iatmul men and women prevented a halt to schismogenesis. The crux of the matter for Bateson was that, left unchecked, either form of schismogenesis would cause Iatmul society simply to break apart. Thus some social or cultural mechanism was needed by society to maintain social integration. That mechanism among the Iatmul was the naven rite. Bateson&#x27;s specific contribution was to suggest that certain concrete ritual behaviors either inhibited or stimulated the schismogenic relationship in its various forms.

In &quot;The Dawn of Everything&quot; (2021), anthropologist David Graeber and archaeologist David Wengrow suggest that schismogenesis can describe differences between societies, as groups define themselves against their neighbors. Some examples of this would be Ancient Athens and Sparta, and the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast and the indigenous peoples of California.

===In natural resource management===
Bateson&#x27;s treatment of conflict escalation has been used to explain how conflicts arise over natural resources, including human-predator conflicts in Norway and also for conflicts among stakeholder groups in shared fisheries. In the latter case, Harrison and Loring compare conflict schismogenesis to the Tragedy of the Commons, arguing that it is a similar kind of escalation of behavior also caused by the failure of social institutions to ensure equity in fisheries-management outcomes.

===In music===
Steven Feld (1994, p. 265-271), apparently in response to R. Murray Schafer&#x27;s &quot;schizophonia&quot; and borrowing the term from Bateson, employs &quot;schismogenesis&quot; to name the recombination and recontextualization of sounds split from their sources.

=== In modern warfare and politics ===
There is documented usage of schismogenesis techniques by the U.S. Office of Strategic Services (OSS, an institutional precursor to the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)), against Japanese-held territories in the Pacific during World War II. U.S. military academics have identified how China and Russia have pursued social-media strategies of schismogenesis against the U.S. and other Western liberal democracies in an attempt to polarize civil society across the political spectrum to damage policy-making processes and to weaken state/military power. Similarly, scholars in Ukraine have documented how Russia has relied on a strategy of schismogenesis to undermine Ukrainian identity and values as a way of promoting pro-Russian territories that can be used against Kyiv, to include forming their own militias which operate alongside Russian special operation forces.

=== In religion ===
The concept of schismogenesis has relevance to the numerous schisms which have occurred within religious thought and practice.

==Types==

Bateson, in &quot;Steps to an Ecology of Mind&quot; describes the two forms of schismogenesis and proposes that both forms are self-destructive to the parties involved. He goes on to suggest that researchers look into methods that one or both parties may employ to stop a schismogenesis before it reaches its destructive stage.

===Complementary schismogenesis===

The first type of schismogenesis is best characterized by a class struggle, but is defined more broadly to include a range of other possible social phenomena. Given two groups of people, the interaction between them is such that a behavior &quot;X&quot; from one side elicits a behavior &quot;Y&quot; from the other side, The two behaviors complement one another, exemplified in the dominant-submissive behaviors of a class struggle. Furthermore, the behaviors may exaggerate one another, leading to a severe rift and possible conflict. Conflict can be reduced by narrowing information asymmetries between the two groups.

===Symmetrical schismogenesis===

The second type of schismogenesis is best shown by an arms race. The behaviors of the parties involved elicit similar or symmetrical behaviors from the other parties. In the case of the United States and the Soviet Union, each party continually sought to amass more nuclear weapons than the other party, a clearly fruitless but seemingly necessary endeavor on both sides.

A form of symmetrical schismogenesis exists in common sporting events, where the rules are the same for both teams.

==Interpersonal communication==
In the field of communication, complementary schismogenesis is a force that can take effect in a conversation where people have different conversational styles, &quot;creating a split in a mutually aggravating way&quot;. The effect causes two well-meaning individuals having a conversation to ramp up different styles, resulting in a disagreement that does not stem from actual difference of opinion. For example, if one person&#x27;s conversational style favoured louder voices, while the other favoured softer speech, the first person might increase the loudness in their voice while the other spoke softer and softer, each trying to lead the conversation towards their style&#x27;s conception of normal talking.
==Systems of holding back==
Systems of holding back are also a form of schismogenesis. They are defined as &quot;mutually aggregating spirals which lead people to hold back contributions they could make because others hold back contributions they could make.&quot;

In systems intelligence literature, it is held that “human interaction has a tendency to slide into such systems of holding back unless conscious effort is launched to counter this tendency.” For example, although most managers would want to give support to their team and most team members would like to receive such support many times support does not result. This is because both parties might feel that the other party is not giving enough and thus they will themselves hold back what they in the best case could give. It has been suggested that systems of holding back are “the single most important key to life-decreasing, reciprocity-trivializing and vitality-downgrading mechanisms in human life.”

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q387767" start="0" end="14" title="Schismogenesis" label="Schismogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="28" end="40" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="189" end="194" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="272" end="278" title="Schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q314252" start="544" end="559" title="Gregory Bateson" label="Gregory Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147375" start="776" end="789" title="Iatmul people" label="Iatmul people"/>
<link wikidata="Q848308" start="797" end="808" title="Sepik River" label="Sepik River"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="812" end="822" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="928" end="939" title="ethnography" label="ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="1577" end="1589" title="patrilineage" label="patrilineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="2195" end="2209" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804508" start="2229" end="2262" title="mechanical and organic solidarity" label="mechanical and organic solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="2268" end="2281" title="functionalism (sociology)" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484318" start="2868" end="2873" title="ethos" label="ethos"/>
<link wikidata="Q108922801" start="3404" end="3426" title="The Dawn of Everything" label="The Dawn of Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174579" start="3456" end="3469" title="David Graeber" label="David Graeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q64594136" start="3488" end="3501" title="David Wengrow" label="David Wengrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064853" start="3658" end="3672" title="Ancient Athens" label="Ancient Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="3677" end="3683" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q210561" start="3693" end="3742" title="indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast" label="indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="3751" end="3783" title="indigenous peoples of California" label="indigenous peoples of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q334622" start="4133" end="4155" title="Tragedy of the Commons" label="Tragedy of the Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="4247" end="4266" title="social institutions" label="social institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614691" start="4334" end="4345" title="Steven Feld" label="Steven Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386495" start="4392" end="4409" title="R. Murray Schafer" label="R. Murray Schafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431601" start="4423" end="4435" title="schizophonia" label="schizophonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="4707" end="4735" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="4776" end="4803" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4868" end="4880" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4926" end="4931" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4936" end="4942" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="4956" end="4968" title="social-media" label="social-media"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="5033" end="5052" title="liberal democracies" label="liberal democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="5079" end="5092" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="5216" end="5223" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q95736217" start="5307" end="5336" title="Culture of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian identity and values"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029471" start="5433" end="5451" title="Separatist forces of the war in Donbass" label="their own militias"/>
<link wikidata="Q277188" start="5484" end="5508" title="spetsnaz" label="special operation forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="5626" end="5635" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970551" start="5688" end="5715" title="Steps to an Ecology of Mind" label="Steps to an Ecology of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="6095" end="6109" title="class struggle" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q431965" start="6609" end="6632" title="information asymmetries" label="information asymmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="6746" end="6755" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6878" end="6891" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6900" end="6912" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="7230" end="7243" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q52943" start="7311" end="7323" title="conversation" label="conversation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980977" wikidata="Q496227" url="?curid=980977" title="The Secret of My Success (1987 film)">
<text>The Secret of My Success (sometimes stylized as &quot;The Secret of My Succe$s&quot;) is a 1987 American comedy film produced and directed by Herbert Ross and starring Michael J. Fox and Helen Slater. The screenplay was written by A.J. Carothers, Jim Cash and Jack Epps Jr. from a story written by Carothers. It was filmed on location in Manhattan.

==Plot==
Brantley Foster is a recent graduate of Kansas State University who moves to New York City, where he has accepted an entry-level job as a financier. Upon arriving, he discovers that the company for which he is supposed to work has been taken over by a rival corporation. As a result, Brantley is laid off before even starting work.

After several interviews for other jobs, he is unsuccessful due to over- or underqualification, or having no experience. Brantley ends up working in the mailroom of the Pemrose Corporation, directed by his &quot;uncle&quot; Howard Prescott, a distant relative he&#x27;s never met. Pemrose was founded by Howard&#x27;s father-in-law. Howard achieved the presidency by marrying his boss&#x27;s daughter, Vera Pemrose.

After inspecting company reports, Brantley realizes that Howard and most of his fellow &quot;suits&quot; (executives) are making pointless or damaging decisions. He notices an empty office in the building due to one of Howard&#x27;s frequent firings. Using his access to the mailroom and his understanding of the company, he creates and assumes the identity of Carlton Whitfield, a new executive.

While handling two jobs (switching between casual apparel and business suits in the elevator), Brantley sparks romantic interest from Christy Wills, a fellow financial wizard who recently graduated from Harvard. He meets Vera by driving her home in a company limo at his employer&#x27;s request. She persuades him to stay for a swim and seduces him.

Seeing Howard arrive, Brantley and Vera realize that she is his aunt by marriage. She had seduced him out of revenge against her husband for having an affair with a woman at the office. Brantley changes as fast as he can and narrowly escapes the mansion without being spotted by Howard.

Howard, unbeknownst to Brantley, is having an affair with Christy. When Howard asks her to spy on Carlton Whitfield, whom he suspects is a corporate spy for Donald Davenport, she falls in love with &quot;Whitfield&quot;, not knowing he is actually Brantley. The Pemrose Corporation is preparing for its impending hostile takeover. If Davenport Corporation absorbs Pemrose in this merger, all workers will get fired, but Howard and his aide Art Thomas will retain their jobs as a favor for cutting money from areas to ease the takeover.

Howard believes the company should cut every area, but that would ruin the company and make Davenport begin his hostile takeover. Brantley pitches the idea with Christy to expand the business to prevent the takeover. Later, at a corporate party at Howard and Vera&#x27;s home, Vera introduces Brantley to three of New York&#x27;s top financiers to whom he discusses his ideas about the company.

Brantley&#x27;s double identity is discovered when he, Christy, Vera and Howard end up in the same bedroom after the party. Brantley and Christy end their blossoming relationship. He gets fired from his job as Whitfield, as does Christy for refusing to continue her affair with Howard. Vera is divorcing Howard, since she found out about his affair with Christy and his plan to propose to her.

While both Christy and Brantley are moving out of their offices, they end up in the same elevator and reconcile, conceiving a revenge plan together with Vera. They raise enough cash, bonds, and stocks to take control of the Pemrose Corporation and, with the help of the financiers from the party, proceed with a hostile takeover bid of Davenport&#x27;s corporation.

Vera, already hating Howard for his inept business practices which were driving her father&#x27;s empire into the ground, tells the board about his affair with Christy. She promptly replaces him with Brantley, with Jean (Carlton&#x27;s secretary), Christy and Melrose (Brantley&#x27;s mailroom colleague) at his side to prevent the takeover and keep everyone&#x27;s jobs safe. While security guards escort Howard and Art from the Pemrose Building, Brantley and Christy start planning their future together, personal as well as professional.

==Cast==
==Soundtrack==

The soundtrack was released on LP and cassette tape on April 10, 1987. Seven of the 10 tracks were produced, and either written or co-written, by David Foster, who also scored the film and has three tracks of his own on the album.

Not all of the songs featured in the film are included on the soundtrack, or, at least not in the same version. The film version of the song &quot;The Secret of My Success&quot; is slightly different, and also features a mini-instrumental version. The film version of &quot;I Burn for You&quot; does not feature vocals, whereas the soundtrack version does. The &quot;Restless Heart&quot; track from the film has a different title (&quot;Something I Gotta Do&quot;), and different lyrics than the soundtrack version.

The popular songs &quot;Walking on Sunshine&quot; by Katrina &amp; The Waves and &quot;Oh Yeah&quot; by Yello are heard in the film but do not appear on the soundtrack.

The soundtrack peaked at No. 131 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200.

The theme from the picture &quot;The Secret of My Success&quot;, performed by Night Ranger, was one of the songs that competed for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song in 1988. The winner was &quot;(I&#x27;ve Had) The Time of My Life&quot;, the theme from &quot;Dirty Dancing&quot;, performed by Bill Medley and Jennifer Warnes.

;Track listing
# &quot;The Secret of My Success&quot; (performed by Night Ranger)
# &quot;Sometimes the Good Guys Finish First&quot; (performed by Pat Benatar)
# &quot;I Burn for You&quot; (performed by Danny Peck and Nancy Shanks)
# &quot;Riskin&#x27; a Romance&quot; (performed by Bananarama)
# &quot;Gazebo&quot; (performed by David Foster)
# &quot;The Price of Love&quot; (performed by Roger Daltrey)
# &quot;Water Fountain&quot; (performed by David Foster)
# &quot;Don&#x27;t Ask the Reason Why&quot; (performed by Restless Heart)
# &quot;3 Themes&quot; (performed by David Foster)
# &quot;Heaven and the Heartaches&quot; (performed by Taxxi)

==Reception==
===Critical response===
The film received a mixed response from critics.
Roger Ebert in the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; wrote, &quot;&quot;The Secret of My Success&quot; seems trapped in some kind of time warp, as if the screenplay had been in a drawer since the 1950s and nobody bothered to update it.&quot; He concluded &quot;Fox provides a fairly desperate center for the film. It could not have been much fun for him to follow the movie&#x27;s arbitrary shifts of mood, from sitcom to slapstick, from sex farce to boardroom brawls.&quot;

However, Vincent Canby, writing in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, felt it was &quot;close to inspired when the ambitious Brantley finds himself leading two lives&quot;, although he noted that &quot;Hanging over &quot;The Secret of My Success&quot; is the long shadow of Frank Loesser&#x27;s classic musical &quot;How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying&quot;.&quot;

 Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;B+&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

===Box office===
The film opened on April 10, 1987, and debuted at number one at the box office, taking $7.8 million in its opening weekend. It stayed at No. 1 for five weeks, and was in the top ten films for two months.

The film grossed $66.995 million in the US, becoming the 7th highest-grossing film in the United States for the year 1987, and outgrossing arguably better known films such as &quot;RoboCop&quot;, &quot;Predator&quot;, &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; and &quot;Dirty Dancing&quot;. The film went on to gross an additional $44 million worldwide, giving it a total of $111 million. Additionally, the film made $29.856 million through video rentals.

== Musical ==
In 2020, a musical based on the film was mid-run for its world premiere and pre-Broadway tryout at the Paramount Theatre in March 2020 with Sydney Morton (Christy Lockhart) and Billy Harrigan Tighe (Brantley Foster/Carlton Whitfield) as leads and Greenberg directing when production was shut down due to the coronavirus pandemic. It had been scheduled to run from February 21 – March 29, and the final performance was March 12, as Illinois governor J. B. Pritzker shut down all performance venues starting March 13.

==See also==
*&quot;Raju Ban Gaya Gentleman&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="105" end="116" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q711415" start="142" end="154" title="Herbert Ross" label="Herbert Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="168" end="182" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q241879" start="187" end="199" title="Helen Slater" label="Helen Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652092" start="231" end="245" title="AJ Carothers" label="A.J. Carothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q967077" start="247" end="255" title="Jim Cash" label="Jim Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805577" start="260" end="273" title="Jack Epps Jr." label="Jack Epps Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="338" end="347" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="399" end="422" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="436" end="449" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380817" start="476" end="491" title="entry-level job" label="entry-level job"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462531" start="655" end="663" title="Layoff" label="laid off"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1710" end="1717" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="2467" end="2475" title="takeover" label="takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q77112" start="4554" end="4566" title="David Foster" label="David Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443769" start="5007" end="5021" title="Restless Heart" label="Restless Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553905" start="5181" end="5200" title="Walking on Sunshine (Katrina and the Waves song)" label="Walking on Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q934582" start="5210" end="5233" title="Katrina &amp;amp; The Waves" label="Katrina &amp;amp; The Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752329" start="5244" end="5251" title="Oh Yeah (Yello song)" label="Oh Yeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q639301" start="5261" end="5266" title="Yello" label="Yello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763146" start="5428" end="5452" title="The Secret of My Success (song)" label="The Secret of My Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889163" start="5473" end="5485" title="Night Ranger" label="Night Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="5530" end="5548" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q24506" start="5602" end="5637" title="(I&amp;#x27;ve Had) The Time of My Life" label="(I&amp;#x27;ve Had) The Time of My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q253978" start="5666" end="5679" title="Dirty Dancing" label="Dirty Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q862315" start="5700" end="5711" title="Bill Medley" label="Bill Medley"/>
<link wikidata="Q238410" start="5716" end="5731" title="Jennifer Warnes" label="Jennifer Warnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763146" start="5757" end="5781" title="The Secret of My Success (song)" label="The Secret of My Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889163" start="5802" end="5814" title="Night Ranger" label="Night Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q235252" start="5881" end="5892" title="Pat Benatar" label="Pat Benatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962982" start="5952" end="5964" title="Nancy Shanks" label="Nancy Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999836" start="5974" end="5996" title="True Confessions (album)" label="Riskin&amp;#x27; a Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q725926" start="6017" end="6027" title="Bananarama" label="Bananarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q77112" start="6064" end="6076" title="David Foster" label="David Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028992" start="6086" end="6103" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Wait to See the Movie" label="The Price of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q311672" start="6124" end="6137" title="Roger Daltrey" label="Roger Daltrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q77112" start="6182" end="6194" title="David Foster" label="David Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443769" start="6254" end="6268" title="Restless Heart" label="Restless Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q77112" start="6307" end="6319" title="David Foster" label="David Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689705" start="6375" end="6380" title="Taxxi" label="Taxxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="6470" end="6481" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="6495" end="6512" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="6951" end="6964" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6983" end="7001" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q966018" start="7213" end="7226" title="Frank Loesser" label="Frank Loesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631702" start="7256" end="7304" title="How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying (musical)" label="How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying"/>
<link wikidata="Q754013" start="7749" end="7766" title="1987 in film" label="for the year 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="7826" end="7833" title="RoboCop (1987 film)" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q200804" start="7847" end="7855" title="Predator (film)" label="Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q462447" start="7869" end="7882" title="Lethal Weapon" label="Lethal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q253978" start="7899" end="7912" title="Dirty Dancing" label="Dirty Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756711" start="8070" end="8083" title="Video rental shop" label="video rentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q107419102" start="8111" end="8136" title="The Secret of My Success (musical)" label="musical based on the film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456804" start="8176" end="8195" title="Tryout (theatre)" label="pre-Broadway tryout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135366" start="8203" end="8220" title="Paramount Theatre (Aurora, Illinois)" label="Paramount Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q106939476" start="8240" end="8253" title="Sydney Morton" label="Sydney Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q91911563" start="8408" end="8428" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the performing arts" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103950" start="8549" end="8563" title="J. B. Pritzker" label="J. B. Pritzker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248795" start="8637" end="8660" title="Raju Ban Gaya Gentleman" label="Raju Ban Gaya Gentleman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980988" wikidata="Q6948386" url="?curid=980988" title="Myrna Driedger">
<text>Myrna Driedger (&#x27;&#x27;) (born 1952) is a former politician in Manitoba, Canada. She was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba from 1998 to 2023, and Speaker of the Legislative Assembly from 2016 to 2023.

==Personal life==
She was born in Benito, Manitoba, and was educated at Benito Collegiate, at the Winnipeg General Hospital School of Nursing, and at Red River Community College.

Before entering provincial politics, Driedger worked as a nurse for 23 years. She was CEO of Child Find Manitoba, and was co-chair of the province&#x27;s Abuse Prevention Services Adult Advisory Committee. She has also participated in other groups that provide services to poor and vulnerable children. At one stage, she was Manitoba President of the Canadian Association of Neurological and Neurosurgical Nurses.

She is married to Helmut Driedger.

==Politics==
Driedger was elected to the provincial legislature in a 1998 by-election, in the upscale west Winnipeg riding of Charleswood. A Progressive Conservative, Driedger defeated Liberal candidate Alan McKenzie by 2767 votes to 1524. She was subsequently named legislative assistant to the Minister of Family Services and the Minister of Health.

The Progressive Conservative government of Gary Filmon was defeated in the 1999 provincial election, although Driedger was re-elected in Charleswood by an increased margin. She was again re-elected in the 2003 election, defeating her leading opponent by over one thousand votes. Although the governing New Democratic Party made significant inroads in south-end Winnipeg in 2003, they were unable to do better than a third-place finish in Driedger&#x27;s riding, due in part to the popularity of Manitoba Liberal Party candidate Rick Ross.

Driedger has participated in a panel seeking input on possible reforms to the province&#x27;s &quot;Young Offenders Act&quot;, and has also participated in programs for Indigenous children. In 2001, she visited France and Switzerland on a fact-finding mission concerning the health-care policies of these countries. In 2003, she advocated the establishment of a Manitoba Heart Institute to reduce waitlist times. She supports Medicare, but has also called for the introduction of further private health services to the province.

She campaigned for Conservative Party of Canada candidate Steven Fletcher in the federal election of 2004.

During her time in Opposition, Driedger was able to get five private members’ bills passed, including a date rape prevention bill; mandatory accreditation of all mammography machines; establishment of April as Sexual Assault Awareness Month; an act to celebrate the centennial of (most) Manitoba women getting the vote; and the founding of the Nellie McClung Foundation.

Driedger has been involved with the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians (CWP) and Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) organizations for a number of years, eventually becoming the first Manitoban to chair CWP.

She was re-elected in the 2007, 2011, 2016 and 2019 provincial elections. In January 2023, she announced her retirement at the end of the legislature.

== Honours and accolades ==
In 2023, she received the Commonwealth Parliamentarian Lifetime Achievement Award by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.

Driedger was appointed as a member of the Order of Manitoba in 2024.

==References==
==External links==
* http://www.myrnadriedger.com/
*Candidacy announcement for the 2016 Manitoba general election</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6948386" start="0" end="14" title="Myrna Driedger" label="Myrna Driedger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948386" start="16" end="22" title="Myrna Driedger" label="&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="68" end="76" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517320" start="110" end="142" title="Legislative Assembly of Manitoba" label="Legislative Assembly of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574281" start="166" end="201" title="Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba" label="Speaker of the Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848070" start="256" end="272" title="Benito, Manitoba" label="Benito, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025751" start="320" end="345" title="Winnipeg General Hospital" label="Winnipeg General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q109002196" start="372" end="399" title="Red River Community College" label="Red River Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="495" end="514" title="Child Find Manitoba" label="Child Find Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="556" end="606" title="Abuse Prevention Services Adult Advisory Committee" label="Abuse Prevention Services Adult Advisory Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="960" end="968" title="Winnipeg, Manitoba" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960784" start="979" end="990" title="Charleswood (electoral district)" label="Charleswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366633" start="994" end="1018" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366499" start="1038" end="1045" title="Manitoba Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48774103" start="1149" end="1176" title="Minister of Family Services (Manitoba)" label="Minister of Family Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750014" start="1185" end="1203" title="Manitoba Minister of Health" label="Minister of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494847" start="1249" end="1260" title="Gary Filmon" label="Gary Filmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586319" start="1281" end="1305" title="1999 Manitoba general election" label="1999 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586320" start="1411" end="1424" title="2003 Manitoba general election" label="2003 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q774542" start="1508" end="1528" title="New Democratic Party of Manitoba" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366499" start="1701" end="1723" title="Manitoba Liberal Party" label="Manitoba Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1734" end="1743" title="Rick Ross (Manitoba politician)" label="Rick Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060061" start="1846" end="1865" title="Young Offenders Act" label="Young Offenders Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1957" end="1963" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1968" end="1979" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806631" start="2172" end="2180" title="Medicare (Canada)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="2295" end="2323" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499223" start="2334" end="2349" title="Steven Fletcher (politician)" label="Steven Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637432" start="2357" end="2381" title="2004 Canadian federal election" label="federal election of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="2445" end="2467" title="Private member&amp;#x27;s bill" label="private members’ bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165309" start="2488" end="2497" title="date rape" label="date rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q324634" start="2546" end="2557" title="mammography" label="mammography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458651" start="2594" end="2624" title="Sexual Assault Awareness Month" label="Sexual Assault Awareness Month"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2728" end="2753" title="Nellie McClung Foundation" label="Nellie McClung Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2792" end="2827" title="Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians" label="Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153823" start="2838" end="2876" title="Commonwealth Parliamentary Association" label="Commonwealth Parliamentary Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586321" start="3001" end="3005" title="2007 Manitoba general election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586322" start="3007" end="3011" title="2011 Manitoba general election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637668" start="3013" end="3017" title="2016 Manitoba general election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233493" start="3022" end="3047" title="2019 Manitoba general election" label="2019 provincial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153823" start="3244" end="3282" title="Commonwealth Parliamentary Association" label="Commonwealth Parliamentary Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306256" start="3327" end="3344" title="Order of Manitoba" label="Order of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637668" start="3453" end="3483" title="2016 Manitoba general election" label="2016 Manitoba general election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980992" wikidata="Q1015788" url="?curid=980992" title="Yixing">
<text>Yixing () is a county-level city administered under the prefecture-level city of Wuxi in southern Jiangsu province, China, and is part of the Yangtze River Delta. The city is known for its traditional Yixing clay ware tea pots. It is a pene-exclave with Changzhou. The city spans an area of , and has a registered hukou population of about 1,075,800 as of 2020.

==History==

During the Xia dynasty and Shang dynasty, the area fell under the jurisdiction of Yangzhou and was known as Jingxi (). The area was subsequently known as Jingyi () during the Zhou dynasty.

The area was first organized as a county in 221 BCE, during the Qin dynasty, under the name of Yangxian County (). Between 303 and 310 CE, local general Zhou Qi, a son of General Zhou Chu, suppressed three rebellions. Yangxian County was then renamed Yixing Commandery (), in honor of Zhou Qi. Yixing Commandery remained under the jurisdiction of Yangzhou. In 589 CE, under the Sui dynasty, Yixing was re-designated from a commandery back to a county, and was placed under the jurisdiction of Changzhou.

In 976 CE, Yixing County () was renamed to the similar sounding Yixing County (), because of the naming taboo of Emperor Taizong of Song, who went by the personal name of Zhao Guangyi. The renaming perhaps to be the allusion of a sentence in &quot;Doctrine of the Mean&quot;: &quot;Righteousness is the accordance of actions ()&quot;. During this time, Yixing County remained under the jurisdiction of Changzhou.

In 1725, under the Qing dynasty, the area was split into two counties: Yixing County (), and Jingxi County ().

In 1912, the Republican government abolished Jingxi County and merged it back into Yixing County.

=== People&#x27;s Republic of China ===
From June 1949 to January 1953, Yixing belonged to . From January 1953 to February 1956, Yixing belonged to . Following this, Yixing fell under the jurisdiction of until March 1983. Beginning in March 1983, Yixing County was placed under the jurisdiction of the prefecture-level city of Wuxi, which it remains part of today. In January 1988, Yixing County was abolished, and Yixing was reorganized as a county-level city, which it remains today.

== Geography ==

Yixing&#x27;s area spans from 31°07′ to 31°37′ north, and from 119°31′ to 120°03′ east. The city is located in the far south of Jiangsu province, lying in between the cities of Shanghai, Nanjing, and Hangzhou. The city is border to the east by Lake Tai, by Changxing County in neighboring Zhejiang province to the southeast, the county-level city of Guangde in neighboring Anhui province to the southwest, the county-level city of Liyang in Changzhou to the west, Jintan District in Changzhou to the northwest, and Wujin District in Changzhou to the north. To its north, situated between Yixing and Wujin District, lies Ge Lake. Yixing&#x27;s urban area is also rich in lakes, with the lake formation, comprising , , and , lying in Yixing&#x27;s urban core.

Yixing&#x27;s terrain is higher in the south, and lower in the north. The city&#x27;s highest point is Huangta Peak (), which rises above sea level.

=== Environment ===
In 2020, the city&#x27;s government recorded an average PM2.5 level of 30.4 micrograms per cubic meter, an 18.9% improvement from 2019. 82.5% of days in Yixing during 2020 had good air quality, as judged per the government.

===Climate===

==Administrative divisions==
Yixing is divided into 5 subdistricts, 14 towns, and 2 other township-level divisions. These township-level divisions are then further divided into 102 residential communities and 207 administrative villages. The city&#x27;s government is seated in .

===Subdistricts===
Yixing administers the following 5 subdistricts:
* ()
* ()

===Towns===
Yixing administers the following 14 towns:
* Dapu ()
* ()
* Gaocheng ()
* ()
* ()
* Xinjian ()
* ()
* Zhoutie ()
=== Other township-level divisions ===
Yixing administers the following 2 other township-level divisions:
* Huanke Park ()
* Yixing Economic Development Zone ()

== Demographics ==

As of 2020, the city government estimates Yixing&#x27;s registered hukou population to be 1,075,800 people. Of this, 529,300 residents are male, and 546,500 are female. The city saw 7,038 births in 2020, giving it a birth rate of 6.53‰ (per thousand), and 9,694 deaths, giving it a death rate of 8.99‰. This gave Yixing a rate of natural increase of -2.46‰ in 2020.

The city is home to 42 different ethnic minorities, who comprise a population of about 15,000 (1.39% of Yixing&#x27;s total population).

==Economy==

As of 2020, Yixing has a gross domestic product (GDP) of 183.221 billion renminbi (RMB). This represented a 3% increase from the previous year. The city&#x27;s per capita disposable income stands as 50,987 RMB, a 5.1% increase from the previous year. This figure stands at 61,090 RMB for urban residents, and 32,430 RMB for rural residents, reflecting a 4.4% and 6.6% increase from the previous year, respectively.

== Transportation ==

The city is served by three railway stations: the Yixing railway station, the , and the . Yixing railway station is located on the Nanjing–Hangzhou high-speed railway, while the latter two are part of the Xinyi–Changxing railway.

In 2020, the Changyi Expressway (), a section of the S39 linking Yixing to Jiangdu District in Yangzhou, was completed. The same year, the Yichang Expressway (), a section of the S14/45 linking Yixing to Changxing County and Hangzhou in neighboring Zhejiang province, was also completed.

==Tourist attractions==
Dongcang Bridge is a historic stone arch bridge in the city.

==Notable people==
*Ding Junhui, professional snooker player
*Jiang Fengzhi, musician erhu artist
*Xu Beihong, painter
*the ancestral home of Chiang Kai-shek
*Ge Mingxiang, 18th century potter

==References==

==External links==
*Yixing Municipal Government website (In Simplified Chinese characters)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1015788" start="0" end="6" title="Yixing" label="Yixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070990" start="15" end="32" title="county-level city" label="county-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q748149" start="56" end="77" title="prefecture-level city" label="prefecture-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q42651" start="81" end="85" title="Wuxi" label="Wuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="98" end="105" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="116" end="121" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195076" start="142" end="161" title="Yangtze Delta" label="Yangtze River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10466474" start="201" end="212" title="Yixing ware" label="Yixing clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="236" end="248" title="pene-exclave" label="pene-exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q57970" start="254" end="263" title="Changzhou" label="Changzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636218" start="314" end="319" title="hukou" label="hukou"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="387" end="398" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="403" end="416" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q57906" start="458" end="466" title="Yangzhou" label="Yangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="551" end="563" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289426" start="600" end="606" title="Counties of China" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="630" end="641" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078924" start="719" end="726" title="Zhou Qi (Jin dynasty)" label="Zhou Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907309" start="745" end="753" title="Zhou Chu" label="Zhou Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="944" end="955" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q517267" start="989" end="999" title="Commandery (China)" label="commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q57970" start="1059" end="1068" title="Changzhou" label="Changzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q871246" start="1168" end="1180" title="naming taboo" label="naming taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7473" start="1184" end="1207" title="Emperor Taizong of Song" label="Emperor Taizong of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q519778" start="1319" end="1339" title="Doctrine of the Mean" label="Doctrine of the Mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1504" end="1516" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="1610" end="1631" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republican government"/>
<link wikidata="Q748149" start="1998" end="2019" title="prefecture-level city" label="prefecture-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q42651" start="2023" end="2027" title="Wuxi" label="Wuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070990" start="2139" end="2156" title="county-level city" label="county-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="2328" end="2335" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="2377" end="2385" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="2387" end="2394" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="2400" end="2408" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q140712" start="2444" end="2452" title="Lake Tai" label="Lake Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062178" start="2457" end="2473" title="Changxing County" label="Changxing County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="2489" end="2497" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070990" start="2529" end="2546" title="county-level city" label="county-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198031" start="2550" end="2557" title="Guangde" label="Guangde"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="2573" end="2578" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365505" start="2631" end="2637" title="Liyang" label="Liyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q57970" start="2641" end="2650" title="Changzhou" label="Changzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q724520" start="2664" end="2679" title="Jintan District" label="Jintan District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197421" start="2715" end="2729" title="Wujin District" label="Wujin District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529425" start="2820" end="2827" title="Ge Lake" label="Ge Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="3185" end="3190" title="PM2.5" label="PM2.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645498" start="3205" end="3215" title="Microgram" label="micrograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25517" start="3220" end="3231" title="Cubic metre" label="cubic meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q986065" start="3423" end="3435" title="Subdistricts of China" label="subdistricts"/>
<link wikidata="Q735428" start="3440" end="3445" title="Towns of China" label="towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q50231" start="3459" end="3483" title="township-level divisions" label="township-level divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q985488" start="3550" end="3573" title="Residential communities of China" label="residential communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100073" start="3582" end="3605" title="Villages of China" label="administrative villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221819" start="3786" end="3790" title="Dapu, Yixing" label="Dapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13786775" start="3801" end="3809" title="Gaocheng, Jiangsu" label="Gaocheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q31851995" start="3825" end="3832" title="Xinjian, Jiangsu" label="Xinjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10921097" start="3843" end="3850" title="Zhoutie" label="Zhoutie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3962" end="3973" title="Huanke Park, Yixing" label="Huanke Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3979" end="4011" title="Yixing Economic Development Zone" label="Yixing Economic Development Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636218" start="4103" end="4108" title="hukou" label="hukou"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="4175" end="4179" title="male" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q43445" start="4197" end="4203" title="female" label="female"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="4252" end="4262" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181011" start="4273" end="4285" title="per thousand" label="per thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="4318" end="4328" title="Mortality rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822899" start="4358" end="4382" title="rate of natural increase" label="rate of natural increase"/>
<link wikidata="Q858804" start="4436" end="4453" title="Ethnic minorities in China" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="4579" end="4601" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="4627" end="4635" title="renminbi" label="renminbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="4714" end="4724" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q986194" start="4725" end="4742" title="Disposable and discretionary income" label="disposable income"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="5020" end="5036" title="Train station" label="railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948806" start="5042" end="5064" title="Yixing railway station" label="Yixing railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q199194" start="5123" end="5158" title="Nanjing–Hangzhou high-speed railway" label="Nanjing–Hangzhou high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044684" start="5197" end="5220" title="Xinyi–Changxing railway" label="Xinyi–Changxing railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334036" start="5298" end="5314" title="Jiangdu District" label="Jiangdu District"/>
<link wikidata="Q57906" start="5318" end="5326" title="Yangzhou" label="Yangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062178" start="5427" end="5443" title="Changxing County" label="Changxing County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="5448" end="5456" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="5472" end="5480" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931771" start="5536" end="5551" title="Dongcang Bridge" label="Dongcang Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q319008" start="5618" end="5629" title="Ding Junhui" label="Ding Junhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="5644" end="5651" title="snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191509" start="5660" end="5673" title="Jiang Fengzhi" label="Jiang Fengzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q726306" start="5684" end="5688" title="erhu" label="erhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q714152" start="5697" end="5707" title="Xu Beihong" label="Xu Beihong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752565" start="5722" end="5736" title="ancestral home" label="ancestral home"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="5740" end="5755" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q123367145" start="5757" end="5769" title="Ge Mingxiang" label="Ge Mingxiang"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980993" wikidata="Q7823132" url="?curid=980993" title="Tony Parsons (presenter)">
<text>Tony Parsons (born 1939) is a Canadian broadcaster whose career has spanned more than 50 years, and he has anchored the second most-watched local evening Television newscast in North America, the &quot;News Hour&quot; on Global BC in Vancouver, British Columbia. He was the co-anchor of &quot;CBC News: Vancouver&quot; on CBUT-DT with Gloria Macarenko, and the 10:00 pm (22:00 military) newscast on CHEK-DT. He currently lives in Kelowna, British Columbia and hosts the podcast, The Tony Parsons Show. 

Parsons&#x27; father was a flight-lieutenant in the Royal Air Force. His mother was of Italian descent. His family immigrated to Canada from England in 1948, settling in Feversham, Ontario. After a year studying radio and television arts at the Ryerson Institute in Toronto, he looked for work at Ontario radio stations and eventually shortened his name from Parsonage to Tony Parsons. His first broadcasting job was as a country and western DJ at CJCS in Stratford, Ontario. He worked at various radio jobs in Stratford, Guelph, and Hamilton, before landing in Toronto. After a brief stint with CHUM radio, he took his first television job as a reporter at CFTO-TV, a CTV affiliate.

Parsons advanced to become the late evening anchor at CFTO until 1975, when he accepted the opportunity to fill the 6:00 anchor spot on CHAN-TV (better known as BCTV) in Vancouver, where he remained for more than 30 years. He was also the anchor of the national edition of &quot;Canada Tonight,&quot; a CHAN-produced newscast which aired outside of BC on stations owned by Western International Communications until that company was acquired by the Global Television Network. (Bill Good anchored the BC version seen on BCTV.) In 2004, his career achievements were recognized by his being awarded the Bruce Hutchison Lifetime Achievement Award by the Jack Webster Foundation.

Parsons had a cameo in the 2001 film &quot;Saving Silverman&quot; (also known as &quot;Evil Woman&quot;) as a TV anchor. The same year he appeared, once again as a news anchor, in the Jack Nicholson film &quot;The Pledge&quot;.

In 2002, Parsons was named Italo-Canadian of the year by the Confratellanza Italo-Canadese.

In May 2007, Parsons announced his intention to phase himself out of the anchor chair at the &quot;News Hour&quot;, with plans to work Tuesdays and Wednesdays until the 2010 Winter Olympics, after which he had stated his intention to retire and make documentaries.

However, on December 16, 2009, Parsons anchored his final newscast at Global BC after 35 years as anchor of the &quot;News Hour&quot;. A day earlier he had confirmed his rather sudden departure in an email to radio station CKNW. It had been expected that he would remain until after the Olympics, but for unknown reasons, Parsons left the station much earlier than expected. He was replaced by Chris Gailus. Parsons went to CHEK-TV in Victoria to anchor the 10 pm newscast starting on March 15.

On April 12, 2010, it was announced that Parsons would co-anchor CBUT&#x27;s evening newscast, &quot;CBC News: Vancouver&quot;, replacing co-anchor Ian Hanomansing who left to work as a reporter and substitute anchor for &quot;CBC News: The National&quot;. Parsons would continue to host the 10 PM newscast for CHEK-TV. After his CBC evening broadcast, he would fly to Victoria (where he also resides with his wife), often by helicopter, to anchor the 10 pm news on CHEK-TV. On December 20, 2013, Parsons retired as co-anchor on &quot;CBC News: Vancouver&quot;.

Parsons has written a book on his journalistic career, called &quot;A Life in the News&quot;. On November 23, 2009, he opened a Vancouver restaurant, the &quot;Poor Italian&quot; in which he has a part-ownership stake.

In 2024, Parsons expanded his media presence by launching a podcast (The Tony Parsons Show) that features in-depth interviews with notable figures and discussions on current events, pop culture, and trending topics. The podcast has drawn attention for its high-profile guests and Parsons&#x27; signature conversational style, marking a new chapter in his storied broadcasting career. Season 1 guests include Wayne Cox, Peter Mansbridge, Jim Hughson, Sandie Rinaldo, Dr. Bonnie Henry, David Suzuki and Leslie Stojsic. 

==References==

==External links==
*CBC Vancouver biography
*In-depth audio interview on memoir</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7823132" start="0" end="12" title="Tony Parsons (presenter)" label="Tony Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931429" start="221" end="230" title="Global BC" label="Global BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="234" end="243" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="245" end="261" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009048" start="293" end="312" title="CBC Television local newscasts" label="CBC News: Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931055" start="322" end="329" title="CBUT-DT" label="CBUT-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194665" start="335" end="351" title="Gloria Macarenko" label="Gloria Macarenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931433" start="399" end="406" title="CHEK-DT" label="CHEK-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q232226" start="430" end="455" title="Kelowna" label="Kelowna, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="556" end="571" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492513" start="674" end="692" title="Feversham, Ontario" label="Feversham, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q611723" start="749" end="766" title="Toronto Metropolitan University" label="Ryerson Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="770" end="777" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012038" start="952" end="956" title="CJCS-FM" label="CJCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q740756" start="960" end="978" title="Stratford, Ontario" label="Stratford, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q504114" start="1026" end="1032" title="Guelph" label="Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="1038" end="1046" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931474" start="1100" end="1104" title="CHUM (AM)" label="CHUM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931379" start="1162" end="1169" title="CFTO-DT" label="CFTO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="1173" end="1176" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="1359" end="1368" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029439" start="1468" end="1482" title="Canada Tonight" label="Canada Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987970" start="1562" end="1598" title="Western International Communications" label="Western International Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="1638" end="1663" title="Global Television Network" label="Global Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909175" start="1666" end="1675" title="Bill Good" label="Bill Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q582748" start="1789" end="1804" title="Bruce Hutchison" label="Bruce Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q15504851" start="1839" end="1851" title="Jack Webster (journalist)" label="Jack Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q198451" start="1908" end="1924" title="Saving Silverman" label="Saving Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="2049" end="2063" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="2356" end="2376" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931429" start="2523" end="2532" title="CHAN-DT" label="Global BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012466" start="2676" end="2680" title="CKNW" label="CKNW"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196945" start="2847" end="2859" title="Chris Gailus" label="Chris Gailus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931433" start="2877" end="2884" title="CHEK-DT" label="CHEK-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="2888" end="2896" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147274" start="3097" end="3112" title="Ian Hanomansing" label="Ian Hanomansing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3176" end="3198" title="CBC News: The National" label="CBC News: The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009048" start="3484" end="3503" title="CBC Television local newscasts" label="CBC News: Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376737" start="4151" end="4167" title="Peter Mansbridge" label="Peter Mansbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195794" start="4169" end="4180" title="Jim Hughson" label="Jim Hughson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471847" start="4182" end="4196" title="Sandie Rinaldo" label="Sandie Rinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q87761491" start="4198" end="4214" title="Bonnie Henry" label="Dr. Bonnie Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q354534" start="4216" end="4228" title="David Suzuki" label="David Suzuki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980995" wikidata="Q2991109" url="?curid=980995" title="Tony Parsons (British journalist)">
<text>Tony Victor Parsons (born 6 November 1953) is an English journalist, broadcaster, and author. He began his career as a music journalist for &quot;New Musical Express&quot; (&quot;NME&quot;), writing about punk music. Later he wrote for &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, before going on to write for the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; for 18 years. Since September 2013, Parsons has written a column for &quot;The Sun&quot;. He was for a time a regular guest on the BBC Two arts review programme &quot;The Late Show&quot;, and appeared infrequently on the successor &quot;Newsnight Review&quot;; he also briefly hosted a series on Channel 4 called &quot;Big Mouth&quot;.

Parsons is the author of the novel &quot;Man and Boy&quot; (1999). He had previously written a number of novels including &quot;The Kids&quot; (1976), &quot;Platinum Logic&quot; (1981) and &quot;Limelight Blues&quot; (1983). Parsons has since published a series of best-selling novels – &quot;One For My Baby&quot; (2001), &quot;Man and Wife&quot; (2003), &quot;The Family Way&quot; (2004), &quot;Stories We Could Tell&quot; (2006), &quot;My Favourite Wife&quot; (2008), &quot;Starting Over&quot; (2009), &quot;Men From the Boys&quot; (2010), &quot;The Murder Bag&quot; (2014), and &quot;The Slaughter Man&quot; (2015). His novels typically deal with relationship problems, emotional dramas and the traumas of men and women in our time. He describes his writing as &#x27;Men Lit&#x27;, as opposed to the female &#x27;Chick Lit&#x27;.

==Background==
Born in Romford, Essex (now Greater London), he was the only child of working-class parents. His father was a former Royal Naval Commando who won the Distinguished Service Medal during the Second World War. After the war he worked as a lorry driver, market trader and greengrocer. His mother was a school dinner lady. He lived for the first five years of his life in a rented flat above a shop in Essex, before his family moved to a council house in Billericay, Essex. 

Parsons attended Barstable Grammar School, Basildon (now Barstable School), which he left aged 16 with five O-levels. He worked in a series of low-paid, unskilled menial jobs before gaining employment with National Mutual Life, a city insurance company, as a computer operator. His free time while working there allowed him to develop his literary skills, and he published an underground paper called the &quot;Scandal Sheet&quot;.

==Career==
In 1974 he began work at the Gordon&#x27;s gin distillery on City Road, London, where he developed an acute gin allergy and wrote his first novel, &quot;The Kids&quot;, published by New English Library in 1976. Parsons later said that he had imagined that if he could publish a book then he would be able to make a living as a professional writer, but the £700 he made from that novel was not enough to allow him to leave Gordon&#x27;s Gin factory. However, when the weekly music magazine &quot;New Musical Express&quot; (&quot;NME&quot;) advertised for new writers in the summer of 1976, Parsons submitted his novel to the editor, Nick Logan, and was rewarded with a staff writer job. For the next three years he wrote about new music. He wrote the first cover story on the Clash and features on the Sex Pistols, Blondie, Talking Heads, the Ramones, David Bowie, Bruce Springsteen, the New York Dolls, Buzzcocks, and Led Zeppelin among others.

For most of the 1980s, Parsons struggled to make a living as a freelance writer. His career started to recover in 1990 when he wrote &quot;Bare&quot;, an authorised biography of pop star George Michael. Despite the absence of a written contract with the singer, proceeds from the book were split equally between the two men. However, they fell out in 1999 after an interview Michael had given to Parsons was published in the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;. In the 1990s, Parsons became a regular on the live BBC panel show &quot;Late Review&quot;. He also made a series of authored documentaries for Channel 4. When Piers Morgan became editor of the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;, Parsons was poached from &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; as a columnist.

In 1993, he presented a film for the British television documentary series &quot;Without Walls&quot;, focusing on the controversy surrounding the film &quot;A Clockwork Orange&quot; (1971). Director Stanley Kubrick and distributor Warner Brothers sued broadcaster Channel 4, unsuccessfully, in an attempt to prevent clips from the film being shown on television. In the programme Parsons is seen taking a cross-channel ferry from England to France to watch the film, which at the time was embargoed in Britain due to a self-imposed ban by the director.

Though it sold respectably on publication, the novel &quot;Man and Boy&quot; (1999) was a word-of-mouth success, and only reached number one in &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; bestseller list one year after publication. &quot;Man and Boy&quot; won the British Book Awards&#x27; Book of the Year Prize in 2001. It has been published in 39 languages, including Chinese for its publication in the People&#x27;s Republic of China in January 2009.

In 2007, Parsons wrote a series of articles about the disappearance of Madeleine McCann from a beach in the Algarve in Portugal, in the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;. The tone with which these articles were written was later described as having a &quot;touch of arrogant xenophobia&quot; by &quot;The Guardian&quot;″s Marcel Berlins. The Press Complaints Commission that year received 485 complaints, a huge increase in the number of complaints in comparison to previous years, his article on the McCann affair receiving the most complaints. In an article for the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; in 2007, entitled &quot;Oh Up Yours Senor&quot;, he said of Portugal&#x27;s ambassador to Britain, Senhor António Santana Carlos, &quot;And I would respectfully suggest that in future, if you can&#x27;t say something constructive about the disappearance of little Madeleine, then you just keep your stupid, sardine-munching mouth shut&quot;.

In 2009, Parsons signed a three-book contract with HarperCollins for two further novels and a non-fiction book titled &quot;Fear of Fake Breasts&quot;. He also writes a monthly column for &quot;GQ&quot; magazine and, until August 2013, a weekly column for the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;.

The end of his association with the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; came at the beginning of September 2013, with Parsons reportedly leaving the title after 18 years because of a cut in its editorial budget. Less than two weeks later it was announced that he had joined &quot;The Sun on Sunday&quot;; Parsons said his previous paper was &quot;dying&quot; because it was giving away its content for free online.

Parsons&#x27; newspaper columns are regularly satirized in Viz with the byline &quot;Tony Parsehole&quot;, in which the photo byline comprises the upper half of Parsons&#x27; head, with human buttocks replacing the lower half. The columns typically focus on Parsehole&#x27;s feigned grief about the recent death of a public figure, contain multiple requests for &quot;subs&quot; to fill in details Parsehole can&#x27;t be bothered to research, and end with a word count (usually 500 words) and the phrase &quot;invoice enc&quot;.

==Views==
Parsons has expressed in articles a strong loathing for tattoos. In the 1990s he wrote a story titled &quot;The Tattooed Jungle&quot;, suggesting that tattoos were symptomatic of the decline of the working class. In a 2012 article for &quot;GQ&quot; magazine, he lamented the fact that in the last 20 years in Britain, tattoos have become mainstream, common among both sexes and to all economic classes; he wrote that tattoos &quot;remain ugly, hideous daubings that make my flesh crawl with revulsion every time I see one&quot;.

He has been a supporter of the Conservative Party since 2015.

Parsons has taken a strident stance in support of Britain&#x27;s withdrawal from the European Union for many years. In 2013, he wrote an article published in the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; titled &#x27;Why I am one of the millions who would not wipe their dog with the EU flag&#x27;. He was a strong advocate of Brexit in the run-up to the referendum and continues to be.

==Personal life==
Parsons married fellow &quot;NME&quot; journalist Julie Burchill in 1979. They had both answered the same advert in the paper in 1976, requesting &quot;hip, young gunslingers&quot; to apply as new writers. He and Burchill collaborated on the book &quot;The Boy Looked at Johnny&quot; published in 1979. After the collapse of their marriage in 1984, periodic clashes in the media between Burchill and Parsons erupted for many years. 

Parsons became a single parent caring for their four-year-old son, Robert Kennedy Parsons. The experience of being a young man caring for a small child influenced his best-selling novel &quot;Man and Boy&quot;. 

Parsons&#x27; father died of cancer in 1987, and his mother died of cancer in 1999, just weeks before the publication of &quot;Man and Boy&quot;. The book is dedicated to Parsons&#x27;s mother.

In 1992, Parsons married Yuriko, a Japanese translator. They have one daughter, Jasmine. He lives with his wife and daughter in London.

==References==
==External links==
*Tony Parsons&#x27; column at The Mirror
*&quot;Let&#x27;s get personal&quot; – &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 27 August 2005.
**In depth interview and profile with extract from his new novel &quot;Stories We Could Tell&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2991109" start="0" end="19" title="Tony Parsons (British journalist)" label="Tony Victor Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="119" end="135" title="music journalist" label="music journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="146" end="165" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="205" end="215" title="punk music" label="punk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="242" end="261" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="308" end="320" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="402" end="409" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="458" end="465" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746318" start="494" end="507" title="The Late Show (BBC2)" label="The Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760530" start="564" end="580" title="Newsnight Review" label="Newsnight Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="623" end="632" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746303" start="705" end="716" title="Man and Boy (novel)" label="Man and Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155545" start="1061" end="1082" title="Stories We Could Tell (novel)" label="Stories We Could Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q477756" start="1481" end="1490" title="Chick Lit" label="Chick Lit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339305" start="1522" end="1529" title="Romford" label="Romford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483675" start="1664" end="1691" title="Distinguished Service Medal (United Kingdom)" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067924" start="1812" end="1830" title="lunch lady" label="school dinner lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q862832" start="1964" end="1974" title="Billericay" label="Billericay"/>
<link wikidata="Q216649" start="2028" end="2036" title="Basildon" label="Basildon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865017" start="2042" end="2058" title="Barstable School" label="Barstable School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917580" start="2093" end="2101" title="GCE Ordinary Level (United Kingdom)" label="O-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538163" start="2458" end="2475" title="Gordon&amp;#x27;s Gin" label="Gordon&amp;#x27;s gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123401" start="2490" end="2499" title="City Road" label="City Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2924" end="2943" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027482" start="3061" end="3071" title="Nick Logan" label="Nick Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="3200" end="3209" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="3230" end="3241" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="3243" end="3250" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="3252" end="3265" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="3271" end="3278" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="3280" end="3291" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="3293" end="3310" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q830586" start="3316" end="3330" title="New York Dolls" label="New York Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q939329" start="3332" end="3341" title="Buzzcocks" label="Buzzcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="3347" end="3359" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="3562" end="3576" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="3806" end="3818" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760530" start="3898" end="3909" title="Late Review" label="Late Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="3969" end="3978" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q557758" start="3985" end="3997" title="Piers Morgan" label="Piers Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="4076" end="4095" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q181086" start="4276" end="4294" title="A Clockwork Orange (film)" label="A Clockwork Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="4318" end="4333" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="4350" end="4365" title="Warner Brothers" label="Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746303" start="4732" end="4743" title="Man and Boy (novel)" label="Man and Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="4823" end="4839" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575072" start="4922" end="4941" title="British Book Awards" label="British Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q639251" start="5185" end="5201" title="Madeleine McCann" label="Madeleine McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="5222" end="5229" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="5256" end="5266" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="5404" end="5416" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756049" start="5425" end="5439" title="Marcel Berlins" label="Marcel Berlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067228" start="5445" end="5472" title="Press Complaints Commission" label="Press Complaints Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="6090" end="6103" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="6233" end="6235" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="6595" end="6612" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q769541" start="6790" end="6793" title="Viz_(comics)" label="Viz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224389" start="7099" end="7103" title="Copy_editing" label="subs"/>
<link wikidata="Q72941682" start="7328" end="7334" title="tattoo" label="tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="7834" end="7852" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="8176" end="8182" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404917" start="8305" end="8319" title="Julie Burchill" label="Julie Burchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="9354" end="9366" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980996" wikidata="Q1709498" url="?curid=980996" title="List of massively multiplayer online games">
<text>This is a list of notable massively multiplayer online games (MMOG), sorted by category.

== Massively multiplayer online first-person shooter games (MMOFPS) ==
== Massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPG) ==
== Massively multiplayer online real-time strategy games (MMORTS) ==
== Massively multiplayer online turn-based strategy games ==
== Action ==

* &quot;Armored Warfare&quot;
* &quot;Cartoon Network Universe: FusionFall&quot;
* &quot;CrimeCraft&quot;
* &quot;DC Universe Online&quot;
* &quot;Infantry Online&quot;
* &quot;SubSpace&quot;
* &quot;War Thunder&quot;
* &quot;World of Tanks&quot;
* &quot;World of Warplanes&quot;
* &quot;World of Warships&quot;

== Browser games ==

* &quot;Agar.io&quot;
* &quot;Bin Weevils&quot;
* &quot;Blood Wars&quot;
* &quot;Castle of Heroes&quot;
* &quot;Club Penguin&quot;
* &quot;Command &amp; Conquer: Tiberium Alliances&quot;
* &quot;Dark Orbit&quot;
* &quot;Empire &amp; State&quot;
* &quot;Glitch&quot;
* &quot;Hattrick&quot;
* &quot;Ikariam&quot;
* &quot;Illyriad&quot;
* &quot;Imperia Online&quot;
* &quot;Little Space Heroes&quot;
* &quot;Lord of Ultima&quot;
* &quot;Miniconomy&quot;
* &quot;Moshi Monsters&quot;
* &quot;National Geographic Animal Jam&quot;
* &quot;NEO Shifters&quot;
* &quot;Ogame&quot;
* &quot;Omerta&quot;
* &quot;Pardus&quot;
* &quot;Pirate Galaxy&quot;
* &quot;Planetarion&quot;
* &quot;Poptropica&quot;
* &quot;Realm of the Mad God&quot;
* &quot;Runes of Magic&quot;
* &quot;Samurai Taisen&quot;
* &quot;Sentou Gakuen&quot;
* &quot;Slither.io&quot;
* &quot;Smallworlds&quot;
* &quot;Surviv.io&quot;
* &quot;Tenvi&quot;
* &quot;Terra Militaris&quot;
* &quot;TirNua&quot;
* &quot;Transformice&quot;
* &quot;Travian&quot;
* &quot;Tribal Wars&quot;
* &quot;Twin Skies&quot;
* &quot;Urban Dead&quot;
* &quot;World of the Living Dead: Resurrection&quot;

== Browser games with 3D rendering ==

* &quot;Battlestar Galactica Online&quot;
* &quot;Dark Orbit&quot; (Since 2015)
* &quot;Dead Frontier&quot;
* &quot;Family Guy Online&quot;
* &quot;Fragoria&quot;
* &quot;Free Realms&quot;
* &quot;RuneScape&quot;
* &quot;Tanki Online&quot;

== Building games ==

* &quot;Active Worlds&quot;
* &quot;Wurm Online&quot;

== Exploration ==

* &quot;Uru Live&quot;

== Puzzle ==

* &quot;Yohoho! Puzzle Pirates&quot;

== Social games ==

* &quot;Active Worlds&quot;
* &quot;Animal Jam Classic&quot;
* &quot;Bin Weevils&quot;
* &quot;EGO&quot;
* &quot;Flyff&quot;
* &quot;Free Realms&quot;
* &quot;Furcadia&quot;
* &quot;Habbo&quot;
* &quot;JumpStart&quot;
* &quot;Nicktropolis&quot;
* &quot;OurWorld&quot;
* &quot;Pirate101&quot; (sister game to &quot;Wizard101&quot;)
* &quot;Red Light Center&quot;

* &quot;Second Life&quot;
* &quot;The Sims Online&quot;
* &quot;SmallWorlds&quot;
* &quot;Star Wars: The Old Republic&quot;
*&quot;Tanki Online&quot;
* &quot;There&quot;
* &quot;TirNua&quot;
* &quot;Toontown Online&quot;
* &quot;Transformice&quot;
* &quot;Virtual Magic Kingdom&quot;
* &quot;Virtual World of Kaneva&quot;
* &quot;vSide&quot;
* &quot;Wizard101&quot; (sister game to &quot;Pirate101&quot;)
* &quot;Woozworld&quot;

== Space simulation ==

* &quot;Dual Universe&quot;
* &quot;Elite Dangerous&quot;
* &quot;Eve Online&quot;

== See also ==
* List of free massively multiplayer online games
* List of free multiplayer online games
* Multiplayer video game
* Massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG)
* Browser based game
* Chronology of MUDs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1709498" start="10" end="60" title="List of massively multiplayer online games" label="list of notable massively multiplayer online games"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="62" end="66" title="MMOG" label="MMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q18385257" start="376" end="391" title="Armored Warfare (video game)" label="Armored Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="" start="406" end="442" title="Cartoon Network Universe: FusionFall" label="Cartoon Network Universe: FusionFall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036676" start="457" end="467" title="CrimeCraft" label="CrimeCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q27107" start="482" end="500" title="DC Universe Online" label="DC Universe Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029083" start="515" end="530" title="Infantry Online" label="Infantry Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502383" start="545" end="553" title="SubSpace (video game)" label="SubSpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052939" start="568" end="579" title="War Thunder" label="War Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q590342" start="594" end="608" title="World of Tanks" label="World of Tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754466" start="623" end="641" title="World of Warplanes" label="World of Warplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053252" start="656" end="673" title="World of Warships" label="World of Warships"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012932" start="710" end="717" title="Agar.io" label="Agar.io"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913794" start="732" end="743" title="Bin Weevils" label="Bin Weevils"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927738" start="758" end="768" title="Blood Wars (video game)" label="Blood Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049538" start="783" end="799" title="Castle of Heroes" label="Castle of Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q390223" start="814" end="826" title="Club Penguin" label="Club Penguin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="841" end="882" title="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Tiberium Alliances" label="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Tiberium Alliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166122" start="897" end="907" title="Dark Orbit" label="Dark Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374000" start="922" end="940" title="Empire &amp;amp; State" label="Empire &amp;amp; State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327766" start="955" end="961" title="Glitch (video game)" label="Glitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q202934" start="976" end="984" title="Hattrick (video game)" label="Hattrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q327602" start="999" end="1006" title="Ikariam" label="Ikariam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796488" start="1021" end="1029" title="Illyriad" label="Illyriad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17375746" start="1044" end="1058" title="Imperia Online" label="Imperia Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572378" start="1073" end="1092" title="Little Space Heroes" label="Little Space Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065375" start="1107" end="1121" title="Lord of Ultima" label="Lord of Ultima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290192" start="1136" end="1146" title="Miniconomy" label="Miniconomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246471" start="1161" end="1175" title="Moshi Monsters" label="Moshi Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972873" start="1190" end="1220" title="National Geographic Animal Jam" label="National Geographic Animal Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612238" start="1235" end="1247" title="NEO Shifters" label="NEO Shifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q219743" start="1262" end="1267" title="Ogame" label="Ogame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099056" start="1282" end="1288" title="Omerta (video game)" label="Omerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136609" start="1303" end="1309" title="Pardus (computer game)" label="Pardus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076720" start="1324" end="1337" title="Pirate Galaxy" label="Pirate Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q624088" start="1352" end="1363" title="Planetarion" label="Planetarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022094" start="1378" end="1388" title="Poptropica" label="Poptropica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700288" start="1403" end="1423" title="Realm of the Mad God" label="Realm of the Mad God"/>
<link wikidata="Q699610" start="1438" end="1452" title="Runes of Magic" label="Runes of Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259178" start="1467" end="1481" title="Samurai Taisen" label="Samurai Taisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451375" start="1496" end="1509" title="Sentou Gakuen" label="Sentou Gakuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23895358" start="1524" end="1534" title="Slither.io" label="Slither.io"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282544" start="1549" end="1560" title="Smallworlds" label="Smallworlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q54823977" start="1575" end="1584" title="Surviv.io" label="Surviv.io"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700948" start="1599" end="1604" title="Tenvi" label="Tenvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162087" start="1619" end="1634" title="Terra Militaris" label="Terra Militaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354187" start="1649" end="1655" title="TirNua" label="TirNua"/>
<link wikidata="Q126474" start="1670" end="1682" title="Transformice" label="Transformice"/>
<link wikidata="Q170331" start="1697" end="1704" title="Travian" label="Travian"/>
<link wikidata="Q264257" start="1719" end="1730" title="Tribal Wars" label="Tribal Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823425" start="1745" end="1755" title="Twin Skies" label="Twin Skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734104" start="1770" end="1780" title="Urban Dead" label="Urban Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036651" start="1795" end="1819" title="World of the Living Dead" label="World of the Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911860" start="1863" end="1875" title="3D rendering" label="3D rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186362" start="1888" end="1915" title="Battlestar Galactica Online" label="Battlestar Galactica Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166122" start="1930" end="1940" title="Dark Orbit" label="Dark Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383465" start="1968" end="1981" title="Dead Frontier" label="Dead Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433145" start="1996" end="2013" title="Family Guy Online" label="Family Guy Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492280" start="2028" end="2036" title="Fragoria" label="Fragoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q691224" start="2051" end="2062" title="Free Realms" label="Free Realms"/>
<link wikidata="Q187732" start="2077" end="2086" title="RuneScape" label="RuneScape"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451202" start="2101" end="2113" title="Tanki Online" label="Tanki Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193484" start="2151" end="2164" title="Active Worlds" label="Active Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849361" start="2179" end="2190" title="Wurm Online" label="Wurm Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869157" start="2225" end="2233" title="Uru Live" label="Uru Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968331" start="2263" end="2285" title="Yohoho! Puzzle Pirates" label="Yohoho! Puzzle Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193484" start="2321" end="2334" title="Active Worlds" label="Active Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972873" start="2349" end="2367" title="Animal Jam Classic" label="Animal Jam Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913794" start="2382" end="2393" title="Bin Weevils" label="Bin Weevils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259935" start="2408" end="2411" title="EGO Game" label="EGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138278" start="2426" end="2431" title="Flyff" label="Flyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q691224" start="2446" end="2457" title="Free Realms" label="Free Realms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509489" start="2472" end="2480" title="Furcadia" label="Furcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q743920" start="2495" end="2500" title="Habbo" label="Habbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311047" start="2515" end="2524" title="JumpStart" label="JumpStart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244027" start="2539" end="2551" title="Nicktropolis" label="Nicktropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110548" start="2566" end="2574" title="OurWorld" label="OurWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754078" start="2589" end="2598" title="Pirate101" label="Pirate101"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743404" start="2652" end="2668" title="Red Light Center" label="Red Light Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="2684" end="2695" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279868" start="2710" end="2725" title="The Sims Online" label="The Sims Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282544" start="2740" end="2751" title="SmallWorlds" label="SmallWorlds"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2766" end="2793" title="Star Wars: The Old Republic" label="Star Wars: The Old Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451202" start="2807" end="2819" title="Tanki Online" label="Tanki Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178880" start="2834" end="2839" title="There (virtual world)" label="There"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354187" start="2854" end="2860" title="TirNua" label="TirNua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441260" start="2875" end="2890" title="Toontown Online" label="Toontown Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q126474" start="2905" end="2917" title="Transformice" label="Transformice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717732" start="2932" end="2953" title="Virtual Magic Kingdom" label="Virtual Magic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362084" start="2968" end="2991" title="Virtual World of Kaneva" label="Virtual World of Kaneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907586" start="3006" end="3011" title="vSide" label="vSide"/>
<link wikidata="Q614418" start="3026" end="3035" title="Wizard101" label="Wizard101"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034109" start="3089" end="3098" title="Woozworld" label="Woozworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127164" start="3138" end="3151" title="Dual Universe" label="Dual Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980843" start="3166" end="3181" title="Elite Dangerous" label="Elite Dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q336177" start="3196" end="3206" title="Eve Online" label="Eve Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621359" start="3231" end="3278" title="List of free massively multiplayer online games" label="List of free massively multiplayer online games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621360" start="3281" end="3318" title="List of free multiplayer online games" label="List of free multiplayer online games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="3321" end="3343" title="Multiplayer video game" label="Multiplayer video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="3346" end="3401" title="Massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="Massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q848991" start="3404" end="3422" title="Browser based game" label="Browser based game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114176" start="3425" end="3443" title="Chronology of MUDs" label="Chronology of MUDs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="980998" wikidata="Q3045816" url="?curid=980998" title="Hurricane Gloria">
<text>Hurricane Gloria was a powerful tropical cyclone that caused significant damage along the East Coast of the United States and in Atlantic Canada during the 1985 Atlantic hurricane season. It was the first significant tropical cyclone to strike the northeastern United States since Hurricane Agnes in 1972 and the first major storm to affect New York City and Long Island directly since Hurricane Donna in 1960. Gloria was a Cape Verde hurricane originating from a tropical wave on September 16 in the eastern Atlantic Ocean. After remaining a weak tropical cyclone for several days, Gloria intensified into a hurricane on September 22 north of the Lesser Antilles. During that time, the storm had moved generally westward, although it turned to the northwest due to a weakening of the ridge. Gloria quickly intensified on September 24, and the next day reached peak winds of . The hurricane weakened before striking the Outer Banks of North Carolina on September 27. Later that day, Gloria made two subsequent landfalls on Long Island and across the coastline of western Connecticut, before becoming extratropical on September 28 over New England. The remnants moved through Atlantic Canada and went on to impact Western Europe, eventually dissipating on October 4.

Before Gloria made landfall, the National Hurricane Center issued hurricane warnings at some point for the East Coast of the United States from South Carolina to Maine. Hundreds of thousands of people evacuated, and the hurricane was described as the &quot;storm of the century.&quot; In general, Gloria&#x27;s strongest winds remained east of the center, which largely spared locations from North Carolina to New Jersey, and the passage at low tide reduced storm surge. Hurricane-force winds and gusts affected much of the path, which knocked down trees and power lines. This left over 4 million people without power, causing the worst power outage in Connecticut history related to a natural disaster. Fallen trees caused six of the storm&#x27;s fourteen deaths.

In North Carolina, high waves damaged many homes along the Outer Banks and caused heavy beach erosion. High waves also damaged piers, boats, and docks throughout the Mid-Atlantic states. Flooding forced several highways to close, and in Pennsylvania, thousands were forced to evacuate their homes. The storm surge destroyed 48 homes on Long Island, while the winds damaged the roofs of many more. Widespread crop damage occurred, amounting to about $20 million (1985 USD). Overall damage in the United States was estimated at $900 million, which was less than expected. In neighboring Canada, the remnants of Gloria caused minor power outages in New Brunswick, although confusion related to the storm&#x27;s arrival led to the creation of the Canadian Hurricane Centre.

== Meteorological history ==

A tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa on September 15. Based on data from satellite imagery, it is estimated that a tropical depression formed on September 16 near Cape Verde, with an associated low-level circulation. The next day, the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Gloria, but there was no further intensification. On September 18, Gloria weakened back to tropical depression status, but re-intensified into a tropical storm on September 20. During this time, it moved generally westward due to a strong ridge to the north. On September 21, the Hurricane Hunters began flying into Gloria to measure the storm&#x27;s intensity, and the next day, a flight observed winds of at a height of . As a result, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) upgraded Gloria to a hurricane about east-northeast of the Lesser Antilles.

After having moved generally to the west, Gloria turned more to the west-northwest on September 22. This occurred after tropical storms Fabian and Henri weakened the ridge. On September 23, Gloria passed about to the north of Anegada, the northernmost island in the Lesser Antilles. It initially remained a minimal hurricane until September 24 when it began quickly intensifying. That day, it became a major hurricane while passing northeast of the Bahamas. Gloria developed a wide eye, surrounded by an eyewall, and was producing the stadium effect. At 01:20 UTC on September 25, Hurricane Hunters extrapolated a barometric pressure of , and reported flight-level winds of . At the time, this was the lowest pressure measured by reconnaissance aircraft over the northern Atlantic Ocean. Because there was little difference in the flight-level winds and the surface winds, this was estimated to have been Gloria&#x27;s peak intensity, making it a Category 4 on the Saffir-Simpson scale. However, a preliminary reanalysis released in 2008 suggested peak winds of . At peak intensity, the hurricane was located about southeast of Cape Hatteras in North Carolina, and had an eye diameter of only .

After peak intensity, Gloria weakened while turning to the north, moving around the western end of the ridge, toward a cold front. By September 26, the winds had decreased to , just 30 hours after its peak intensity. Shortly after peaking, Gloria&#x27;s asymmetrical wind field caused the storm to rapidly weaken, and 18 hours later, its sustained wind speed decreased to . Later that day, a buoy about east of the center recorded a wave height of , which at the time was the highest buoy wave recording in an Atlantic hurricane. While accelerating toward North Carolina, Gloria re-intensified slightly to winds of , making it a Category 2 hurricane. At 05:30 UTC on September 27, the hurricane struck southern Hatteras Island in the Outer Banks. After weakening further, Gloria passed just east of the Delmarva Peninsula and New Jersey and interacted with a cold front. Its strongest winds remained on the eastern edge of the circulation, and the storm was gradually losing tropical characteristics. At 16:00 UTC on September 27, the hurricane made landfall with a broad and poorly defined center, between John F. Kennedy International Airport and Islip, New York, with sustained winds of , on western Long Island. This was only about three days after Henri had struck the same general area as a much weaker tropical storm. Operationally, the NHC had classified Gloria as a Category 3 major hurricane when it made landfall, but the storm&#x27;s landfall intensity was later downgraded in the post-season analysis. Even then, the hurricane produced Category 3-equivalent wind gusts throughout Long Island.

About an hour after striking Long Island, Gloria made its final landfall in western Connecticut near Westport, and proceeded to move through New England, while weakening. The NHC estimated that Gloria became extratropical over Maine by 00:00 UTC on September 28. The storm continued moving towards the northeast through Atlantic Canada, passing south of Greenland on September 30. The extratropical circulation of Gloria was last noted on October 2, although the storm&#x27;s remnants later affected Europe and were last noted on October 4.

== Preparations ==

Early in Gloria&#x27;s duration, it threatened the northern Lesser Antilles, prompting a hurricane watch and later warning for the area. Gloria also threatened the Bahamas, prompting that government to issue hurricane watches and warnings.

While Gloria was off the east coast of Florida, the NHC issued a hurricane watch from Edisto Beach, South Carolina to Cape Henry, Virginia, which was upgraded to a hurricane warning at 1000 UTC on September 26, or 19.5 hours before landfall. By later that day, a hurricane watch was issued for the rest of the eastern United States to Eastport, Maine. By two hours before Gloria&#x27;s landfall on Long Island, a hurricane warning was in effect for the same area, after warnings were gradually extended further north. Officials anticipated higher winds and storm surge than what occurred, due to the hurricane weakening as it approached landfall.

Officials in Delaware and Maryland declared a state of emergency before the storm struck, and thousands of people from coastal communities evacuated to shelters. Schools closed in Delaware, and non-emergency workers were sent home. Along Long Island in New York, hundreds of thousands of people evacuated their homes, and a state of emergency was declared for several counties. In Connecticut, about 20,000 people evacuated along the coast, and 7,300 evacuated from neighboring Rhode Island. Residents also evacuated portions of Cape Cod.

As Gloria approached the East Coast of the United States, National Hurricane Center director Neil Frank called it the &quot;Storm of the Century&quot;, due to its intensity and potential track over the densely populated region of New England. Such a track gathered the attention of many people, and led to the evacuation of 380,000 people along the coast from North Carolina to Connecticut. In Maryland, officials implemented lane reversing to expedite the evacuation process, a policy many other coastal states now use.

Officials advised 95,000 citizens along the New Jersey coastline, an area that rarely experiences hurricanes, to evacuate. Cape May County—the most vulnerable part of the state and among the most susceptible in the entire country—would require 36 hours in 2005 to evacuate the 100,000 citizens and 900,000 tourists that were commonly present during busy summer weekends.

Offices and classes of Harvard University closed only for the third time in the 20th century, the previous cases being the New England Hurricane of 1938 and the Blizzard of &#x27;78. Although Gloria&#x27;s winds downed numerous trees and caused tens of thousands of dollars in damage in the area, overall effects were much less than expected.

At the same time Gloria was making landfall on Long Island, a storm warning was issued for western New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. Across Atlantic Canada, the threat of Hurricane Gloria caused many citizens to rely on American media for storm coverage.

== Impact ==
Hurricane Gloria was a large hurricane that affected much of the northeastern United States. Gloria brought strong wind gusts, which downed trees and left hundreds of thousands without power. Overall damage was estimated at $900 million, and there were fourteen deaths. Gloria was the first significant hurricane to affect New England since Hurricane Donna in 1960.

=== Carolinas and Mid-Atlantic ===
While offshore the eastern United States, the hurricane&#x27;s strongest winds were on the eastern periphery, which reduced the winds over land. In North Carolina, where Gloria made its first landfall, the strongest winds were at a station near Buxton at the Cape Hatteras National Weather Service office; a gust of was also observed there. At Diamond Shoal Light, located offshore, sustained winds reached , with gusts to . A peak storm surge of was estimated at the Neuse River. A minimal surge of around 1.3 ft (0.4 ft) occurred in neighboring South Carolina, where winds were below tropical storm force. The highest rainfall related to Gloria was , recorded in Edenton, North Carolina. High waves and storm surge resulted in heavy coastal flooding and beach erosion along the Outer Banks, and several new inlets were created. Coastal flooding damaged several homes in the Outer Banks. Damage in the state was estimated at $8.1 million, including $2.4 million in crop damage. There was one death in North Carolina when a man was struck by a fallen tree.

Throughout much of the Mid-Atlantic, the winds remained generally below hurricane force; however, gusts reached along the Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel in Virginia and in Ocean City, Maryland. The strongest winds in the region occurred after the center passed the area. Due to Gloria&#x27;s fast motion, there was minimal coastal flooding because the highest storm surge occurred during low tide, generally less than . Beach erosion was reported in both Maryland and Delaware. The heaviest rainfall was west of the center. Statewide peaks included at Valley Forge National Historical Park in Pennsylvania, in Holland, Virginia, and in Annapolis, Maryland. Rainfall spread as far inland as West Virginia.

High waves washed away of a fishing pier in Virginia Beach, Virginia. The rainfall caused minor flooding, and high tides flooded coastal portions of the Hampton Roads region. There was minor damage to trees, roofs, and signs in southeastern Virginia. The center of Gloria passed about offshore eastern Maryland. In Ocean City, waves of severely damaged the boardwalk, washing sand and debris a block inland. Downed trees left about 150,000 people in Maryland without power. High winds forced the Chesapeake Bay Bridge to close, and there was little damage outside of eastern Maryland. High waves in Delaware eroded beaches, wrecked dunes, and damaged oceanfront buildings and boardwalks. Storm flooding closed several highways, including Delaware Route 1. Damage was heaviest in Sussex County, although the storm damaged corn and soybean crops in northern Delaware. Monetary damage totaled over $500,000 in the state. In neighboring Pennsylvania, wind gusts reached in Allentown, which knocked down many trees and left thousands without power. Heavy rainfall flooded many streams, which closed or damaged several highways, bridges, and rail lines. About 3,000 houses were flooded, forcing thousands to evacuate.
While just off the New Jersey coast, Gloria produced strong winds, peaking at in Ocean City, where a gust of was also reported. In the town, an F0 tornado was reported damaging a house. Rainfall in the state reached at the Charlotteburg Reservoir near West Milford. Heavy beach erosion occurred along the coast, and several coastal towns sustained damage to boardwalks. Strong winds downed trees and power lines, which damaged homes and cars. One person was killed in Long Branch after touching a downed power line.

Though Gloria moved quickly through the region, it dropped moderate rainfall in locations, including at Baltimore–Washington International Airport. In addition, some unofficial reports in southeastern Virginia indicated amounts of up to of rain. Because much of the Mid-Atlantic experienced the western, weaker side of this hurricane, damage was relatively light. High winds downed numerous trees throughout the area, leaving hundreds of thousands without power, including 237,000 in New Jersey, 124,000 in Maryland, and 56,000 in Virginia. Extreme rainfall in Virginia resulted in $5.5 million (1985 USD) in damage. Intense flood waters split Long Beach Island in half for a period of time.

=== Long Island and New York City ===

While making its second landfall, Gloria was accompanied by a storm surge of at Battery Park, the highest along its path. The highest wind report was a gust of at Islip Airport. Central Park reported a gust of . Rainfall in the state reached at Unadilla, although was much less near the coast, reaching in Central Park.

Along Long Island, the high storm surge flooded hundreds of streets and caused heavy beach erosion. High winds downed thousands of trees and damaged hundreds of homes, causing widespread power outages. About 1.5 million people in the state lost power, including two-thirds of the Long Island Lighting Company customers, making it one of the worst power outages in the state. Storm surges reached at Bergen Point and the Battery, and at Willets Point; these effects were mitigated by Gloria&#x27;s fast motion and arrival at low tide. Had Gloria moved more slowly and struck at high tide, the storm surge at the Battery would have been , a record for the location; storm surges at Bergen Point and Willets Point would have been , respectively. There were four deaths on Long Island, two of whom related to heart attacks and the other two related to fallen trees. There were also 14 injuries in the region, many of them due to downed tree branches. In the New York mainland, heavy rainfall flooded rivers and alleviated drought conditions. Rough waves damaged boats and docks along the Hudson River. Unsettled weather contributed to a traffic fatality and an airplane crash that killed one in the New York mainland.

It is believed peak gusts reached in eastern Long Island. Weather forecasters believe that damage across parts of Long Island indicated winds in the Category 3 range, as evidence of the damage received at MacArthur Airport. Gloria&#x27;s high winds caused significant damage across Long Island and southeastern New York. The area hit the worst was eastern Long Island, where high wind gusts blew thousands of trees into buildings and across roads. The broadcast tower of WBLI-FM toppled on Bald Hill in Farmingville. In addition, the winds ripped roofs off of many buildings, including hangars at the MacArthur Airport, a hangar at the Bayport Aerodrome and the roof of the Islip Police Station. Prolonged exposure to high winds and waves led to moderate beach erosion, washing away several piers and docks. The storm surge, though relatively weak, destroyed 48 houses on the ocean side of the island. Gloria&#x27;s high winds left 683,000 people in New York without power, with some lacking electricity for over eleven days.

=== New England and Canada ===

Gloria passed quickly through New England as a weakened hurricane, although it maintained a large circulation. The storm hit at low tide, resulting in low to moderate storm surges of in Groton, Connecticut, in New Bedford, Massachusetts, and in Portland, Maine. The high waves caused heavy beach erosion in Connecticut and Rhode Island. The highest reported sustained winds were in Waterbury, Connecticut, and Blue Hill Meteorological Observatory in Massachusetts, although neither location is at sea level. Gusts peaked at in Chatham, Massachusetts, and widespread areas across New England reported hurricane-force gusts. It is estimated that hurricane-force winds occurred in Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire. Rainfall in the region peaked at at Borden Brook Reservoir in Springfield, Massachusetts.

In Connecticut, Gloria crossed from Westport along Long Island Sound, passed near Hartford, and exited into Massachusetts. Wind gusts peaked at in Bridgeport, and in Hartford. The winds downed thousands of trees, many of which knocked down power lines. This left about 727,000 residents without power, setting a record for the state related to a weather event. High waves damaged or sunk hundreds of boats along the coast, and several beachfront homes and docks were damaged. Light rainfall caused some minor flooding, mostly in northwestern Connecticut. Agricultural damage across the state totaled about $6 million. Damage was heaviest near Hartford, and overall storm damage was estimated at $91 million. Fallen trees contributed to two of the three deaths in the state, as well as several other injuries.

Hurricane-force gusts affected coastal Rhode Island, peaking at in Westerly. The winds uprooted thousands of trees and caused widespread roof damage. About 300,000 people lost power; this constituted the largest power outage in the state since the Northeast blackout of 1965. Coastal flooding was minimized due to the storm striking at low tide, although tides were high enough in Narragansett Bay to damage docks and hundreds of boats. Damage in the state was estimated at $20 million, including the cost for restoring the power outages. There were two deaths in Rhode Island; one was related to a fallen tree, and one occurred when a man was trying to secure his boat.

In Massachusetts, the hurricane moved from Connecticut through the Springfield area. There was a small F1 tornado in Middlesex County that damaged trees. High winds knocked over thousands of trees, and about 500,000 people statewide lost power. At the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University in Boston, a total of approximately 95 trees were lost and another 100 were damaged at a cost of over $100,000; these impacts were generally less severe than expected, as Gloria had been forecast to track closer to Boston than it ultimately did. Heavy rainfall caused stream flooding, although the heaviest damage was from the winds. The hurricane destroyed a radio tower in Framingham and damaged hundreds of homes in the eastern portion of the state. Along the coast, the storm tide caused minor coastal flooding and damaged hundreds of boats. Across Massachusetts, damage was estimated at $61 million, including $6 million from crop damage.

By the time Gloria reached New Hampshire, it had weakened and was becoming extratropical, although hurricane-force wind gusts were reported across the state. On the top of Mount Washington, wind gusts reached . The winds were strong enough to knock down large trees, 100,000 people lost power, mostly along the coast. Fallen trees also damaged 16 homes and several vehicles. North Woodstock reported generally minor damage from rainfall-induced flooding. There was one death in the state; an elderly woman was knocked over by the strong winds, and died two weeks later. There was about $2.5 million in crop damage, mostly to the apple crop. In neighboring Maine, about 600,000 people lost power due to the storm; this was the most since the passage of hurricanes Carol and Edna in 1954. Wind gusts in Maine reached , and the storm knocked down about 100 power poles in addition to the downed lines. Downed trees blocked roads and damaged houses and cars. The winds damaged roofs, including the 127‑year‑old spire of a church in Groveville. Damage to the apple crop was estimated at $3 million. High waves along the coast damaged lobster traps and dozens of boats, many of which were driven ashore.

Gloria&#x27;s high winds downed numerous trees across New England, causing minor to moderate damage. In the region, Connecticut received the worst damage to trees and structures. Along the coastline, storm surge and strong waves washed away several fishing piers, and some roadways were underwater during the storm&#x27;s passage. New Hampshire was affected only slightly from the hurricane; effects were limited to minor wind damage and localized flooding. In Maine, damage was more severe, where strong wind gusts ripped off roofs and uprooted hundreds of trees. High winds across New England resulted in significant power outages, leaving 250,000 in Maine without power. In all, seven deaths occurred in New England, many of which occurred from falling tree limbs.

While the remnants of Gloria were moving through Atlantic Canada, they produced rainfall to the north of the track, reaching as high as in Quebec. The highest winds in the country were , peaking in the Bay of Fundy and to the northeast of Newfoundland. The remnants of Gloria caused wind and wave damage in Nova Scotia. Wind gusts of in Fredericton, New Brunswick knocked down power lines, affecting more than 1,800 people.

===Western Europe===
In Western Europe, Gloria&#x27;s remnants produced unusual weather over portions of the region. On October 4, Gloria&#x27;s remnants caused the warmest October day on record for Switzerland during the 20th century.

== Aftermath ==

On Long Island, thousands were left without power for over a week, until the last outages were restored two weeks after the storm on October 8. The long duration without electricity forced hundreds of schools to close, extended train times by six hours due to lack of powered crossings, and price gouging on food, ice, and generators. The lack of power led to a general disdain for the Long Island Lighting Company (LILCO), which increased further when the company left the $40 million (1985 USD) repair bill to the ratepayers, citing the company&#x27;s lack of hurricane insurance. Citizens quickly protested LILCO&#x27;s decision, and within years the publicly owned Long Island Power Authority was formed.

Residents in both Massachusetts and Connecticut were also without power for up to two weeks. The states brought in workers from other states, although the delay in restoring the widespread outages caused many schools to remain closed. In Connecticut, one man was electrocuted while repairing downed power lines. About 477,000 Connecticut Light &amp; Power customers in the state lost power, a record that was surpassed by the 754,000 who lost power during Hurricane Irene in 2011. Later in 2011, a nor&#x27;easter in October left over 830,000 people statewide without power, also breaking the record set by Gloria. In New Hampshire, most power outages were quickly restored, and all were restored within six days. In Maine, all power outages were restored in 11 days.

After the storm, President Ronald Reagan declared several counties in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and Massachusetts as federal disaster areas. This declaration allowed those counties to apply for disaster assistance.

In Canada, the damage was less than expected, but confusion related to the storm threat prompted Environment Canada to research the need for a dedicated hurricane center in 1986. The following year, the Canadian Hurricane Centre was established with offices on both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts.

Due to the hurricane&#x27;s impact, the World Meteorological Organization retired name Gloria from the rotating Atlantic tropical storm naming lists in the spring of 1986, and it will never again be used in the basin. It was replaced with Grace for the 1991 season.

== See also ==

* List of retired Atlantic hurricane names
* List of wettest tropical cyclones in Massachusetts
* List of New England hurricanes
* List of New York hurricanes
* List of New Jersey hurricanes
* List of North Carolina hurricanes

==Notes==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* HPC information on Gloria&#x27;s rainfall
* NOAA hurricane intensities at landfall
* An unofficial Hurricane Gloria page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3045816" start="0" end="16" title="Hurricane Gloria" label="Hurricane Gloria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="32" end="48" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="90" end="121" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="129" end="144" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334675" start="156" end="186" title="1985 Atlantic hurricane season" label="1985 Atlantic hurricane season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711419" start="281" end="296" title="Hurricane Agnes" label="Hurricane Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526982" start="300" end="304" title="1972 Atlantic hurricane season" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="359" end="370" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638575" start="386" end="401" title="Hurricane Donna" label="Hurricane Donna"/>
<link wikidata="Q756739" start="405" end="409" title="1960 Atlantic hurricane season" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141458" start="424" end="444" title="Cape Verde hurricane" label="Cape Verde hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q13671" start="464" end="477" title="tropical wave" label="tropical wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="648" end="663" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789796" start="785" end="790" title="Ridge (meteorology)" label="ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517373" start="920" end="931" title="Outer Banks" label="Outer Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1023" end="1034" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="1071" end="1082" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063457" start="1100" end="1113" title="extratropical" label="extratropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329523" start="1300" end="1325" title="National Hurricane Center" label="National Hurricane Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q665469" start="1333" end="1351" title="tropical cyclone warnings and watches" label="hurricane warnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="1374" end="1405" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="1725" end="1736" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="2121" end="2134" title="beach erosion" label="beach erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="2500" end="2503" title="United States dollar" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944925" start="2776" end="2801" title="Canadian Hurricane Centre" label="Canadian Hurricane Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13671" start="2836" end="2849" title="tropical wave" label="tropical wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="2921" end="2938" title="satellite imagery" label="satellite imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="3011" end="3021" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3042" end="3063" title="Tropical cyclone#Background" label="low-level circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789796" start="3365" end="3370" title="ridge (meteorology)" label="ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359280" start="3406" end="3423" title="Hurricane Hunters" label="Hurricane Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329523" start="3567" end="3592" title="National Hurricane Center" label="National Hurricane Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="3658" end="3673" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3812" end="3818" title="1985 Atlantic hurricane season#Tropical Storm Fabian" label="Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3823" end="3828" title="1985 Atlantic hurricane season#Tropical Storm Henri" label="Henri"/>
<link wikidata="Q519873" start="3902" end="3909" title="Anegada" label="Anegada"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="4125" end="4132" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q640404" start="4158" end="4161" title="eye (cyclone)" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4211" end="4225" title="eye (cyclone)#stadium effect" label="stadium effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="4236" end="4239" title="UTC" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="4290" end="4309" title="atmospheric pressure" label="barometric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q978032" start="4804" end="4817" title="Cape Hatteras" label="Cape Hatteras"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="4991" end="5001" title="cold front" label="cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q821563" start="5305" end="5316" title="wave height" label="wave height"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509872" start="5583" end="5598" title="Hatteras Island" label="Hatteras Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="5675" end="5693" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="5698" end="5708" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551132" start="5922" end="5930" title="landfall" label="landfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="5979" end="6016" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751219" start="6021" end="6036" title="Islip, New York" label="Islip, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="6075" end="6086" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="6563" end="6574" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q586762" start="6580" end="6588" title="Westport, Connecticut" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="6620" end="6631" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063457" start="6687" end="6700" title="extratropical" label="extratropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="6799" end="6814" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="6833" end="6842" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q665469" start="7130" end="7145" title="tropical cyclone warnings and watches" label="hurricane watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903825" start="7368" end="7396" title="Edisto Beach, South Carolina" label="Edisto Beach, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640805" start="7400" end="7410" title="Cape Henry" label="Cape Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q785669" start="7617" end="7632" title="Eastport, Maine" label="Eastport, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="7839" end="7850" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="8459" end="8467" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="8495" end="8526" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988581" start="8563" end="8573" title="Neil Frank" label="Neil Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="8700" end="8711" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="8864" end="8872" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165714" start="8896" end="8910" title="Contraflow lane reversal" label="lane reversing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="9036" end="9046" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q497795" start="9115" end="9130" title="Cape May County, New Jersey" label="Cape May County"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="9387" end="9405" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q206897" start="9487" end="9516" title="New England Hurricane of 1938" label="New England Hurricane of 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064441" start="9525" end="9545" title="Northeastern United States Blizzard of 1978" label="Blizzard of &amp;#x27;78"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638575" start="10315" end="10330" title="Hurricane Donna" label="Hurricane Donna"/>
<link wikidata="Q745614" start="10621" end="10627" title="Buxton, North Carolina" label="Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q978032" start="10635" end="10648" title="Cape Hatteras" label="Cape Hatteras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="10649" end="10673" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270917" start="10720" end="10739" title="Diamond Shoal Light" label="Diamond Shoal Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606944" start="10844" end="10855" title="Neuse River" label="Neuse River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028258" start="11041" end="11064" title="Edenton, North Carolina" label="Edenton, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="11111" end="11127" title="coastal flooding" label="coastal flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070563" start="11556" end="11584" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q687905" start="11604" end="11624" title="Ocean City, Maryland" label="Ocean City, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860064" start="11984" end="12021" title="Valley Forge National Historical Park" label="Valley Forge National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712554" start="12042" end="12059" title="Holland, Virginia" label="Holland, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="12068" end="12087" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="12182" end="12206" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="12291" end="12304" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319988" start="12634" end="12655" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q798263" start="12876" end="12892" title="Delaware Route 1" label="Delaware Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q156213" start="12917" end="12930" title="Sussex County, Delaware" label="Sussex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="13107" end="13116" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017603" start="13431" end="13441" title="Ocean City, New Jersey" label="Ocean City"/>
<link wikidata="Q380770" start="13494" end="13496" title="Fujita scale" label="F0"/>
<link wikidata="Q375252" start="13602" end="13614" title="West Milford, New Jersey" label="West Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q995231" start="13818" end="13829" title="Long Branch, New Jersey" label="Long Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q94895" start="13971" end="14013" title="Baltimore–Washington International Airport" label="Baltimore–Washington International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="14068" end="14076" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="14428" end="14436" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533347" start="14511" end="14528" title="Long Beach Island" label="Long Beach Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13689" start="14679" end="14691" title="Battery Park" label="Battery Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q937590" start="14762" end="14775" title="Islip Airport" label="Islip Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="14777" end="14789" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596590" start="14844" end="14852" title="Unadilla, New York" label="Unadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672702" start="15200" end="15228" title="Long Island Lighting Company" label="Long Island Lighting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891534" start="15319" end="15331" title="Bergen Point" label="Bergen Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q13689" start="15336" end="15347" title="The Battery (Manhattan)" label="the Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563984" start="15356" end="15369" title="Willets Point, Queens" label="Willets Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="16004" end="16016" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="16180" end="16191" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947261" start="16606" end="16610" title="WBLI" label="WBLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q937590" start="16736" end="16753" title="MacArthur Airport" label="MacArthur Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10385027" start="17380" end="17399" title="Groton, Connecticut" label="Groton, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49147" start="17404" end="17430" title="New Bedford, Massachusetts" label="New Bedford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="17439" end="17454" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49178" start="17576" end="17598" title="Waterbury, Connecticut" label="Waterbury, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803017" start="17604" end="17640" title="Blue Hill Meteorological Observatory" label="Blue Hill Meteorological Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774812" start="17721" end="17743" title="Chatham, Massachusetts" label="Chatham, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="17981" end="18007" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="18092" end="18100" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49174" start="18157" end="18167" title="Bridgeport, Connecticut" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028023" start="18887" end="18895" title="Westerly, Rhode Island" label="Westerly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251686" start="19068" end="19094" title="Northeast blackout of 1965" label="Northeast blackout of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241943" start="19201" end="19217" title="Narragansett Bay" label="Narragansett Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="19559" end="19570" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="19609" end="19625" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q568666" start="19744" end="19760" title="Arnold Arboretum" label="Arnold Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="19764" end="19782" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="19786" end="19792" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q988568" start="20158" end="20168" title="Framingham, Massachusetts" label="Framingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167053" start="20803" end="20818" title="North Woodstock, New Hampshire" label="North Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108734" start="21191" end="21196" title="Hurricane Carol" label="Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358382" start="21201" end="21205" title="Hurricane Edna" label="Edna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072836" start="21456" end="21466" title="Buxton, Maine" label="Groveville"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="21958" end="21971" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="22088" end="22093" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181857" start="22598" end="22610" title="Bay of Fundy" label="Bay of Fundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="22635" end="22647" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138" start="22733" end="22744" title="Fredericton" label="Fredericton"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="23020" end="23031" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253693" start="23366" end="23379" title="price gouging" label="price gouging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672702" start="23461" end="23489" title="Long Island Lighting Company" label="Long Island Lighting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035174" start="23744" end="23771" title="Long Island Power Authority" label="Long Island Power Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344199" start="24111" end="24140" title="Northeast Utilities" label="Connecticut Light &amp;amp; Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q187621" start="24241" end="24256" title="Hurricane Irene" label="Hurricane Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621284" start="24283" end="24309" title="2011 Halloween nor&amp;#x27;easter" label="nor&amp;#x27;easter in October"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="24581" end="24594" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q348789" start="24904" end="24922" title="Environment Canada" label="Environment Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944925" start="25010" end="25035" title="Canadian Hurricane Centre" label="Canadian Hurricane Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="25147" end="25180" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851940" start="25360" end="25371" title="1991 Atlantic hurricane season" label="1991 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108754" start="25392" end="25432" title="List of retired Atlantic hurricane names" label="List of retired Atlantic hurricane names"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25435" end="25485" title="List of wettest tropical cyclones in the United States#Massachusetts" label="List of wettest tropical cyclones in Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591781" start="25488" end="25518" title="List of New England hurricanes" label="List of New England hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592062" start="25521" end="25548" title="List of New York hurricanes" label="List of New York hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591828" start="25551" end="25580" title="List of New Jersey hurricanes" label="List of New Jersey hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592420" start="25583" end="25616" title="List of North Carolina hurricanes" label="List of North Carolina hurricanes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981005" wikidata="Q403627" url="?curid=981005" title="Pathétique">
<text>Pathétique may refer to:

*Piano Sonata No. 8 (Beethoven), in C minor (Op.13), titled &quot;Pathétique&quot; by Beethoven
*Symphony No. 6 (Tchaikovsky), in B minor (Op.74), also titled &quot;Pathétique&quot; by the composer&#x27;s younger brother, Modest Ilyich Tchaikovsky</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146113" start="27" end="57" title="Piano Sonata No. 8 (Beethoven)" label="Piano Sonata No. 8 (Beethoven)"/>
<link wikidata="Q246589" start="123" end="151" title="Symphony No. 6 (Tchaikovsky)" label="Symphony No. 6 (Tchaikovsky)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981020" wikidata="Q409790" url="?curid=981020" title="Charleville">
<text>Charleville can refer to:
== Australia ==

* Charleville, Queensland, a town in Australia
**Charleville railway station, Queensland

== France ==

* Charleville, Marne, a commune in Marne, France
*Charleville-Mézières, a commune in Ardennes, France
** Charleville-Mézières station
* Charleville musket, a smoothbore longarm used by the French military in the 18th and early 19th century

== Ireland ==
*Charleville, County Cork, a town in Ireland
**Charleville railway station
**Charleville GAA
**Charleville (Parliament of Ireland constituency)
*Charleville Castle, a castle in County Offaly, Ireland
*Earl of Charleville, an 18th- and 19th-century Irish peerage

==See also==
* Charlesville (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q409790" start="0" end="11" title="Charleville" label="Charleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q656048" start="45" end="68" title="Charleville, Queensland" label="Charleville, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209165" start="92" end="131" title="Charleville railway station, Queensland" label="Charleville railway station, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218954" start="149" end="167" title="Charleville, Marne" label="Charleville, Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47383" start="197" end="217" title="Charleville-Mézières" label="Charleville-Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395722" start="252" end="280" title="Charleville-Mézières station" label="Charleville-Mézières station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899116" start="283" end="301" title="Charleville musket" label="Charleville musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066722" start="403" end="427" title="Charleville, County Cork" label="Charleville, County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969394" start="449" end="476" title="Charleville railway station" label="Charleville railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084255" start="479" end="494" title="Charleville GAA" label="Charleville GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257738" start="497" end="545" title="Charleville (Parliament of Ireland constituency)" label="Charleville (Parliament of Ireland constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084254" start="547" end="565" title="Charleville Castle" label="Charleville Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326231" start="603" end="622" title="Earl of Charleville" label="Earl of Charleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066701" start="680" end="709" title="Charlesville (disambiguation)" label="Charlesville (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981021" wikidata="Q3124839" url="?curid=981021" title="Prize money">
<text>Prize money refers in particular to naval prize money, usually arising in naval warfare, but also in other circumstances. It was a monetary reward paid in accordance with the prize law of a belligerent state to the crew of a ship belonging to the state, either a warship of its navy or a privateer vessel commissioned by the state. Prize money was most frequently awarded for the capture of enemy ships or of cargoes belonging to an enemy in time of war, either arrested in port at the outbreak of war or captured during the war in international waters or other waters not the territorial waters of a neutral state. Goods carried in neutral ships that are classed as contraband, being shipped to enemy-controlled territory and liable to be useful to it for making war, were also liable to be taken as prizes, but non-contraband goods belonging to neutrals were not. Claims for the award of prize money were usually heard in a prize court, which had to adjudicate the claim and condemn the prize before any distribution of cash or goods could be made to the captors.

Other cases in which prize money has been awarded include prize money for the capture of pirate ships, slave ships after the abolition of the slave trade and ships trading in breach of the Navigation Acts, none of which required a state of war to exist. Similar monetary awards include &quot;military salvage&quot;, the recapture of ships captured by an enemy before an enemy prize court has declared them to be valid prizes (after such ships have been condemned, they are treated as enemy ships), and payments termed &quot;gun money&quot;, &quot;head money&quot; or &quot;bounty&quot;, distributed to men serving in a state warship that captured or destroyed an armed enemy ship. The amount payable depended at first on the number of guns the enemy carried, but later on the complement of the defeated ship.

Certain captures made by armies, called &quot;booty of war&quot;, were distinct from naval prize because, unlike awards under naval prize legislation, the award of booty was only made for a specific capture, often the storming of a city; the award did not set a precedent for other military captures in the same war, and did not require adjudication by a prize court. When the British army and navy acted together, it was normal for instructions to say how any prizes and booty should be shared, and the shares allocated. In this case, combined naval and military force to be dealt with under naval prize law rules.

Although prize law still exists, the payment of prize money to privateers ceased in practice during the second half of the 19th century and prize money for naval personnel was abolished by those maritime states that had provided it at various times in the late 19th century and the first half of the 20th century.

==Origins==
The two roots of prize law and the consequent distribution of prize money are the medieval maritime codes, such as the Consolato Del Mare and Rolls of Oleron, which codified the customary laws that reserved legal rights over certain property found or captured at sea, in harbour or on the shore for the rulers of maritime states, and the 16th and 17th century formulation of international law by jurists such as Hugo Grotius. These jurists considered that only the state could authorise war, and that goods captured from an enemy in war belong as of right to its monarch. However, it was customary for the state to reward those who that assisted in making such captures by granting them part of the proceeds.

In various 17th century states, the crown retained from one-tenth to one-fifth of the value of ships and cargoes taken by privateers but up to half of the value of those captured by the state&#x27;s navy. Grotius also recorded the practices that, for a prize to be effective, the ship must either be brought to port or retained for 24 hours, and that no distribution of prize money or goods could made without due court authorisation.

Most European maritime states, and other maritime states that adopted laws based on European models, had codes of prize law based on the above principles that allowed for monetary rewards for captures. However, details of prize money law and practice are known for relatively few of these. They include English rules from the 17th century, which formed the basis for the rules for Great Britain and the United Kingdom in the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, those of France from the 17th to 20th centuries, the Dutch Republic, mainly for the 17th century, and the United States for the 18th and 19th centuries. The smaller navies of maritime states such as Denmark and Sweden, had little chance of gaining prize money because they had few opportunities to capture enemy ships in wartime, both because, after the Great Northern War, they were rarely involved in naval wars and, when they were, their fleets were much weaker than their major opponents.

===Booty of war===
Booty of war, also termed &quot;spoils of war&quot; is the movable property of an enemy state or its subjects which can be used for warlike purposes, in particular its soldiers&#x27; arms and equipment, captured on land, as opposed to &quot;prize&quot; which is hostile property captured at sea. It is legally the property of the victorious state, but all or part of it (or its value) may be granted to the troops that capture it. In British practice, although the Crown may grant booty and to specify its distribution, this was done by a special proclamation relating to a specific capture which did not set a precedent, not a general measure dealing with all captures made during a war, as were naval prize acts. Instances of it being granted include the Siege of Seringapatam, 1799, the capture of Bordeaux, 1814 and the Siege of Delhi, 1857. Although the United States and France had allowed their soldiers to profit from booty on a basis similar to Britain, they abolished the practice in 1899 and 1901 respectively. The Third Geneva Convention now only allows the arms, military equipment and military documents of prisoners of war to be seized and prohibits the award of booty.

==England to 1707==
The Crown of England had, from medieval times, legal rights over certain property found or captured at sea or found on the shore. These included the rights to shipwrecks, ships found abandoned at the sea, flotsam, jetsam, lagan and derelict, enemy ships and goods found in English ports or captured at sea in wartime and goods taken from pirates. At first, these were collectively known as Droits of the Crown, but after the creation the office of the High Admiral, later the Lord High Admiral, of England in the early 15th century, they were known as Droits of Admiralty, as the Crown granted these rights, and legal jurisdiction the property specified in them, to the Lord Admiral. This jurisdiction ceased in 1702, but the name Droits of Admiralty remained in use.

Early prize law made little distinction between financial rewards made to officers and men of the Royal Navy and to privateers (civilians authorised to attack enemy shipping by letters of marque issued by the Crown), as the former did not exist as a permanent force until the 16th century. Mediaeval rulers had no administrative mechanism to adjudicate prizes or collect the royal share. The first Admiralty Court in England with responsibility for prize and prize money issues was created in 1483 and subordinate Vice-Admiralty courts were later set up in British colonies. Appeal from the Court of Admiralty was to the Privy Council. As the rights over enemy ships or goods are legally prerogatives of the Crown, there are few English or British statues that deal with naval prize money, other than the prize acts issued at the start of each war, authorising the Crown to issue orders or proclamations dealing with prize money, and these acts affirm rather than limit the Crown&#x27;s rights.

From Elizabethan times, the Crown insisted that the validity of prizes and their value had to be determined by royal courts, and that it should retain a portion of their value. In some cases, an English ship failing to bring a prize for adjudication was confiscated. Beyond this, it was left to the discretion of the Crown, guided by custom, as to what should be allocated to those taking prizes, and how that prize money should be allocated between the owners, the officers and the crew. Generally, the Crown retained one-tenth of the value of prizes captured by privateers. By ancient custom, the common seamen, but not the officers, of navy vessels had the right of &quot;free pillage&quot;, the seizure of the enemy crew&#x27;s personal possessions and any goods not stored in the hold. The Commonwealth attempted to forbid the custom of pillage in 1652, but this rule was impossible to enforce, and the right to pillage was given statutory force after the Restoration.

Some rewards that were previously customary or discretionary for privateers became entitlements in 1643, when an ordinance passed by the Commonwealth parliament allowed them to retain any ships and goods captured after adjudication in an Admiralty Court and payment of one-tenth of the value of the prize and customs duties on any goods. A further ordinance of 1649 relating to naval ships, which applied during the First Anglo-Dutch War, entitled seamen and subordinate officers to half the value of a captured enemy warship and &quot;gun money&quot; of between 10 and 20 pounds for every gun on an enemy warship that was sunk, and one third of the value of a captured enemy merchant ship. If a captured enemy warship were repairable at reasonable cost and suitable to add to the English fleet, the Crown might buy it. However, until 1708, the purchase price was fixed by the Admiralty, whose agents were suspected of valuing them cheaply or inflating the cost of repairs. The 1643 ordinance also introduced two new measures: that part of the money not allocated to the ship&#x27;s crew would go to the sick and wounded, and that English ships recaptured from an enemy were to be returned to their owner on payment of one-eighth of their value to the ship recapturing them. A further ordinance of 1650 applied these prize money rules to the capture of pirate ships.

The provisions of 1643, 1649 and 1650 on the distribution of prize money were repeated after the Restoration in the Navy Act 1661 (13 Cha. 2. St. 1. c. 9), which also expressly allowed the custom of pillage, and allowed the Lord Admiral discretion over any money or goods not allocated to the crews. The right of disposing of captured prizes and pre-emption in acquiring their goods was also retained by the Lord Admiral.

===Anglo-Dutch Wars===
Even before the Second Anglo-Dutch War formally began, two steps were taken by the English government that were liable to promote hostility between England and the Netherlands. Firstly, the Navigation Act 1663 (15 Cha. 2. c. 7), which aimed to restrict Dutch maritime trade, authorised the capture of English or foreign vessels trading in breach of that act as prizes, and allowed Vice-Admiralty courts in the English colonies to adjudicate their value, and to award one-third of this value to the captor, one third to the colonial governor and one third to the Crown. These overseas Vice-Admiralty courts were, from 1692, also able to deal with wartime prizes. Secondly, an Order in Council of 1644 increased the prize money due to the seamen of English ships that took prizes to 10 shillings for each ton comprised in their tonnage, and gun money of at least 10 pounds a gun for any warship sunk or burned.

Although neither Charles II nor his brother James, Lord High Admiral since 1660, had been ungenerous to those Royal Navy captains and flag officers that captured enemy ships, giving them a fair allocation of the value of their prizes, the failure to set out a fixed scale of prize money for senior officers led to a scandal in 1665. The Earl of Sandwich commanded an English fleet that, between 3 September and 9 September, had captured thirteen Dutch East India Company merchant ships of the East Indies spice fleet, and had also captured or sunk several of their escorts. Concerned that Charles&#x27;s difficult financial position might make him less generous that before, and considering the great value of the cargoes captured, Sandwich, urged on by one of his flag officers, Sir William Penn, agreed that he and Penn should take goods to the value of 4,000 pounds, and that each other flag officer and the three captains that held knighthoods should take goods worth 2,000 pounds, from the captured cargoes: nothing was provided for the untitled captains.

This seizure of goods was represented by Sandwich and Penn as a payment on account of their expected prize money, although it was in clear breach of the instructions issued in 1665 at the outbreak of the war that required ships and goods to be declared as lawful prizes by an Admiralty court before any goods in its hold could be removed. Three of those officers offered 2,000 pounds of goods refused to take them, and the untitled captains complained against the arrangement. In the course of the removal of goods from the Dutch ships&#x27; holds, many English sailors joined in the plundering, and a large quantity of spices and other valuable goods were stolen or spoilt. The Earl of Sandwich lost his command, and the government lost goods and money that could have been used to send the fleet back to sea.

English privateers were very prominent at sea during the Anglo-Dutch Wars, attacking the maritime trade and fisheries on which the United Provinces depended, capturing many Dutch merchant ships.

===War of the Spanish Succession===
The situation of ships&#x27; captains was remedied by the Prize Act 1692 (4 Will. &amp; Mar. c. 25). This act distinguished between captures made by privateers and by royal ships. Privateers were entitled to retain any ships captured and four-fifths of the goods, surrendering one-fifth of those to the Crown, and it was left to them how they sold their prizes and distributed the proceeds. However, in the case of captures by royal ships, one-third of their value went to the officers and men of the captor, and one third to the king, from which he could reward flag officers. The final one-third was to benefit those sick and wounded, as before, and for the first time was also used to pay dependents of crew members killed and to fund Greenwich Hospital.

The Prize Act 1692 also abolished the ancient right of pillage, standardised gun money at 10 pounds a gun and provided for salvage to be paid by the owners of English ships recaptured from the enemy. Until 1692, the allocation of the one-third of the value of prize money due to the officers and men had been a matter of custom, but it was then fixed as one-third (or one-ninth of the total prize money) to the captain, one-third to other officers and one-third to the crew.

During this war, in 1701, the Admiralty had established a board of prize commissioners, who appointed local prize agents at British and some colonial ports, and were responsible for the custody of ships captured both by privateers and royal ships until these captures were either condemned or released. Although privateers were free to dispose of prize ships and goods after they were condemned and any duties were paid, the prize commissioners were responsible for the sale of ships and cargoes captured by royal ships, the valuation of ships or goods acquired for Royal Navy use, and the calculation and payment of prize money. As many naval actions in this war took place in the Mediterranean or Caribbean, some captains disposed of captured ships without bringing them before an Admiralty prize agent, often defrauding their own crews of all or part of their prize money entitlement. A Royal Proclamation of 1702 made captains that failed to act through prize agents liable to court martial and dismissal. If the Admiralty Court found that a seizure was unlawful, the ships and cargo was restored to its owner, and the captor would be responsible for any loss or costs arising.

==Great Britain, 1707 to 1801==
After the Act of Union 1707 between England and Scotland, the former English prize money rules applied to Great Britain. The War of the Spanish Succession continued until 1714.
An act of 1708, the (6 Ann. c. 65) generally known as the &quot;Cruisers and Convoys Act 1708&quot; was designed to protect British maritime trade by allocating Royal Navy ships to protect convoys, by encouraging privateers to assist in protecting convoys and amending the prize rules to encourage naval ships to attack enemy warships, and both Royal Navy ships and privateers to attack enemy privateers and merchant ships. The two main changes to the made under this act were the abolition of the Crown&#x27;s shares in the value of merchant ships and their cargoes captured by naval vessels, and of goods captured by privateers, and the payment of &quot;head money&quot; of five pounds for each crew member of a captured or sunk enemy warship, as far as these could be established, replacing gun money. As with other prize acts, this ceased to have effect at the end of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1714, although its provisions were largely repeated in subsequent prize acts; the Naval Prize, etc. Act 1756 (29 Geo. 2. c. 34), the Privateers Act 1776 (17 Geo. 3. c. 7), the Prize Act 1780 (20 Geo. 3. c. 9), and the Prize Act 1793 (33 Geo. 3. c. 34), issued at the outbreaks of conflicts or to include new belligerents. Occasionally, if an enemy merchant ship were captured where it was difficult to take it to an admiralty court or prize agent, the captor might offer to ransom it for 10% to 15% of its estimated value. In 1815, ransoming was prohibited except in case of necessity, for example where an enemy warship were nearby.

The 1708 act still required captured ships to be placed in the custody of Admiralty prize agents before adjudication by the Admiralty Court, and of paying customs duties on captured cargoes. However, once they had paid these duties, Royal Navy captors were free to sell these cargoes at the best prices rather than having to sell them through Admiralty prize agents, as privateers had always been able to do so. The act also allowed Royal Navy captains, officers and crews to appoint their own experts and prize agents to dispute the value of ships or goods acquired for naval use and collect prize money on their behalf. Admiralty appointed prize agents were, however, now entitled to a fee of 2% in Britain and 5% abroad. The various changes brought in by this act are regarded as the basis for the fortunes made from prize money in the 18th and early 19th centuries.

===Distribution===
In the Georgian navy, shares of prize money were based on rank. As there were few senior officers, their individual shares were larger than junior officers and very much larger than those of the seamen. The percentages of prize money granted to senior officers were generally higher in the 18th century than in most of the 19th century. Although shares varied over time, and captains within a fleet or squadron could agree on alternative sharing arrangements, in the 18th century, an admiral could generally receive one-eighth of the value of all prizes taken by his fleet or squadron, and if there were more than one admiral, they would share that eighth. A captain usually received one-quarter of the value of his prize, or three-eighths if not under the command of an admiral. The distribution for other officers and men was less detailed than it later became: other officers shared another quarter and the crew shared the remainder. Any ships within sight of a battle also participated in the sharing of prize money, and any unclaimed prize money was allocated to Greenwich Hospital.

During the Seven Years&#x27; War, the crews of privateers operating from the British colonies in America and the Caribbean were often paid wages as well as a share of prize money, but the crews of those operating from British ports usually received no wages and the cost of the provisions they consumed was deducted from their prize money. The owners of privateers generally took half the value of any prize and also charged a further 10% to cover prize agents&#x27; fees and other commissions. The captain received 8% of the value by custom, leaving 32% to be shared by the other officers and crew. It was common practice to divide this into shares, with the officers receiving several times as much as seamen, their relative shares being agreed at the start of the voyage.

===Notable awards, 1707 to 1801===
Perhaps the greatest amount of prize money awarded for the capture of a single ship was for that of the Spanish frigate &quot;Hermione&quot; on 31 May 1762 by the British frigate and sloop . The two captains, Herbert Sawyer and Philemon Pownoll, received about £65,000 apiece, while each seaman and Marine got £482 to £485. The total pool of prize money for this capture was £519,705 after expenses.

However, the capture of the &quot;Hermione&quot; did not lead to the largest award of prize money to an individual. As a result of the Siege of Havana, which led to the surrender of that city in August 1762, 10 Spanish ships-of-the-line, three frigates and a number of smaller vessels were captured, together with large quantities of military equipment, cash and merchandise. Prize money payments of £122,697 each were made to the naval commander, Vice-Admiral Sir George Pocock, and the military commander, George Keppel, 3rd Earl of Albemarle, with £24,539 paid to Commodore Keppel, the naval second-in-command who was Albemarle&#x27;s younger brother. Each of the 42 naval captains present received £1,600 as prize money. The military second-in-command, Lieutenant-General Eliott, received the same amount as Commodore Keppel, as the two shared a fifteenth part of the prize pool, as against the third shared by their commanders. Privates in the army received just over £4 and ordinary seamen rather less than £4 each.

The prize money from the capture of the Spanish frigates &quot;Thetis&quot; and &quot;Santa Brigada&quot; in October 1799, £652,000, was split up among the crews of four British frigates, with each captain being awarded £40,730 and the seamen each receiving £182 4s 9d or the equivalent of 10 years&#x27; pay.

==United Kingdom from 1801==
After the Acts of Union 1800 between Great Britain and Ireland, the former prize money rules of Great Britain applied to the United Kingdom. The Treaty of Amiens of March 1802 ended the hostilities of the French Revolutionary Wars and those of the Napoleonic Wars commenced in May 1803, when the United Kingdom declared war in France.
Prize acts at the start of war with France and Spain repeated the provisions of the Prize Act 1793 (33 Geo. 3. c. 34), which in turn largely repeated those of 1708. The basis of distribution under these acts is detailed in the next section. However, a proclamation of 1812 soon after the start of the War of 1812 made a further revision to the rules on allocation, such that the admiral and captain jointly received one-quarter of the prize money with one-third of this going to the admiral, a reduction from their previous entitlement. The master and lieutenants received one-eighth of the prize money, as did the warrant officers. The crew below warrant officer rank now shared one-half of the prize money. However, this group was subdivided into several grades, from senior petty officers down to boys, with the higher grades gaining at the expense of the lower ones. The Prize, etc. Act 1815 (55 Geo. 3. c. 160), issued after Napoleon&#x27;s return from Elba, largely repeated the allocation below the flag officers&#x27; share into eight grades and, although it lapsed in the same year, its provisions were re-enacted in 1854 at the start of the Crimean War.

The multiplicity of prize money grades survived until 1918, with some refinements to include new ratings required for steamships. The Naval Agency and Distribution Act 1864 (27 &amp; 28 Vict. c. 24) was a permanent act, rather than one enacted at the start of a particular conflict, stating that prize money was to be distributed according to a royal proclamation or Order in Council issued when appropriate. This act made no provision for privateers as the United Kingdom had signed the Declaration of Paris, which outlawed privateering by the ships of signatory nations. The royal proclamation on the division of prize money dated 19 May 1866 provided for a single admiral to receive, or several admiral to share, one-thirtieth of the prize money pool; a single captain or commanding officer to receive, or several share, one-tenth of the pool, and the residue to be allocated to officers and ratings in 10 classes in specified shares.

The Prize Courts Act 1894 (57 &amp; 58 Vict. c. 39) provided that regulations for setting up of prize courts and on prize money should in future be initiated at the start of any war only by an Order in Council and not by royal proclamation. The Naval Prize Act 1918 (8 &amp; 9 Geo. 5. c. 30) changed the system to one where the prize money was no longer paid to the crews of individual ships, but into a common fund from which a payment was made to all naval personnel. The act also stated that no distribution would occur until after the end of the war. The award of prize money in the two world wars were governed by this legislation, which was further modified in 1945 to allow for the distribution to be made to Royal Air Force (RAF) personnel who had been involved in the capture of enemy ships. The Prize Act 1948 (12, 13 &amp; 14 Geo. 6. c. 9) abolished the Crown prerogative of granting prize money or any money arising from droits of the Crown in wartime.

For more on the prize court during World War I, see Maxwell Hendry Maxwell-Anderson.

===Anti-slavery===
After the British abolition of the slave trade in 1807, an additional source of prize money arose when Royal Navy ships of the West Africa Squadron captured slave ships. Under an Order in Council of 1808, the government paid 60 pounds for each male slave freed, 30 pounds for each woman and 10 pounds for each child aged under 14. This was paid in lieu of any prize money for the captured slave ship, which became the property of the British government, and it was allocated in the same proportions as other prize money. Between 1807 and 1811, 1,991 slaves were freed through the Vice-Admiralty Court of Sierra Leone, and between 1807 and mid-1815, HM Treasury paid Royal Navy personnel 191,100 pounds in prize money for slaves freed in West Africa. Condemned slave ships were usually auctioned at Freetown and re-registered as British ships. However, in 1825, the bounty for all slaves was reduced to a flat rate of 10 pounds, and it was further reduced to 5 pounds for each live slave in 1830. The decline in captures prompted an increase in prize money in 1839 to 5 pounds for each slave landed alive, half that sum for slaves that had died and one pound and ten shillings for each ton of the captured vessel&#x27;s tonnage.

===Distribution===
The following scheme for distribution of prize money was used for much of the Napoleonic wars until 1812, the heyday of prize warfare. Allocation was by eighths. Two eighths of the prize money went to the captain or commander, generally propelling him upwards in political and financial circles. One eighth of the money went to the admiral or commander-in-chief who signed the ship&#x27;s written orders (unless the orders came directly from the Admiralty in London, in which case this eighth also went to the captain). One eighth was divided among the lieutenants, sailing master, and captain of marines, if any. One eighth was divided among the wardroom warrant officers (surgeon, purser, and chaplain), standing warrant officers (carpenter, boatswain, and gunner), lieutenant of marines, and the master&#x27;s mates. One eighth was divided among the junior warrant and petty officers, their mates, sergeants of marines, captain&#x27;s clerk, surgeon&#x27;s mates, and midshipmen. The final two eighths were divided among the crew, with able and specialist seamen receiving larger shares than ordinary seamen, landsmen, and boys. The pool for the seamen was divided into shares, with each able seaman getting two shares in the pool (referred to as a fifth-class share), an ordinary seaman received a share and a half (referred to as a sixth-class share), landsmen received a share each (a seventh-class share), and boys received a half share each (referred to as an eighth-class share).

A notable prize award related to a capture in January 1807, when the frigate &quot;Caroline&quot; took the Spanish ship &quot;San Rafael&quot; as a prize, netting Captain Peter Rainier £52,000.

===Operational difficulties===
For much of the 18th century and until 1815, the main complaints about prize money concerned delays in its payment and practices that deprived ordinary seamen of much of what was due to them. Although the incidence of captains selling captured ships abroad and defrauding crews of prize money reduced greatly in the course of the century, payment was often by way of a promissory note, or &quot;ticket&quot; to be paid when the relevant naval department had funds. Although officers could generally afford to wait for payment, which was often made only in London and sometimes in instalments that might stretch over several years, most seamen sold their promissory notes at a large discount. Other seamen authorised another individual to collect their prize money, who did not always pass it on, or lost out when they transferred to a new ship, if their prize money were not forwarded. A final issue of contention was that the value of prizes assessed in overseas Vice-Admiralty courts could be reassessed in the Admiralty Court in Britain if the Admiralty appealed the initial valuation. Excessive valuations in Vice-Admiralty courts, particularly in the West Indies, arose because the courts charged fees based on the prizes&#x27; values. This led to delays and possible reduced payments.

To some extent, delays arose from the time taken by Vice-Admiralty courts adjudicating whether captured ships were legitimate prizes and, if they were, their value. In the War of 1812, the Vice-Admiralty courts at Halifax, Nova Scotia, and, to a lesser extent, Bermuda had to deal with many, often small, American ships captured both by privateers and naval vessels, leading to lengthy legal delays in adjudication. Once an adjudication was made, providing there was no appeal, the funds from the sale of a captured ship or its goods should have been available for payment within two years, but the whole process from capture to payment might take three years or more.

Under the so-called &quot;joint capture&quot; rules, which did not apply to privateers, any Royal Navy ship present when a capture took place was entitled to share in the prize money. However, this rule led to disputes where, for example, three claimant ships had been pursuing the captured ship but were out of sight when another captured it, or where a squadron commander claimed a share in a prize captured by his subordinate in disobedience to that commander&#x27;s orders. In order to minimise disputes, some captains and crews of ships on the same mission made time-limited agreements to share prize money. In the case of privateers, for one to claim a share of prize money, it had to give actual assistance to the ship making the capture unless there were a prior agreement between privateers to share prizes.

==Scotland and Ireland==

===Scotland===
The Kingdom of Scotland had its own Lord High Admiral from mediaeval times until 1707, except for the period 1652 to 1661. His jurisdiction over Scottish ships, waters and coasts, exercised through a High Court of Admiralty, was similar to that of his English equivalent. In 1652, the Scottish fleet that was absorbed into the Commonwealth fleet and, although a separate Scottish Admiralty was re-established in 1661, it had no warships designed as such until three relatively small ones were commissioned in 1696.

However, as Scotland was involved in the Second (1665–67) and Third Anglo-Dutch Wars (1672–74) against the Dutch and their allies, the Scottish Admiralty commissioned a significant number of privateers in both conflicts by issuing Letters of marque. Although Scottish privateers were generally successful in 1666 and later, their activities in 1665 were limited, because of delays in the Scottish Admiral issuing regular Letters of marque at the start of the war. At least 80 privateers operating from Scottish ports in these two wars have been identified, and contemporaries estimated as many as 120 may have operated against Dutch and Danish merchant ships, including some English ships operating under Scottish commissions. Apart from ships of the Dutch East India Company, many Dutch merchant ships and of its Danish ally were poorly armed and undermanned. Most of these engaged in Atlantic trade had to sail around the north of Scotland to avoid the English Channel in wartime, and the Dutch whaling and herring fleets operated in waters north and east of Scotland, so they were vulnerable Scottish privateers, who were particularly successful in the Second Anglo-Dutch War. The owners of privateering vessels, were entitled to the greater part of the value of their prizes, as their ordinary seamen usually served for wages rather than a share of prize money.

===Ireland===
Admirals of Ireland were appointed in the late Middle Ages to what was a mainly honorific position involving few official tasks. However, from the late 16th century, these admirals became the Irish representatives of the Lord Admiral of England. They were sometimes referred to as the Vice-Admiral of Ireland, but had no control over the royal fleet in Irish waters. Ireland also had its own Admiralty Court from the late 16th century, mainly staffed by English admiralty officials and with a jurisdiction was broadly similar to that of its English counterpart. Much of its activities concerned the many pirates operating off the coast of Ireland during the late 16th and early 17th centuries. The Irish Admiralty had no ships of its own and no authority to issue Letters marque to privateers, but could seize and condemn pirate and enemy ships in Irish ports.

The Irish Admiralty was granted permission to establish a prize court at the time of the Second Anglo-Dutch War, which was considered to be the equivalent of the Vice-Admiralty courts in British colonies. At the outbreak of the War of the Austrian Succession in 1744, the Irish Admiralty Court managed to extend its powers and jurisdiction by obtaining independent prize jurisdiction and enhancing its status from that of a Vice-Admiralty to that of an independent court.

==France==
In France, prize jurisdiction lay with the Admiral of France until that office was suppressed in 1627. A commission of jurists, the prize council (&quot;Conseil des Prises&quot;), was established in 1659 to deal with the adjudication of all prizes and the distribution of prize money, although many French privateers tried to evade its scrutiny. Cormack (2002), p. 76. The Prize Council only functioned in times of war until 1861: it then became permanent until its dissolution in 1965.

Although officers and men of the French Navy were, in principle, entitled to prize money, and depriving men of prize money due to them was an established disciplinary measure, awards were relatively rare. During the 17th and 18th centuries, French naval strategy alternated between that of &quot;guerre d&#x27;escadre&quot;, maintaining a fully-equipped battle fleet for control of the sea, and &quot;guerre de course&quot;, sometimes using naval ships but more often privateers, including smaller naval warships leased to private individuals, to destroy an enemy&#x27;s maritime commerce. Although these alternatives had a strategic basis, only &quot;guerre de course&quot; was viable when financial problems prevented the maintenance of a battle fleet. Even when it was possible to equip a battle fleet, the French naval doctrine that a fleet must avoid any action that might prevent it carrying out its designated mission, prioritised defensive tactics which made captures and prize money unlikely.

When a policy of commerce raiding was adopted, the major warships were laid up, but many of the smaller warships manned by the officers and men of the French Navy, were leased by the French Crown to contractors, who paid the fitting-out and running costs of these ships, and agreed to pay the Crown one-fifth of the value of all captures. Jenkins (1973), These ships were, however, regarded as privateers, and other privateers were entirely financed by private individuals: in both cases, the privateers operated as their owners and lessees wished, outside if government control. Privateering denied the French Navy of recruits who were experienced seamen, already in short supply in France.

Under an ordinance of 1681, privateers, both those using their own ships and those leasing royal ships were required to register with an officer of the Admiralty and make a substantial cautionary deposit. Any prize obtained by a privateer was to be surveyed by representatives of the prize council, who would recover their costs out of the sale proceeds, and retain a tenth of the net proceeds as the Admiralty portion. Officers and men of the French Royal Navy were entitled to share four-fifths of the value of a merchant ship captured, with one tenth of the proceeds retained by the Admiralty and a further tenth for sick and injured seamen. Gun money for an enemy warship or armed privateer captured or destroyed. The Admiralty tenth was sometimes waived when the government wished to encourage commerce raiding, and the distribution of prize money to the officers and crews, and to owners of private ships, was governed by custom, not by any ordinance. The prize council was notorious for the lengthy delays in dealing with cases, during which the prizes and their cargoes deteriorated.

Prize money was awarded to French naval personnel up to 1916, after which amounts that would have been paid as prize money were allocated to a fund for naval widows and wounded.

==Dutch Republic==
During the Dutch Revolt, William the Silent as sovereign Prince of Orange, was able to issue letters of marque to privateers and, before the end of the 16th century five partly autonomous admiralties had emerged, under the oversight of the states general. During the 17th and 18th centuries, the each of these was responsible for providing warships to the navy of the Dutch Republic and acting as prize courts for captures by both for their own warships and for privateers to whom they had given commissions, although these were formally issued in the name of the states general. From the 1620s, the states general also delegated authority to the Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company to issue Letters of marque valid within each company&#x27;s area of operation. In the 17th century, the greatest number of privateers operated under the jurisdiction of the Admiralty of Zeeland, and its councillors based in Middelburg spent a great deal of time dealing with the complex business of adjudicating prizes. Prizes were normally sold by auction, and the large numbers captured in the 17th century wars against Spain, England and France depressed prices and restricted the prize money crews received.

Although prize money was an important supplement to the income of the officers of Dutch warships, there has been little research on how the five admiralties calculated the amounts of prize money distributed to the officers and men capturing prizes. The lieutenant-admiral of an admiralty generally received four times as much as the captain responsible for a capture, and the vice-admiral twice as much: in both cases, these flag-officers shared in all ships and goods taken by captains in their admiralties, even when not present at the capture. In 1640, Maarten Tromp, a lieutenant-admiral was owed 13,800 guilders, mostly his share of prize money from the Battle of the Downs the previous year.

Both captains and flag officers in the Dutch fleet sometimes put the pursuit of prize money before discipline. In the Four Days&#x27; Battle of June 1666, several Dutch ships left the fleet either towing English ships they had captured or in pursuit of prizes, and Cornelis Tromp was extremely reluctant to burn after it had run aground and been damaged, despite the orders of his commander, Michiel de Ruyter. Tromp attempted to claim compensation for its loss for many years. For ordinary seamen, prize money was rare, the amounts small and payment was often delayed. In many cases, prize money was paid in installments over several years and crew members frequently sold advance notes for the later instalments at far below their face value, especially in the 18th century, when several of the Admiralties were in financial difficulties.

Privateering was already established when the Dutch Republic broke away from Spain: it quickly developed in the late 16th century and expended further in the 17th century. In many cases, Dutch privateers attempted to evade the prize rules, by attacking neutral or even Dutch ships, failing to bring captures or their cargoes for adjudication and removing and selling cargoes to avoid paying duties. Privateers licensed by the two Dutch India companies were aggressive in attacking what they termed &quot;interlopers&quot; in their areas of operations, regardless of nationality, and both companies were active in privateering in the three Anglo-Dutch wars. .

During the Eighty Years&#x27; War, the main targets of Dutch privateers were Spanish and Portuguese ships, including those of the Spanish Netherlands. Privateers licensed by the West India Company were very active against ships trading with Brazil. The privateers that had attacked Portuguese shipping had to cease doing so after the 1661 Treaty of The Hague, but many quickly transferred their activities to attacking English shipping after 1665 during the Second and Third Anglo-Dutch wars. However, there was relatively little Dutch privateering after the end of the War of the Spanish Succession, a consequence of the general decline in Dutch maritime activity.

==United States==
===To 1814===
During the Revolutionary War period, the Continental Congress had no navy and relied heavily on privateers who had been authorised by one of the states to capture British ships. Admiralty courts for the state that had authorised the privateer adjudicated on the ownership of captured vessels and their value, and were subject to oversight by a committee of Congress. The Continental Navy, formed in 1775, was small and outmatched by the Royal Navy, whereas American privateers captured about 600 British merchant ships in the course of this conflict. In 1787, the US Constitution transferred the right to grant letters of marque from the states to Congress.

At the start of the War of 1812, the few larger US Navy ships were laid-up, while the Royal Navy had relatively few resources available in the western Atlantic, leaning the field free for privateers on both sides. However, once the US Navy frigates were brought back into commission, they achieved some spectacular successes against weaker British frigates, with Stephen Decatur and John Rodgers both receiving over 10,000 dollars in prize money. However, later in the war, the Royal Navy succeeded in blockading the US Eastern seaboard and capturing several US Navy vessels and a number of merchant ships, and also stifling American privateer activity, although single US Navy warships managed to avoid the blockade and attack British shipping in the Caribbean and off South America.

From the inception of its navy, the United States government granted naval personnel additional payments of two kinds, prize money, being a share in the proceeds from captured enemy merchant vessels and their cargo, and head money, a cash reward from the US Treasury for sinking enemy warships. From 1791, US Navy personnel received half the proceeds of a prize of equal or inferior force, and all the proceeds of a vessel of superior force. Privateers, in contrast, received all the proceeds of any prize, but had to pay duties that rose to 40% during the War of 1812, although they were lower at other times. Generally, half of the net amount went to the owners of the privateer, half to the crew. From 1800, US Navy ships that sunk an armed enemy ship received a bounty of twenty dollars for each enemy crew member at the start of the action, divided among the crew of that ship in the same proportions as other prize money.

===Distribution===
Under United States legislation of 1800, whether the officers and men of the navy ship or ships responsible for the capturing a prize were entitled to half of the assessed value of the prize, or the whole value in the case of a capture of superior force, the prize money fund was to be allocated in specified proportions. The captain or captains of vessels taking prizes were entitled to 10% of the prize money fund, and the commander of the squadron to 5% of the fund. In the event that the captain was operating independently, he received 15% of the prize fund. Naval lieutenants, captains of marines and sailing masters were to share 10%, increased to approximately 12% if there were no lieutenants of marines. Chaplains, lieutenants of marines, surgeons, pursers, boatswains, gunners, carpenters, and master&#x27;s mates shared 10% of the prize fund, reduced to approximately 8% if there were no lieutenants of marines. Midshipman, junior warrant offices and the mates of senior warrant officers shared 17.5% and a range of petty officers a further 12.5%. This left 35% for the rest of the crew. Any unclaimed prize money was to be retained jointly by the Navy and Treasury secretaries to fund disability pensions and half-pay.

===From 1815===
For most of the period between the end of the War of 1812 and the start of the American Civil War, there was little opportunity to gain prize money. After the outbreak of the Civil War, the Confederate States granted some 30 commissions or letters of marque to privateers, which captured between 50 and 60 United States merchant ships. However, a declaration by Abraham Lincoln that Confederate privateers would be treated as pirates and the closure of the ports of European colonies in the Caribbean as venues for the disposal of prize vessels and cargoes encouraged their owners to turn to blockade running.

From 1861, US Navy ships engaged Confederate privateers and blockade runners: as the 1800 legislation only applied to enemies of the United States, which did not recognise the Confederate States, it was unclear if prize money would apply. However, a revised statute of 1864 stated that &quot;the provisions of this title shall apply to all captures made as prize by authority of the United States&quot;, allowing prize money claims to be made. Over 11 million dollars of prize money was paid to US Navy personnel for captures in the Civil War period. It has been calculated that about one-third of prize money due was payable to officers under the prevailing rules, but that approximately half of the money actually paid went to officers, most probably because of the difficulty in tracing enlisted men when payments were delayed. One sailor, Benjamin Jackson, earned $900 ($ today) after one year of service in the Union blockade.

In 1856, the Declaration of Paris was signed: this outlawed privateering by the ships of the 55 nations that signed it. However, the United States did not sign the declaration, in part because it considered that, if privateering were to be abolished, the capture of merchant ships by naval vessels should also cease. Despite this, the United States agreed to respect the declaration during the American Civil War, although Lincoln&#x27;s cabinet did discuss the use of privateers against British merchant shipping in the event Britain recognised the Confederacy.

A number of changes were made to the allocation of prize money to US Navy personnel in the 19th century in the last being in 1864. This preserved the awards 5% of the prize fund to commanders of the squadron, which now also applied to fleet commanders of fleet and of 10% to captains under the immediate command of a flag officer or 15% for those operating independently. It added new awards of 2% for a commander of a division of a fleet under the orders of a fleet commander and 1% for a fleet captain stationed on the flagship. The most significant change was that the residue of prize money after making these awards was to be divided amongst the remaining officers and men in proportion to their rates of pay. This law also increased the bounty or head money for destroying an enemy warship in action, or any other enemy ship that it was necessary to destroy was increased to 100 dollars for each enemy crew member at the start of the action on a ship of less or equal force, or 200 dollars for each crew member of an enemy ship of greater force, to be divided among the officers and men of the US ship in the same proportions as other prize money.

The small size of US Navy meant that privateering would be the main way it could attack enemy commerce. Until the early 1880s, American naval opinion considered that privateering remained a viable option, although subsequent increases in the size of the US Navy changed this view.

In the Spanish–American War of 1898, neither the United States nor Spain issued commissions to privateers. However, the US Navy was granted what were to be last payments of prize money made by the US Treasury for that war. These were to sailors that took part in the battles of Manila Bay and Santiago and divided prize funds of 244,400 dollars and 166,700 dollars respectively, based on the estimated numbers of Spanish sailors and the value of ships salvaged at Manilla.

===Abolition===
During the Spanish American War in 1898, the US Navy was seen by much of the United States population as seeking to profit from prize money and head money to an unacceptable extent, even though the amounts granted were relatively modest. All awards of prize money and head money to US Navy personnel were abolished by an overwhelming vote of Congress in March 1899, shortly after the Spanish-American War concluded.

It is sometimes claimed that the US Navy last paid prize money in 1947. and USS Somers (DD-381) intercepted the German cargo ship &quot;Odenwald&quot; on 6 November 1941 while on Neutrality Patrol in the area of the western Atlantic in which the United States had prohibited warships of belligerent powers from operating. Although the &quot;Odenwald&quot; was not a warship, it was sailing under the United States flag and claiming to be registered there, and also carrying contraband, either of which rendered the ship liable to arrest although not condemnation as a prize. After the &quot;Odenwald&quot; was stopped, its crew tried to scuttle it and took to the lifeboats. However, a boarding party from the &quot;Omaha&quot; managed to prevent the &quot;Odenwald&quot; from sinking and sailed it first to Trinidad, then to Puerto Rico. The United States was not at war with Germany at the time, and after the war, the &quot;Odenwald&#x27;s&quot; owners claimed that its seizure was therefore illegal. The Admiralty Court in Puerto Rico, however, ruled in 1947 that the crew&#x27;s attempt to scuttle the ship, and then abandon it, meant that the &quot;Omaha&#x27;s&quot; boarding party and salvage party that jointly brought the &quot;Odenwald&quot; to port had salvage rights, worth approximately 3 million dollars. It also ruled explicitly that it was not a case of bounty or prize.

==End of prize money==
===Privateers===
Privateers were most numerous in European waters during the seventeenth and early eighteenth-century wars, in conflicts involving Britain, France and the Dutch Republic, and outside Europe in the percent in the American War of Independence, the War of 1812 and colonial conflicts in the Caribbean, involving Britain, France and the United States. However, between 1775 and 1815, revenues declined sharply, largely because the probability of seizing a prize ship fell dramatically, partly owing to the increasing numbers of naval vessels competing for captures. As outfitting and manning ships for commerce raiding was expensive, privateering became less financially attractive.

The Declaration of Paris 1856, by outlawing privateering by ships of signatory nations, would have made it politically difficult for non-signatories, which included the United States to commission privateers in a future conflict, and the privateering using metal-hulled steamships presented the additional problems of maintaining complex engines, the need for frequent re-coaling and to repair more complex damage than that experienced by wooden-hulled sailing ships. In addition, after 1880, many maritime countries paid subsidies so that liners and other fast merchant vessels were built with a view to conversion into armed merchant cruisers under naval control in wartime, which replaced the need for privateers, and no privateers were commissioned after the American Civil War.

==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Nelson&#x27;s Navy – Prize Money</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3124839" start="0" end="11" title="Prize money" label="Prize money"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="74" end="87" title="naval warfare" label="naval warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967845" start="175" end="184" title="prize law" label="prize law"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="288" end="297" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="532" end="552" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758553" start="667" end="677" title="contraband" label="contraband"/>
<link wikidata="Q542612" start="926" end="937" title="prize court" label="prize court"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="1256" end="1271" title="Navigation Acts" label="Navigation Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372150" start="1640" end="1646" title="Bounty (reward)" label="bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11932304" start="2940" end="2958" title="Book of the Consulate of the Sea" label="Consolato Del Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q556537" start="2963" end="2978" title="Rolls of Oleron" label="Rolls of Oleron"/>
<link wikidata="Q154959" start="3233" end="3245" title="Hugo Grotius" label="Hugo Grotius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="4476" end="4490" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="4777" end="4795" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5693" end="5714" title="Battle of Seringapatam#Siege" label="Siege of Seringapatam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="5737" end="5745" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343263" start="5760" end="5774" title="Siege of Delhi" label="Siege of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984882" start="5962" end="5985" title="Third Geneva Convention" label="Third Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="6142" end="6151" title="The Crown" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q852190" start="6301" end="6311" title="shipwrecks" label="shipwrecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275063" start="6347" end="6382" title="flotsam, jetsam, lagan and derelict" label="flotsam, jetsam, lagan and derelict"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308236" start="6532" end="6537" title="Droit" label="Droit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153574" start="6594" end="6647" title="Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom" label="High Admiral, later the Lord High Admiral, of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414906" start="7088" end="7105" title="letters of marque" label="letters of marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q583320" start="7309" end="7324" title="Admiralty Court" label="Admiralty Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="7532" end="7545" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="8702" end="8714" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="8864" end="8879" title="Stuart Restoration" label="the Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151913" start="9298" end="9319" title="First Anglo-Dutch War" label="First Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q339180" start="9455" end="9461" title="Pound (currency)" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10366" end="10379" title="Navy Act 1661" label="Navy Act 1661"/>
<link wikidata="Q122879220" start="10381" end="10397" title="13 Cha. 2. St. 1" label="13 Cha. 2. St. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q916495" start="10712" end="10734" title="Second Anglo-Dutch War" label="Second Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="10886" end="10905" title="Navigation Act 1663" label="Navigation Act 1663"/>
<link wikidata="Q122879200" start="10907" end="10916" title="15 Cha. 2" label="15 Cha. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="11371" end="11387" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="11480" end="11489" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="shillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q491774" start="11522" end="11529" title="tonnage" label="tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="11623" end="11633" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q335182" start="11939" end="11959" title="Edward Montagu, 1st Earl of Sandwich" label="The Earl of Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="12052" end="12076" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="12099" end="12110" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q656629" start="12386" end="12402" title="Sir William Penn" label="Sir William Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q755170" start="13537" end="13553" title="Anglo-Dutch Wars" label="Anglo-Dutch Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893248" start="13770" end="13784" title="Prize Act 1692" label="Prize Act 1692"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460379" start="13786" end="13804" title="4 Will. &amp;amp; Mar." label="4 Will. &amp;amp; Mar."/>
<link wikidata="Q15137935" start="14450" end="14468" title="Greenwich Hospital, London" label="Greenwich Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="16172" end="16189" title="Act of Union 1707" label="Act of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509804" start="16360" end="16366" title="6 Ann." label="6 Ann."/>
<link wikidata="Q370330" start="16528" end="16534" title="convoy" label="convoy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17330" end="17356" title="Naval Prize, etc. Act 1756" label="Naval Prize, etc. Act 1756"/>
<link wikidata="Q131286440" start="17358" end="17367" title="29 Geo. 2" label="29 Geo. 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17381" end="17400" title="Privateers Act 1776" label="Privateers Act 1776"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17424" end="17438" title="Prize Act 1780" label="Prize Act 1780"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560536" start="17440" end="17449" title="20 Geo. 3" label="20 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17466" end="17480" title="Prize Act 1793" label="Prize Act 1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734624" start="17482" end="17491" title="33 Geo. 3" label="33 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="18038" end="18045" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="19873" end="19894" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642321" start="20777" end="20813" title="Spanish frigate Hermione" label="Spanish frigate &amp;quot;Hermione&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735510" start="20882" end="20896" title="Herbert Sawyer (1730–1798)" label="Herbert Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q648900" start="20901" end="20917" title="Philemon Pownoll" label="Philemon Pownoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q562277" start="21209" end="21224" title="Siege of Havana" label="Siege of Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="21293" end="21310" title="ships-of-the-line" label="ships-of-the-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="21318" end="21326" title="frigates" label="frigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q472599" start="21539" end="21552" title="George Pocock" label="George Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479480" start="21582" end="21618" title="George Keppel, 3rd Earl of Albemarle" label="George Keppel, 3rd Earl of Albemarle"/>
<link wikidata="Q332972" start="21641" end="21657" title="Augustus Keppel, 1st Viscount Keppel" label="Commodore Keppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101410" start="21831" end="21856" title="George Augustus Eliott, 1st Baron Heathfield" label="Lieutenant-General Eliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q15178081" start="22118" end="22202" title="Action of 16 October 1799" label="the capture of the Spanish frigates &amp;quot;Thetis&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Santa Brigada&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="22447" end="22465" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="22582" end="22598" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="22642" end="22667" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="22685" end="22700" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22856" end="22870" title="Prize Act 1793" label="Prize Act 1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734624" start="22872" end="22881" title="33 Geo. 3" label="33 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="23073" end="23084" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23647" end="23667" title="Prize, etc. Act 1815" label="Prize, etc. Act 1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q123418907" start="23669" end="23678" title="55 Geo. 3" label="55 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="23702" end="23710" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="23923" end="23934" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24071" end="24109" title="Naval Agency and Distribution Act 1864" label="Naval Agency and Distribution Act 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q123983031" start="24111" end="24128" title="27 &amp;amp; 28 Vict." label="27 &amp;amp; 28 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q1572600" start="24282" end="24300" title="royal proclamation" label="royal proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="24304" end="24320" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q684311" start="24425" end="24445" title="Paris Declaration Respecting Maritime Law" label="Declaration of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24880" end="24901" title="Prize Courts Act 1894" label="Prize Courts Act 1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965314" start="24903" end="24920" title="57 &amp;amp; 58 Vict." label="57 &amp;amp; 58 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25121" end="25141" title="Naval Prize Act 1918" label="Naval Prize Act 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460407" start="25143" end="25159" title="8 &amp;amp; 9 Geo. 5" label="8 &amp;amp; 9 Geo. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="25592" end="25607" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967845" start="25681" end="25695" title="Prize Act 1948" label="Prize Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q123294207" start="25697" end="25719" title="12, 13 &amp;amp; 14 Geo. 6" label="12, 13 &amp;amp; 14 Geo. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="25877" end="25888" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932822" start="25894" end="25925" title="Maxwell Hendry Maxwell-Anderson" label="Maxwell Hendry Maxwell-Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020194" start="26074" end="26094" title="West Africa Squadron" label="West Africa Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="26551" end="26563" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="26596" end="26607" title="HM Treasury" label="HM Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="27113" end="27122" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="shillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="27273" end="27288" title="Napoleonic wars" label="Napoleonic wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="27400" end="27407" title="Captain (naval)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="27527" end="27534" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="27748" end="27758" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4233220" start="27761" end="27775" title="sailing master" label="sailing master"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="27781" end="27799" title="Captain (land)" label="captain of marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q325855" start="27869" end="27876" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s doctor" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307407" start="27878" end="27884" title="purser" label="purser"/>
<link wikidata="Q303486" start="27939" end="27948" title="boatswain" label="boatswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555506" start="27954" end="27960" title="Gunner (rank)" label="gunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784915" start="27994" end="28012" title="master&amp;#x27;s mate" label="master&amp;#x27;s mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036499" start="28118" end="28138" title="captain&amp;#x27;s clerk" label="captain&amp;#x27;s clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646177" start="28140" end="28159" title="surgeon&amp;#x27;s mate" label="surgeon&amp;#x27;s mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="28166" end="28176" title="midshipman" label="midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="30417" end="30437" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="30464" end="30471" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="31736" end="31755" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782467" start="31768" end="31785" title="Lord High Admiral of Scotland" label="Lord High Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q666275" start="32017" end="32031" title="Royal Scots Navy" label="Scottish fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q916495" start="32289" end="32295" title="Second Anglo-Dutch War" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342568" start="32310" end="32331" title="Third Anglo-Dutch War" label="Third Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414906" start="32479" end="32496" title="Letters of marque" label="Letters of marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="34719" end="34749" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="38461" end="38473" title="Dutch Revolt" label="Dutch Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="38475" end="38493" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="38497" end="38506" title="imperial immediacy" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="38507" end="38523" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793723" start="38638" end="38649" title="Dutch admiralties" label="admiralties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="38690" end="38704" title="States General of the Netherlands" label="states general"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="39130" end="39154" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393452" start="39328" end="39348" title="Admiralty of Zeeland" label="Admiralty of Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52101" start="39379" end="39389" title="Middelburg, Zeeland" label="Middelburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q931281" start="39921" end="39939" title="lieutenant-admiral" label="lieutenant-admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q214443" start="40044" end="40056" title="vice-admiral" label="vice-admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q470200" start="40224" end="40237" title="Maarten Tromp" label="Maarten Tromp"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="40276" end="40284" title="guilders" label="guilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q675999" start="40327" end="40346" title="Battle of the Downs" label="Battle of the Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q734934" start="40485" end="40507" title="Four Days&amp;#x27; Battle" label="Four Days&amp;#x27; Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q982247" start="40632" end="40646" title="Cornelis Tromp" label="Cornelis Tromp"/>
<link wikidata="Q316945" start="40759" end="40776" title="Michiel de Ruyter" label="Michiel de Ruyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="41880" end="41902" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="41999" end="42018" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383784" start="42208" end="42227" title="Treaty of The Hague (1661)" label="Treaty of The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="42609" end="42629" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367216" start="42939" end="42955" title="Continental Navy" label="Continental Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414906" start="43179" end="43196" title="letters of marque" label="letters of marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="43590" end="43605" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733407" start="43610" end="43622" title="John Rodgers (1772-1838)" label="John Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="43747" end="43763" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Eastern seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q144134" start="46183" end="46191" title="half-pay" label="half-pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="46289" end="46307" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="46400" end="46418" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="46572" end="46587" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159762" start="46593" end="46614" title="Confederate privateer" label="Confederate privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q884687" start="46802" end="46818" title="Blockade runner" label="blockade running"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888867" start="47664" end="47680" title="Benjamin Jackson (sailor)" label="Benjamin Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493703" start="47737" end="47751" title="Union blockade" label="Union blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q684311" start="47767" end="47787" title="Paris Declaration Respecting Maritime Law" label="Declaration of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458437" start="48808" end="48821" title="Captain of the fleet" label="fleet captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="49762" end="49782" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q528550" start="50033" end="50043" title="Battle of Manila Bay" label="Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999889" start="50048" end="50056" title="Battle of Santiago de Cuba" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471161" start="50738" end="50757" title="USS Somers (DD-381)" label="USS Somers (DD-381)"/>
<link wikidata="Q469062" start="50841" end="50858" title="Neutrality Patrol" label="Neutrality Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="51470" end="51478" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="51488" end="51499" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569963" start="53391" end="53414" title="Armed merchantmen" label="armed merchant cruisers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981028" wikidata="Q7541337" url="?curid=981028" title="Slop bowl">
<text>In Europe, a slop bowl, slop basin or waste bowl is one of the components of a traditional tea set. It was used to empty the cold tea and dregs in tea cups before refilling with hot tea, as there were often tea leaves in the bottom of the cups.

As with the rest of the tea set, most slop bowls were in pottery, but some in silver. In the 18th century they typically held about half a pint, with some room to spare. Handleless ceramic bowls of this size and shape were also used for drinking tea at breakfast, sometimes known at the time as &quot;breakfast basins&quot;, and it is not always possible to assign a particular role to a piece; indeed they may have been made as dual-purpose pieces. They became less common after about 1860, but services in the 1902 Sears Roebuck catalogue still offered them.

In 2015 a slop bowl from the famous Swan Service in Meissen porcelain (originally 1737 to 1742) fetched £18,125 at a London auction, compared to £31,250 for a teacup and saucer.


== References ==
==External links==
* http://www.silvercollection.it/dictionarywastebowl.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7541337" start="13" end="22" title="Slop bowl" label="slop bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541337" start="24" end="34" title="Slop bowl" label="slop basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408351" start="91" end="98" title="tea set" label="tea set"/>
<link wikidata="Q81707" start="147" end="154" title="tea cup" label="tea cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="763" end="776" title="Sears Roebuck" label="Sears Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486671" start="844" end="856" title="Swan Service" label="Swan Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q822407" start="860" end="877" title="Meissen porcelain" label="Meissen porcelain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981045" wikidata="Q7797260" url="?curid=981045" title="Three-key exposition">
<text>In music, the three-key exposition is a particular kind of exposition used in sonata form.

Normally, a sonata form exposition has two main key areas. The first asserts the primary key of the piece, that is, the tonic. The second section moves to a different key, establishes that key firmly, arriving ultimately at a cadence in that key. For the second key, composers normally chose the dominant for major-key sonatas, and the relative major (or less commonly, the minor-mode dominant) for minor-key sonatas. The three-key exposition moves not directly to the dominant or relative major, but indirectly via a third key; hence the name.

==Examples== 

* A very early example appears in the first movement of Haydn&#x27;s String Quartet in D major, Op. 17 No. 6: the three keys are D major, C major, and A major. (C major is prepared by a modulation to its relative minor A minor, which happens to be the dominant minor of the original key.)
* Ludwig van Beethoven wrote a number of sonata movements during the earlier part of his career with three-key expositions. For the &quot;third&quot; (that is, the intermediate) key, Beethoven made various choices: the dominant minor (Piano Sonata No. 2, Op. 2 no. 2; String Quartet No. 5, Op. 18 no. 5), the supertonic minor (Piano Sonata No. 3, Op. 2 no. 3), and the relative minor (Piano Sonata No. 7, Op. 10 no. 3). Later, Beethoven used the supertonic major (Piano Sonata No. 9, Op. 14 no. 1, Piano Sonata No. 11, Op. 22), which is only a mild sort of three-key exposition, since the supertonic major is the dominant of the dominant, and commonly arises in any event as part of the modulation. As he entered his so-called &quot;middle period,&quot; Beethoven abandoned the three-key exposition. This was part of a general change in the composer&#x27;s work in which he moved closer to the older practice of Haydn, writing less discursive and more closely organized sonata movements. 
* Franz Schubert, who liked discursive forms for the entirety of his short career, also employed the three-key expositions in many of his sonata movements. A famous example is the first movement of the Death and the Maiden Quartet in D minor, in which the exposition moves to F major and then A minor (translated to D major and minor respectively in the recapitulation), a formula that is repeated in the final movement; another is the Violin Sonata in A major (in which the second theme appears in G major and B major, while only the closing passage of the exposition is in the dominant, E major). His B major piano sonata, D 575, even uses a four-key exposition (B major, G major, E major, F-sharp major): this key scheme is literally transposed up a fourth for the recapitulation. The finale of his sixth symphony (D 589) is an even more extreme case: its exposition passes from C major to G major by way of A-flat major, F major, A major, and E-flat major, making a six-key exposition.
* Felix Mendelssohn followed the Death and the Maiden example in the first movement of his second Piano Trio, in which the E flat major second theme gives way to a G minor close (transposed to C major and minor in the recapitulation). 
* The first movement of Frédéric Chopin&#x27;s Piano Concerto in F minor also has a three-key exposition (F minor, A-flat major, C minor).
* The first movement of the second cello sonata by Brahms also employs a three-key exposition moving to C major and then A minor, the exposition of the first movement of the String Sextet in B flat involves an intervening theme in A major before reaching F, and the Piano Quartet in G minor involves secondary themes in D minor and major respectively (the first of these being omitted in the recapitulation and the second transposed to E flat major moving back to G minor). The D minor violin sonata has a final movement that moves through a calm second theme in C major before closing the exposition in A minor.

== Further reading ==

*Longyear, Rey M., and Kate R. Covington (1988). Sources of the three-key exposition. &quot;The Journal of Musicology&quot; 6(4), pp. 448-470.
*Rosen, Charles (1985) &quot;Sonata Forms&quot;. New York: Norton.
*Graham G. Hunt; When Structure and Design Collide: The Three-Key Exposition Revisited, Music Theory Spectrum, Volume 36, Issue 2, 1 December 2014, Pages 247–269.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7797260" start="14" end="34" title="Three-key exposition" label="three-key exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="78" end="89" title="sonata form" label="sonata form"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="388" end="396" title="dominant (music)" label="dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500499" start="428" end="442" title="relative major" label="relative major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="709" end="714" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="944" end="964" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q145873" start="1177" end="1208" title="Piano Sonata No. 2 (Beethoven)" label="Piano Sonata No. 2, Op. 2 no. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q240321" start="1210" end="1244" title="String Quartet No. 5 (Beethoven)" label="String Quartet No. 5, Op. 18 no. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482078" start="1251" end="1261" title="supertonic" label="supertonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145937" start="1269" end="1300" title="Piano Sonata No. 3 (Beethoven)" label="Piano Sonata No. 3, Op. 2 no. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q146086" start="1327" end="1359" title="Piano Sonata No. 7 (Beethoven)" label="Piano Sonata No. 7, Op. 10 no. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q146133" start="1406" end="1438" title="Piano Sonata No. 9 (Beethoven)" label="Piano Sonata No. 9, Op. 14 no. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q146164" start="1440" end="1467" title="Piano Sonata No. 11 (Beethoven)" label="Piano Sonata No. 11, Op. 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="1854" end="1859" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="1933" end="1947" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q605107" start="2133" end="2161" title="Death and the Maiden Quartet" label="Death and the Maiden Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190168" start="2534" end="2554" title="Piano Sonata in B major D. 575 (Schubert)" label="B major piano sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q246533" start="2733" end="2747" title="Symphony No. 6 (Schubert)" label="sixth symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="2923" end="2940" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="3181" end="3196" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210210" start="3204" end="3229" title="Piano Concerto No. 2 (Chopin)" label="Piano Concerto in F minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490239" start="3324" end="3343" title="Cello Sonata No. 2 (Brahms)" label="second cello sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="3347" end="3353" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482582" start="3470" end="3493" title="String Sextet No. 1 (Brahms)" label="String Sextet in B flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132812" start="3562" end="3586" title="Piano Quartet No. 1 (Brahms)" label="Piano Quartet in G minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490213" start="3774" end="3795" title="Violin Sonata No. 3 (Brahms)" label="D minor violin sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065956" start="4077" end="4091" title="Charles Rosen" label="Rosen, Charles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981047" wikidata="Q835420" url="?curid=981047" title="Teaware">
<text>Teaware is a broad international spectrum of equipment used in the brewing and consumption of tea. Many components make up that spectrum, and vary greatly based upon the type of tea being prepared, and the cultural setting in which it is being prepared. This is often referred to as the &quot;tea ceremony,&quot; and holds much significance in many cultures, particularly in northwestern Europe and in eastern Asia. A complete, cohesive collection of tea ware makes up a tea set.

==Components==
=== Alternatives / Others ===
*Chaki, the caddy used at Japanese tea ceremonies.
*Chawan, tea bowl used in East Asian tea ceremonies
*Coffee cup, instead of tea cup
*Gaiwan, lidded cup for brewing and decanting or tea may even be drunk out of the vessel directly 
*Japanese tea utensils, used in their tea ceremonies
*Mug, instead of tea cup
*Tea draining tray, for the Gongfu tea ceremony

==Construction==
Tea equipment may be constructed of many materials, from iron in Japan to porcelain and clay in China, and also bamboo and other woods. Of particular repute are the Yixing clay teapots produced in eastern China, a type of Yixing ware. The Brown Betty was originally made from red clay found in Britain.

==Lu Yu&#x27;s tea set (陸羽的茶具)==

*Crushing block (砧椎)
*Brazier (風爐)
*Charcoal basket (炭筥)
*Charcoal mallet (炭檛)
*Fire chopsticks (火筴)
*Cauldron (鍑)
*Cauldron stand (交床)
*Tea tongs (夾)
*Paper wallet (紙囊)
*Crushing roller (碾)
*Sieve box (羅合)
*Tea holder (則)
*Water vessel (水方)
*Water filter bag (漉水囊)
*Gourd scooper (瓢)
*Bamboo tongs (竹夾)
*Salt container (鹺簋)
*Boiled water vessel (熟盂)
*Bowl (碗)
*Bowl basket (畚)
*Brush (劄)
*Water basin (滌方)
*Spent tea basin (滓方)
*Tea cloth (巾)
*Utensil table (具列)
*Utensil basket (都籃)
==The twelve tea pieces for the elderly (審安老人的12茶具)==
#Brazier (風爐)
#Crushing block (砧椎)
#Crushing roller (碾)
#Stone mill (石磨)
#Gourd scooper (瓢)
#Sieve box (羅合)
#Brush (札)
#Bowl basket (畚)
#Bowl (碗)
#Water vessel (水方)
#Tea whisk (茶筅)
#Tea cloth (巾)

The above tea pieces were also mentioned by Lu Yu in &quot;The Classic of Tea,&quot; except for the stone mill (石磨) and tea whisk (茶筅).

==See also==
*Flagstaff House Museum of Teaware
* List of Japanese tea ceremony equipment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q835420" start="0" end="7" title="Teaware" label="Teaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="94" end="97" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="206" end="214" title="culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359655" start="293" end="305" title="tea ceremony" label="tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="388" end="394" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="410" end="414" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408351" start="471" end="478" title="tea set" label="tea set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134443" start="527" end="532" title="Chaki" label="Chaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q798625" start="578" end="584" title="Chawan" label="Chawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359655" start="603" end="628" title="East Asian tea ceremony" label="East Asian tea ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235198" start="630" end="640" title="Coffee cup" label="Coffee cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233591" start="662" end="668" title="Gaiwan" label="Gaiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559660" start="761" end="782" title="Japanese tea utensils" label="Japanese tea utensils"/>
<link wikidata="Q386215" start="814" end="817" title="Mug" label="Mug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691120" start="839" end="856" title="Tea draining tray" label="Tea draining tray"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="961" end="965" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="969" end="974" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="978" end="987" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="992" end="996" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1000" end="1005" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="1016" end="1022" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="1033" end="1038" title="Wood" label="woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426533" start="1069" end="1088" title="Yixing clay teapot" label="Yixing clay teapots"/>
<link wikidata="Q10466474" start="1126" end="1137" title="Yixing ware" label="Yixing ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976067" start="1143" end="1154" title="Brown Betty (teapot)" label="Brown Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q259153" start="2037" end="2055" title="The Classic of Tea" label="The Classic of Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q908224" start="2129" end="2162" title="Flagstaff House Museum of Teaware" label="Flagstaff House Museum of Teaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559660" start="2165" end="2204" title="List of Japanese tea ceremony equipment" label="List of Japanese tea ceremony equipment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981057" wikidata="Q685924" url="?curid=981057" title="MINIX file system">
<text>The Minix file system is the native file system of the Minix operating system. It was written from scratch by Andrew S. Tanenbaum in the 1980s and aimed to replicate the structure of the Unix File System while omitting complex features, and was intended to be a teaching aid. It largely fell out of favour among Linux users by 1994 due to the popularity of other filesystems - most notably ext2 - and its lack of features, including limited partition sizes and filename length limits.

==History==
MINIX was written from scratch by Andrew S. Tanenbaum in the 1980s, as a Unix-like operating system whose source code could be used freely in education. The MINIX file system was designed for use with MINIX; it copies the basic structure of the Unix File System but avoids any complex features in the interest of keeping the source code clean, clear and simple, to meet the overall goal of MINIX to be a useful teaching aid.

When Linus Torvalds first started writing his Linux operating system kernel (1991), he was working on a machine running MINIX, and adopted its file system layout. This soon proved problematic, since MINIX restricted filename lengths to 14 characters (30 in later versions), it limited partitions to 64 megabytes, and the file system was designed for teaching purposes, not performance. The Linux implementation of the MINIX fs was multi-threaded, whereas the MINIX implementation of the fs was single-threaded. The extended file system (ext; April 1992) was developed to replace MINIX&#x27;s, but it was only with the second version of this, ext2, that Linux obtained a commercial-grade file system. As of 1994, the MINIX file system was &quot;scarcely in use&quot; among Linux users.

==Design and implementation==
A MINIX file system has six components:
*The Boot Block which is always stored in the first block. It contains the boot loader that loads and runs an operating system at system startup.
*The second block is the Superblock which stores data about the file system, that allows the operating system to locate and understand other file system structures. For example, the number of &quot;inodes&quot; and &quot;zones&quot;, the size of the two bitmaps and the starting block of the &quot;data area&quot;.
*The inode bitmap is a simple map of the inodes that tracks which ones are in use and which ones are free by representing them as either a one (in use) or a zero (free).
*The zone bitmap works in the same way as the &quot;inode bitmap&quot;, except it tracks the zones.
*The inodes area. Each file or directory is represented as an inode, which records metadata including type (file, directory, block, char, pipe), IDs for user and group, three timestamps that record the date and time of last access, last modification and last status change. An inode also contains a list of addresses that point to the zones in the &quot;data area&quot; where the file or directory data is actually stored.
*The data area is the largest component of the file system, using the majority of the space. It is where the actual file and directory data are stored.

==See also==
*List of file systems
*MINIX 3
*Minix-vmd

==References==
==External links==
*File, file system, and memory size limits in Minix
*Minix Filesystem Tool
*Introduction to the minix file system</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q685924" start="4" end="21" title="MINIX file system" label="Minix file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="36" end="47" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="55" end="60" title="Minix" label="Minix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="61" end="77" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q92621" start="110" end="129" title="Andrew S. Tanenbaum" label="Andrew S. Tanenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046338" start="187" end="203" title="Unix File System" label="Unix File System"/>
<link wikidata="Q283527" start="390" end="394" title="ext2" label="ext2"/>
<link wikidata="Q92621" start="532" end="551" title="Andrew S. Tanenbaum" label="Andrew S. Tanenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="571" end="580" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046338" start="743" end="759" title="Unix File System" label="Unix File System"/>
<link wikidata="Q34253" start="929" end="943" title="Linus Torvalds" label="Linus Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="970" end="975" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q624167" start="1209" end="1219" title="Disk partitioning" label="partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045719" start="1439" end="1459" title="extended file system" label="extended file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q283527" start="1566" end="1570" title="ext2" label="ext2"/>
<link wikidata="Q875716" start="1785" end="1795" title="Boot sector" label="Boot Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="1855" end="1866" title="Booting" label="boot loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="1890" end="1906" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="2252" end="2258" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q80585" start="2271" end="2274" title="Map (computer science)" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q306170" start="2282" end="2287" title="inode" label="inode"/>
<link wikidata="Q633005" start="3101" end="3121" title="List of file systems" label="List of file systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q770573" start="3123" end="3130" title="MINIX 3" label="MINIX 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="3132" end="3141" title="Minix-vmd" label="Minix-vmd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981065" wikidata="Q889897" url="?curid=981065" title="Bunyoro">
<text>Bunyoro, also called Bunyoro-Kitara, is a traditional Bantu kingdom in Western Uganda. It was one of the most powerful kingdoms in Central and East Africa from the 16th century to the 19th century. It is ruled by the King (&quot;Omukama&quot;) of Bunyoro-Kitara. The current ruler is Solomon Iguru I, the 27th &quot;Omukama&quot;.

==History==

===Establishment===
The kingdom of Bunyoro was established in the late 16th century by Rukidi-Mpuga after the dissolution of the Empire of Kitara. The founders of Bunyoro-Kitara were known as the Babiito, a people who succeeded the Bachwezi. 
Rukidi Mpuga was the first king of Bunyoro. He was called Rukidi because he was born in Bukidi (Luo/Madi area of northern Uganda), and Mpuga means &quot;a cow with white spots&quot; in the Nyoro language. He was named Mpuga because &quot;one of his sides was very white like his Bacwezi father’s, the other black like his Bakidi mothers&#x27;,&quot; which signified his mixed ancestry.

Archaeological excavations of Bigo bya Mugenyi has shown that the centre of the site was &quot;radically reconstructed so as to include a large, hemispherical mound reminiscent of those made at Shilluk capitals and elsewhere.&quot; Oral traditions say that in the long run, a capital in the grasslands proved unsuitable for a Luo dynasty, which soon moved its headquarters to the region around and north of Mubende, where agriculture could be practiced on a larger scale. It was there, in the northern half of the old Kitara kingdom, that the new kingdom of Bunyoro developed.

===Expansion===
The early Bito kings surpassed the feats of their Chwezi forefathers and achieved regional pre-eminence. Recent historical studies by Jean-Pierre Chrétien, Henri Médard and Christopher Wrigley have concluded that Bunyoro during the first one or two centuries of Bito rule was the greatest power in the region. Bito princes established themselves in the kingdom of Kiziba (in northern kagera), the northern Busoga kingdoms and west of the Rwenzoris. As far away as Buzinza, kings claimed to have their origins in Bunyoro.

===Decline===
Bunyoro began to decline in the late eighteenth century due to internal divisions. Buganda seized the Kooki and Buddu regions from Bunyoro at the end of the century. In the 1830s, the large province of Tooro separated, claiming much of the lucrative salt works. To the south Rwanda and Ankole were both growing rapidly, taking over some of the smaller kingdoms that had been Bunyoro&#x27;s vassals.

Thus by the mid-nineteenth century Bunyoro (also known as Unyoro at the time) was a far smaller state, though it was still wealthy due to the income generated from controlling the lucrative trade routes over Lake Victoria and linking to the coast of the Indian Ocean. In particular, Bunyoro benefited from the trade in ivory. Due to the volatile nature of the ivory trade, an armed struggle developed between the Baganda and the Banyoro. As a result, the capital was moved from Masindi to the less vulnerable Mparo. Following the death of Omakuma Kyebambe III, the region experienced a period of political instability where two kings ruled in a volatile political environment.

In July 1890 an agreement was settled whereby the entire Buganda region north of Lake Victoria was given to Great Britain. In 1894 Great Britain declared the region its protectorate. In alliance with Buganda, King Omukama Kabalega of Bunyoro resisted the efforts of Great Britain, aiming to take control of the kingdom. However, in 1899 Omukama Kabalega was captured and exiled to the Seychelles, and Bunyoro was subsequently annexed to the British Empire. Because of Bunyoro&#x27;s resistance to the British, a portion of the Bunyoro kingdom&#x27;s territory was given to Buganda and Tooro.

The country was put under the governance of Buganda administrators. The Banyoro revolted in 1907; the revolt was put down, and relations improved somewhat. After the region remained loyal to Great Britain in World War I a new agreement was made in 1933 giving the region more autonomy. Bunyoro remains as one of the five constituent kingdoms of Uganda, along with Buganda, Busoga, Rwenzururu, and Tooro.

===Contemporary society===
During the first regime of Milton Obote, the Kingdom of Bunyoro initially benefited from regaining the two &quot;lost counties&quot; of Buyaga and Bugangaizi following a 1964 referendum. It was, however, forcefully disbanded in 1967. The kingdom, together with three others, Buganda, Busoga, Tooro, remained banned during the regime of dictator Idi Amin (1971–1979) and the second regime of Milton Obote (1980–1985) and remained banned until 1993.

In 1993 the Kingdom was re-established and in 1995 the new constitution of Uganda was made, allowing and recognizing the Kingdoms. The current Kingdom covers the districts of Buliisa District, Hoima district, Kibaale District, Kakumiro District, Kagadi District, Kiryandongo District and Masindi District.

According to 1997 projections, the total population of the Kingdom is between 800,000 but there may be 1,400,000 (depending on sources) living in 250,000-350,000 households. 96% of the population lives in rural areas, and only 1% of the population uses electricity for lighting and cooking. More than 92% of the population is poor, and earned less than half that of the Ugandan national average, and about 50% of the population is illiterate.

==Geography==

===Territory and sphere of influence===
In the Northern and eastern parts of Bunyoro, it was difficult to determine where the borders of the Bunyoro kingdom ended, and where separate (but in some degree dependent) polities began, and due to the broadening and varying shades of influence the question might have been meaningless. Due to British colonialism, the Nile river, and not any traditional division in language, culture, or political allegiance, became the formal northern boundary of the attenuated Nyoro state.

People north of the Nile, such as the Alur and Acholi, recognized the Mukama (king of Bunyoro) as overlord and sent tribute to him. According to the cultural anthropologist Aidan Southall, the Alur recognized their &quot;ritual subordination to Bunyoro by going there for confirmation of their title after accession to kingship&quot;. Gifts were given to the king of Bunyoro by Lango and Acholi chiefs, who acknowledged the Nyoro king’s supremacy.
Bunyoro&#x27;s Nilotic neighbors viewed themselves and were viewed by the Banyoro, as &quot;mother&#x27;s brothers&quot; to the Bito dynasty, rooted in the fact that Rukidi Mpuga&#x27;s mother, Nyatworo, was a Nilotic Luo from Bukidi. Bunyoro&#x27;s relationship with its Nilotic neighbors was not only defined by political dominance but also by kinship ties. In Nyoro culture, it is believed that sisters&#x27; sons are to &quot;rule&quot; their mothers&#x27; brothers.

==Luo influence==
The first Bito King Rukidi and his brothers took the totem (Muziro) of the clan of their Luo mother, Nyatworo, which was the bushbuck (Ngabi) because their Chwezi father, Kyomya, abandoned them when they were infants. Today the aristocratic lineages of the Acholi people to the north still have the bushbuck as their totem like the Babito clan of Bunyoro.

The first Babito kings made sure that succession to the throne was restricted to sons born to them by their Luo wives. This gave the Paluo (luo speakers in northern Bunyoro) major political influence in Bunyo-Kitara. It was Oyo Nyimba, Rukidi&#x27;s son born by Nyatworo of the Luo clan of Kwonga, who succeeded him. Nyimba in turn made sure that it Waswinyi, born by a Luo woman, who became king after him. The practice of restricting succession to children born by Luo women went on uninterrupted, and thus all the kings of Bunyoro-Kitara were born by Luo women until 1733.

In the Acholi language, the term &quot;Bito&quot; is used &quot;generally of the sons of an aristocratic lineage&quot;. The Empaako praise names that every Munyoro is given after birth are still found in Acholi, where they are called &quot;Pak&quot;, meaning &#x27;praise&#x27;. Many of the mpako names are also of Luo origin. Although many Bito personal names are Luo, Bunyoro&#x27;s political terminology features only two words of Luo origin, &quot;ekikali&quot; (&quot;royal courtyard&quot; found also in the kingdom of Ankole and Rwanda) and &quot;dyangi&quot;. Some of the objects which make up the regalia of the Nyoro kings can be identified with artefacts of Nilotic origin. The Nyoro word &quot;Mugole&quot; (wife) is a nilotic loanword that can be found in the Acholi &quot;Nya gol&quot; (wife) and beyond that to the Dinka-Nuer word &quot;Gol&quot; (clan, family). It can be found as far south in Rwanda where Mugole/Mugore simply means &quot;woman&quot; in Kinyarwanda. The nyoro word, &quot;wakonga&quot; (pangolin) is related to the Acholi &quot;Okong&quot; and Dinka &quot;Akuong&quot;. the Nyoro &quot;Mukago&quot; (&quot;blood-brotherhood&quot; which is initiated by cutting the hands) is related to Shilluk &quot;Kago&quot; and Dinka &quot;Kak&quot; (cut open).

==Culture and society==
In describing the Kingdom of Bunyoro, Samuel Baker states that the people of Bunyoro &quot;have become the most advanced nation in Central Africa; they are well clothed and clean in their persons, courteous and dignified in demeanor, and susceptible of enlarged political organization.&quot;

Bunyoro consists of three classes of people: Iru, Huma, and Bito. The distinction between the Iru and Huma has never had the importance in Bunyoro, as it did in other kingdoms such as Ankole or Rwanda.

The Iru are commoners who engage in farming and some cattle rearing. The Iru were Ironsmiths and provided tools and weapons to the Huma (who themselves did not practice smithing). Intermarriage between the Iru and Huma (Hima) in Bunyoro was never prohibited, and it has always been possible for Bunyoro of Iru (commoner) origin to rise to a high position in the state as many did in historical times. There is a Luo speaking community in the Kibanda county of the Kiryandongo District of northern Bunyoro called the Paluo (or Palwo) or Chope/Chopi. The Paluo were generally regarded as Iru by other Banyoro people. It was possible for Paluo families settling south into the Kitara heartland and assimilating its culture to become part of the Huma category.

The Huma are those engaged only in pastoralism. The name &quot;Bahuma&quot; comes from the verb &quot;okuhuma&quot;, which means the &quot;cacophony of sound made by a herd of cattle on the move, lowing, thudding of hooves, and cries of herdsmen&quot;. Although the Bahuma claimed and were accorded high status, they have always, as Bahuma, lacked major political importance and they have never been rulers in Bunyoro-Kitara but were herdsmen, who &quot;attached themselves to the great chiefs as custodians of their herds&quot;. Samuel Baker describes them:

The Bahuma loved their cattle so dearly that Gaetano Casati reports that after a Sudanese raid into Bunyoro that captured 10,000 cattle, the Bahuma preferred to serve the Sudanese as cattle keepers rather than be separated [sic] from their cows. Thus The Bahuma willingly followed the raiders with their families.

The Bito are the royal clan of Bunyoro. The Babito are originally descended from the Chwezi prince Kyomya and the Luo woman Nytworo. The Banyoro say, &quot;the Babito are the children (Bana) of the Bacwezi, and the grandchildren (baijukuru) of the Batembuzi&quot;. When the Luo diviner Nyakoka left Kitara and entered northern Uganda, he encountered Kyomya&#x27;s sons resting under a Bito tree, which is where the Bito clan gets its name from (although it is unknown what kind of tree a bito tree was).

===Art===
Samuel Baker praised the crafts made by Bunyoro artisans. He said that the Banyoro &quot;make good earthenware, they sew with needles of their own make, the eye of the needles being simply a fine end overlapped; their smiths are clever and use hammers instead of stones as in neighbouring countries and they draw fine brass and copper wire for ornamenting belts, knife handles&quot;.

===Medicine===
European travelers in the Great Lakes region of Africa during the 19th century reported cases of surgery in Bunyoro. Medical historians, such as Jack Davies argued in 1959 that Bunyoro&#x27;s traditional healers were perhaps the most highly skilled in precolonial sub-Saharan Africa, possessing a remarkable level of medical knowledge. One observer noted a &quot;surgical skill which had reached a high standard&quot;. Caesarean sections and other abdominal and thoracic operations were performed on a regular basis with the avoidance of hemorrhage and sepsis using antiseptics, anesthetics and cautery iron. The expectant mother was normally anesthetized with banana wine, and herbal mixtures were used to encourage healing. From the well-developed nature of the procedures employed, European observers concluded that they had been employed for some time. Bunyoro surgeons treated lung inflammations, Pneumonia and pleurisy by punching holes in the chest until the air passed freely. Trephining was carried out and the bones of depressed fractures were elevated. Horrible war wounds, even penetrating abdominal and chest wounds were treated with success, even when this involved quite heroic surgery. Amputations were done by tying a tight ligature just above the line of amputation and neatly cutting off the limb, stretched out on a smooth log, with one stroke of a sharp sword. Banyoro surgeons had a good knowledge of anatomy, in part obtained by carrying out autopsies. Inoculation against smallpox was carried out in Bunyoro and its neighbouring kingdoms. Over 200 plants are used medicinally in eastern Bunyoro alone, and recent tests have shown that traditional cures for eczema and post-measles bloody diarrhea were more effective than western medications. Bunyoro&#x27;s medical elite, the &quot;Bafumu&quot;, had a system of apprenticeship and even &quot;met at periods for conferences&quot;. In Bunyoro, there was a close relationship between the state and traditional healers. Kings gave healers &quot;land spread in the different areas so that their services would reach more people&quot;. Moreover, &quot;in the case of a disease hitting a given area&quot;, the king would order healers into the affected district. Kabaleega is said to have provided his soldiers with anti-malarial herbs and even to have organized medical research. A Munyoro healer reported in 1902 that when an outbreak of what he termed sleeping sickness occurred in Bunyoro around 1886–87, causing many deaths, Kabaleega ordered him &quot;to make experiments in the interest of science&quot;, which were &quot;eventually successful in procuring a cure&quot;. Barkcloth, which was used to bandage wounds, has been proven to be antimicrobial.

==Economy==
Bunyoro drew various communities together in trade. This trade heavily depended on Bunyoro&#x27;s rich salt deposits in the lucrative Kibiro saltworks of Lake Mwitanzige and the saltworks located in Lake Katwe. Bunyoro&#x27;s markets fostered complex interactions between the Banyoro and regional groups such as the Alur, Acholi, Langi, Kumam Iteso, Basoga, Banyankore, Congolese, and Haya populations, and, further, witnessed brisk trade not only in iron implements, salt, and ivory, but also in items like cattle, foodstuffs, beer, tobacco, and coffee. Even despite their bitter rivalry, Bunyoro traded iron hoes and salt with Buganda in exchange for Barkcloth and Bananas

Bunyoro blacksmiths were regarded as among the greatest in east Africa. Bunyoro&#x27;s historical ties with Luo speakers to the north, many of whom considered Bunyoro as &quot;home,&quot; and with Buganda to the south secured the stability of trade in Bunyoro. The ties also ensured that &quot;Bunyoro&#x27;s ironsmiths had a guaranteed market among the Iteso and Langi [to the northeast], peoples who did not smelt&quot;. Having the highest quality of metallurgy in the region made it one of the strongest economic and military powers in the Great Lakes region.

===Slavery===
Historian John Nyakatura delineates three categories of slaves in the Bunyoro region. The first category, known as &quot;Embomboza,&quot; consists of individuals who were found wandering without a home or family, likely as a result of conflict or famine. The second category encompasses individuals who were captured during warfare. The third category comprises those who were acquired through purchase from neighboring kingdoms.

King Kabalega forcibly relocated various ethnic groups into Bunyoro to ease the demographic crisis the kingdom was experiencing. When he reconquered Busongora and the Tooro Kingdom he relocated many Bahuma herders into the Nyoro heartland. The Masindi area was settled by Alur slaves and entire Bakonjo families from the Rwenzori region were settled into central Bunyoro and were almost completely culturally assimilated into Bunyoro society by 1900.

The Banyoro tried not to mistreat their slaves too harshly, due to the fear of their ghosts returning to seek retribution. The Banyoro say, &quot;If you ever mistreated a slave, his ghost would always disturb the family. And that one is very, very dangerous, even more, dangerous than the ghost of a relative&quot;.

If a female slave had a child with her master, then that child would be considered free and not discriminated against in Nyoro society. Female slaves who married their masters were no longer treated as slaves and overworked.

Slaves were able to rise to political power. A famous example of this is Nyakamatura, who was a slave of Iru origin. King Kamarusi recognized Nyakamatura&#x27;s talents, freed him, and made him a chief. Nyakamatura was a friend of Kamamrusi&#x27;s son, Kabalega, which caused the Iru chief&#x27;s status to rise even further in society. After Kabalega took the throne he honored Nyakamatura by naming him the first minister.

==Military==
Kabalega created a standing army called the &quot;Abarusura&quot;. Most members of Bunyoro&#x27;s army were Iru, such as Rwabudongo, who was the leader of the army.

The army of Bunyoro was supplemented with mercenaries from foreign ethnic groups such as the Lango. War captives could also be integrated into the military, such as in the case of Ireeta, who was freed and eventually became one of Bunyoro&#x27;s leading generals.

Kabalega defeated the rebellious Paluo in northern Bunyoro and put them back under Nyoro authority and the Acholi and Alur tribes across the Nile were forced to pay tribute.

Bunyoro&#x27;s army achieved a significant victory against the Baganda (who outnumbered them) at the Battle of Rwangabi (or Rwengabi) in February 1886. Following this victory, the army occupied parts of western Buganda and enslaved 20,000 Baganda.
==Infrastructure==
Bunyoro boasted an impressive and well-maintained network of roads, which facilitated efficient movement throughout the region. Henry Colvile effectively utilized these routes to swiftly transport his army, taking advantage of the carefully constructed bridges that spanned the streams. John Roscoe, a missionary, also picked up on Bunyoro&#x27;s network of roads.

===Communication===
The people of Bunyoro developed a form of writing based on a floral code
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* The National University of Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom
* Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom
* Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom NGO.
* Royal Coat of Arms of Bunyoro-Kitara 
* More on the Bunyoro Culture</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q889897" start="0" end="7" title="Bunyoro" label="Bunyoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q889897" start="21" end="35" title="Bunyoro" label="Bunyoro-Kitara"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="54" end="59" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="60" end="67" title="monarchy" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559188" start="71" end="85" title="Western Region, Uganda" label="Western Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="131" end="138" title="Central Africa" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="143" end="154" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041232" start="229" end="236" title="Omukama of Bunyoro" label="Omukama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558636" start="284" end="299" title="Solomon Iguru I" label="Solomon Iguru I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444485" start="474" end="490" title="Empire of Kitara" label="Empire of Kitara"/>
<link wikidata="Q33794" start="777" end="791" title="Nyoro language" label="Nyoro language"/>
<link wikidata="Q859697" start="1005" end="1021" title="Bigo bya Mugenyi" label="Bigo bya Mugenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482103" start="1169" end="1176" title="Shilluk Kingdom" label="Shilluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528929" start="1382" end="1389" title="Mubende" label="Mubende"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444485" start="1493" end="1499" title="Empire of Kitara" label="Kitara"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="2188" end="2195" title="Buganda" label="Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430555" start="2207" end="2212" title="Kooki" label="Kooki"/>
<link wikidata="Q15205537" start="2217" end="2222" title="Buddu" label="Buddu"/>
<link wikidata="Q889912" start="2307" end="2312" title="Tooro Kingdom" label="Tooro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="2380" end="2386" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q538636" start="2391" end="2397" title="Nkore" label="Ankole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="2759" end="2771" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="2824" end="2829" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820248" start="2865" end="2876" title="ivory trade" label="ivory trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q403656" start="2918" end="2925" title="Baganda" label="Baganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346711" start="2934" end="2941" title="Banyoro" label="Banyoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907120" start="2983" end="2990" title="Masindi" label="Masindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802286" start="3014" end="3019" title="Mparo, Hoima" label="Mparo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="3291" end="3304" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="3352" end="3364" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="3383" end="3390" title="Buganda" label="Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="3568" end="3578" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3624" end="3638" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="3756" end="3763" title="Buganda" label="Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q889912" start="3768" end="3773" title="Tooro Kingdom" label="Tooro"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3984" end="3995" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="4121" end="4127" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="4140" end="4147" title="Buganda" label="Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q691037" start="4149" end="4155" title="Busoga" label="Busoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795682" start="4157" end="4167" title="Rwenzururu" label="Rwenzururu"/>
<link wikidata="Q889912" start="4173" end="4178" title="Tooro Kingdom" label="Tooro"/>
<link wikidata="Q210069" start="4235" end="4247" title="Milton Obote" label="Milton Obote"/>
<link wikidata="Q30524693" start="4378" end="4393" title="Ugandan lost counties referendum, 1964" label="1964 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="4483" end="4490" title="Buganda" label="Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q691037" start="4492" end="4498" title="Busoga" label="Busoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q889912" start="4500" end="4505" title="Tooro Kingdom" label="Tooro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="4553" end="4561" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229793" start="4832" end="4848" title="Buliisa District" label="Buliisa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624192" start="4850" end="4864" title="Hoima City" label="Hoima district"/>
<link wikidata="Q604966" start="4866" end="4882" title="Kibaale District" label="Kibaale District"/>
<link wikidata="Q38249480" start="4884" end="4901" title="Kakumiro District" label="Kakumiro District"/>
<link wikidata="Q38249484" start="4903" end="4918" title="Kagadi District" label="Kagadi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539116" start="4920" end="4940" title="Kiryandongo District" label="Kiryandongo District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032238" start="4945" end="4961" title="Masindi District" label="Masindi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q202353" start="5983" end="5987" title="Alur people" label="Alur"/>
<link wikidata="Q340581" start="5992" end="5998" title="Acholi people" label="Acholi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="6094" end="6117" title="Cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696737" start="6118" end="6132" title="Aidan Southall" label="Aidan Southall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273334" start="6323" end="6328" title="Lango people" label="Lango"/>
<link wikidata="Q340581" start="6333" end="6339" title="Acholi people" label="Acholi"/>
<link wikidata="Q340581" start="7140" end="7153" title="Acholi people" label="Acholi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q340581" start="7794" end="7797" title="Acholi people" label="Luo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34926" start="7824" end="7839" title="Acholi dialect" label="Acholi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q48748634" start="7941" end="7948" title="Empaako" label="Empaako"/>
<link wikidata="Q33794" start="8505" end="8510" title="Nyoro language" label="Nyoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34926" start="8589" end="8595" title="Acholi dialect" label="Acholi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114989" start="8646" end="8656" title="western Nilotic languages" label="Dinka-Nuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="8787" end="8798" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q36486" start="9035" end="9042" title="Shilluk language" label="Shilluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q56466" start="9064" end="9069" title="Dinka language" label="Dinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q376087" start="9161" end="9173" title="Samuel Baker" label="Samuel Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539116" start="10083" end="10103" title="Kiryandongo District" label="Kiryandongo District"/>
<link wikidata="Q376087" start="10907" end="10919" title="Samuel Baker" label="Samuel Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769197" start="10982" end="10996" title="Gaetano Casati" label="Gaetano Casati"/>
<link wikidata="Q376087" start="11767" end="11779" title="Samuel Baker" label="Samuel Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="12193" end="12221" title="African Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes region of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="12586" end="12603" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284347" start="13049" end="13067" title="pneumonitis" label="lung inflammations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="13069" end="13078" title="Pneumonia" label="Pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="13083" end="13091" title="pleurisy" label="pleurisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q472953" start="13152" end="13162" title="Trephining" label="Trephining"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860921" start="14813" end="14822" title="Barkcloth" label="Barkcloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404035" start="15042" end="15058" title="Kibiro saltworks" label="Kibiro saltworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q125888" start="15062" end="15077" title="Lake Albert (Africa)" label="Lake Mwitanzige"/>
<link wikidata="Q119442522" start="15107" end="15117" title="Lake Katwe" label="Lake Katwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626853" start="15575" end="15582" title="Matoke" label="Bananas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="16037" end="16047" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q889912" start="16760" end="16773" title="Tooro Kingdom" label="Tooro Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032238" start="16837" end="16844" title="Masindi District" label="Masindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202353" start="16865" end="16869" title="Alur people" label="Alur"/>
<link wikidata="Q804474" start="16888" end="16895" title="Konjo people" label="Bakonjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795682" start="16914" end="16929" title="Rwenzururu" label="Rwenzori region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273334" start="18286" end="18291" title="Lango people" label="Lango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124658" start="19028" end="19041" title="Henry Colvile" label="Henry Colvile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701607" start="19187" end="19198" title="John Roscoe" label="John Roscoe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981067" wikidata="Q186571" url="?curid=981067" title="Robert Rogers (British Army officer)">
<text>Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Rogers (7 November 1731 – 18 May 1795) was a British Army officer and frontiersman. Born in Methuen, Massachusetts, he fought in King George&#x27;s War, the French and Indian War and the American Revolutionary War. During the French and Indian War, Rogers raised and commanded Rogers&#x27; Rangers, a ranger unit trained for carrying out asymmetric warfare.

==Early life==

Robert Rogers was born to Ulster-Scots settlers, James and Mary McFatridge Rogers on 7 November 1731 in Methuen, a small town in northeastern Massachusetts. At that time, the town was a staging point for Scots-Irish settlers bound for the wilderness of New Hampshire.

In 1739 when Rogers was eight years old, his family relocated to the Great Meadow district of New Hampshire near present-day Concord, where James founded a settlement on of land which he called Munterloney, after a hilly place in County Londonderry, Ireland. Rogers referred to this childhood residence as &quot;Mountalona&quot;. It was later renamed Dunbarton, New Hampshire.

In 1740, the War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748) broke out in Europe and, in 1744, the war spread to North America, where it was known as King George&#x27;s War (1744–1748). During Rogers&#x27; youth (1746), he saw service in the New Hampshire militia as a private in Captain Daniel Ladd&#x27;s Scouting Company and, in 1747, also as a private in Ebenezer Eastman&#x27;s Scouting Company, both times guarding the New Hampshire frontier.

In 1754, Rogers became involved with a gang of counterfeiters. He was indicted but the case was never brought to trial.

==French and Indian War==

In 1755, war engulfed the colonies, spreading also to Europe. Britain and France declared war on each other. The British in America suffered a string of defeats including Braddock&#x27;s at the Battle of the Monongahela trying to capture Fort Duquesne. Encouraged by the French victories, American Indians launched a series of attacks along the colonial frontier. During the French and Indian War, Israel Putnam (who would go on to later fame in the Revolutionary War) fought as a Connecticut militia captain in conjunction with Rogers, and at one point saved his life.

===Ranger recruiter===
In 1756, Rogers arrived in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and began to muster soldiers for the British Crown, using the authority vested in him by Colonel Winslow. Rogers&#x27; recruitment drive was well supported by the frightened and angry provincials due to attacks by American Indians along the frontier. In Portsmouth, he also met his future wife Elizabeth Browne, the youngest daughter of Anglican Reverend Arthur Browne.

Robert&#x27;s brothers James, Richard, and possibly John all served in Rogers&#x27; Rangers. Richard died of small pox in 1757 at Fort William Henry. His corpse was later disinterred and mutilated by hostile Indians.

===Rogers and the Rangers===
Rogers raised and commanded the famous Rogers&#x27; Rangers that fought for the British during the French and Indian War. This militia unit operated primarily in the Lake George and Lake Champlain regions of New York. They frequently undertook winter raids against French towns and military emplacements, traveling on sleds, crude snowshoes, and even ice skates across frozen rivers. Rogers&#x27; Rangers were never fully respected by the British regulars, yet they were one of the few non-Indian forces able to operate in the inhospitable region despite harsh winter conditions and mountainous terrain.

Rogers showed an unusual talent for commanding his unit in conditions to which the regular armies of the day were unaccustomed. He took the initiative in mustering, equipping, and commanding ranger units. He wrote an early guide for commanding such units as Robert Rogers&#x27; 28 &quot;Rules of Ranging&quot;. The Queen&#x27;s York Rangers of the Canadian Army, the U.S. Army Rangers, and the 1st Battalion 119th Field Artillery all claim Rogers as their founder, and &quot;Rogers&#x27; Standing Orders&quot; are still quoted on the first page of the U.S. Army&#x27;s Ranger handbook.

Rogers was personally responsible for paying his soldiers, and he went deeply into debt and took loans to ensure that they were paid properly after their regular pay was raided during transport. He was never compensated by the British Army or government, though he had reason to believe that he should have his expenses reimbursed.

===Northern campaign===

From 1755 to 1758, Rogers and his rangers served under a series of unsuccessful British commanders operating over the northern accesses to the British colonies: Major General William Johnson, Major General William Shirley, Colonel William Haviland, and Major General James Abercromby. At the time, the British could do little more than fight defensive campaigns around Lake Champlain, Crown Point, Ticonderoga, and the upper Hudson.

During this time, the rangers proved indispensable; they grew gradually to twelve companies, as well as several additional contingents of Indians who had pledged their allegiance to the British cause. The rangers were kept organizationally distinct from British regulars. Rogers was their acting commandant, as well as the direct commander of his own company.

On 21 January 1757 at the First Battle of the Snowshoes, Rogers&#x27; Rangers ambushed and captured seven Canadians near Fort Carillon but then encountered a hundred French and Canadian militia and Ottawa Indians from the Ohio Country. Roger&#x27;s forces retreated after taking casualties of 14 killed, nine wounded, and six missing or captured; the French-Indian forces were 11 killed, 27 wounded.

British forces surrendered Fort William Henry in August 1757, after which the Rangers were stationed on Rogers Island near Fort Edward. This allowed them to train and operate with more freedom than the regular British forces.

On 13 March 1758 at the Second Battle of the Snowshoes, Rogers&#x27; Rangers ambushed a French and Indian column and, in turn, were ambushed by enemy forces. The Rangers lost 125 men in this encounter, as well as eight men wounded, with 52 surviving. Rogers estimated 100 killed and nearly 100 wounded of the French-Indian forces; however, the French listed casualties as a total of ten Indians killed and seventeen wounded.

On 7 July 1758, Rogers&#x27; Rangers took part in the Battle of Carillon.

In 1758, Abercromby recognized Rogers&#x27; accomplishments by promoting him to Major, with the equally famous John Stark as his second in command. Rogers now held two ranks appropriate to his double role: Captain and Major.

In 1759, the tide of the war turned and the British advanced on the city of Quebec. Major General Jeffrey Amherst, the newly appointed Commander-in-Chief of British forces in North America, had a brilliant and definitive idea. He dispatched Rogers and his rangers on an expedition far behind enemy lines to the west against the Abenakis at Saint-Francis in Quebec, a staging base for Indian raids into New England. Rogers led a force of two hundred rangers from Crown Point, New York, deep into French territory to Saint-Francis.

At this time, the Indians near Saint-Francis had given up their aboriginal way of life and were living in a town next to a French mission. Rogers losses were 41 killed; 7 wounded 10 captured. Following the 3 October 1759 attack and successful destruction of Saint-Francis, Rogers&#x27; force ran out of food during their retreat back through the rugged wilderness of northern Vermont. The Rangers reached a safe location along the Connecticut River at the abandoned Fort Wentworth. Rogers left them encamped, and returned a few days later with food and relief forces from Fort at Number 4, now Charlestown, New Hampshire, the nearest British town.

The destruction of Saint-Francis by Rogers was a major psychological victory, as the colonists no longer felt that they were helpless. The residents of Saint-Francis, a combined group of Abenakis and others, understood that they were no longer beyond reach. Abenaki raids along the frontier did not cease, but significantly diminished.

===Montreal Campaign===

Quebec fell in 1759, and in spring 1760 Rogers joined in Amherst&#x27;s campaign on Montreal. Before doing so however, in June Rogers conducted a successful pre-emptive raid on Fort Sainte Thérèse, a supply base for the French army as well as a vital link in the communication and supply line between Fort Saint-Jean and the French forces at .

Roger&#x27;s was then part of William Haviland&#x27;s thrust (one of three all led by Amherst) on Montreal in August where it marched from Lake Ontario in the west along the Saint Lawrence River and from upper New York via the Richelieu River. Along the way Rogers fought to reduce which succeeded in a ruse attack. Soon after Fort Saint-Jean was burned by the French, and Chambly was seized. The Rangers then led the final advance on Montreal, which surrendered without a fight the following month.

===Western campaign===

Rogers then advanced when Indian activity ceased against colonials in the east, and Rogers&#x27; service there was over. General Amherst transferred him to Brigadier General Robert Monckton, commanding at Fort Pitt (formerly Fort Duquesne). Following Amherst&#x27;s advice, Monckton sent the rangers to capture Detroit, far to the north, which they did.

On 29 November 1760 in Detroit, Rogers received the submission of the French posts on the Great Lakes; during the spring 1761, Rogers and his Rangers occupied Fort Michilimackinac and Fort St. Joseph. It was the final act of his command. Shortly thereafter, his rangers were disbanded. Monckton offered Rogers command of a company of regulars in South Carolina but, after visiting the place, Rogers chose instead to command another company in New York. That unit was soon disbanded, however, and Rogers was forced into retirement at half-pay.

No longer preoccupied with military affairs, Rogers returned to New England to marry Elizabeth Browne in June, 1761, and set up housekeeping with her in Concord, New Hampshire. Like many New Englanders, they had indentured servants and slaves, including an Indian boy captured at Saint-Francis.

Rogers received large grants of land in southern New Hampshire in compensation for his services. He sold much of it at a profit and was able to purchase and maintain slaves. He deeded much of his land to his wife&#x27;s family, which served to support her later.

In 1761, Rogers purchased a commission commanding a British Independent Company serving in South Carolina during the Anglo-Cherokee War. While Rogers never commanded his men in the field, his company participated in the 1761 Grant Campaign which destroyed the homes and food of more than 5000 Cherokee men, women, and children.

On 10 February 1763, the French and Indian War came to an end with the Treaty of Paris (also known as the &quot;Treaty of 1763&quot;). Rogers found himself once more a soldier of fortune, still on half-pay. Later, General Thomas Gage remarked that, if the army had put him on whole pay, they could have prevented his later unfit employment (Gage&#x27;s terms).

==Pontiac&#x27;s War==

On 7 May 1763, Pontiac&#x27;s War broke out in the Ohio Country. Odawa leader Pontiac attempted to capture Fort Detroit by surprise with a force of 300 warriors. However, the British commander was aware of Pontiac&#x27;s plan, and his garrison was armed and ready. Undaunted, Pontiac withdrew and laid siege to the fort. Eventually, more than 900 Indian warriors from a half-dozen tribes joined the siege of Fort Detroit.

Upon hearing this news, Rogers offered his services to General Jeffrey Amherst. Rogers then accompanied Captain James Dalyell with a relief force to Fort Detroit. Their ill-fated mission was terminated at the Battle of Bloody Run on 31 July 1763.

In an attempt to break Pontiac&#x27;s siege, about 250 British troops led by Dalyell and Rogers attempted a surprise attack on his encampment. However, Pontiac was ready, supposedly alerted by French settlers, and he defeated the British at Parent&#x27;s Creek two miles north of the fort. The creek or &quot;run&quot; was said to have run red with the blood of the 20 dead and 34 wounded British soldiers and was henceforth known as Bloody Run. Captain James Dalyell was one of those killed.

Soon after these events, Pontiac&#x27;s war effort collapsed and Pontiac himself faded away into obscurity and death. Surprisingly, Rogers later memorialized Pontiac and his conflict in a stage play during his sojourn in England.

==Post-war success and failure==
Rogers had brought total dedication to his position as commander of the rangers. As was often the custom in the British and American armies, he had spent his own money to equip the rangers when needed and consequently had gone into debt. In 1764, he was faced with the problem of repaying his creditors.

To recoup his finances, Robert engaged briefly in a business venture with the fur trader John Askin near Detroit. After it failed, he hoped to win the money by gambling, with the result that he was totally ruined. His creditors put him in prison for debt in New York, but he escaped.

===Author in Britain===
In 1765, Rogers voyaged to England to obtain pay for his service and capitalize on his fame. His journals and &quot;A Concise Account of North America&quot; were published. Immediately thereafter, he wrote the stage play &quot;Ponteach &quot;[Pontiac]&quot;: or the Savages of America&quot; (1766), significant as an early American drama and for its sympathetic portrayal of American Indians. He enjoyed some moderate success with his publications (though Ponteach was condemned by the critics) and attracted royal attention. He had an audience with King George III, to whom he proposed undertaking an expedition to find the Northwest Passage. The King appointed Rogers governor of Michilimackinac (Mackinaw City, Michigan) with a charter to look for the passage, and he returned to North America.

===Royal Governor===

Upon his return to America, Rogers moved with his wife to the fur-trading outpost of Fort Michilimackinac and began his duties as royal governor. During Rogers&#x27; absence, Amherst had been replaced by Thomas Gage as commander of the British forces in America, and Gage was a bitter rival of Amherst. Rogers was a loyal friend of Amherst and was consequently hated by Gage.

As an aristocrat and political intriguer, Gage viewed Rogers as a provincial upstart who posed a threat to his newly acquired power, due to his friendship with Amherst. At the time, Rogers was still a half-pay captain in the British army and, to some degree, under Gage&#x27;s military jurisdiction. However, Gage could not challenge Rogers, the king&#x27;s appointee, unless he could find a good reason, as the king would countermand any legal process in order to save his favorites. Knowing this, Gage actively set about finding a solid justification to remove Rogers as royal governor in a way that would forestall royal intervention.

Unaware of Gage&#x27;s plotting, Rogers continued performing his administrative duties with considerable zest. He dispatched expeditions to search for the fabled Northwest Passage under Jonathan Carver and James Tute, but they were unsuccessful. A path to the Pacific Ocean remained undiscovered until the 1792–93 Peace River expedition led by Alexander MacKenzie, completed overland and via river.

Rogers perceived a need for unity and a stronger government, and he negotiated with the Indians, parlayed with the French, and developed a plan for a province in Michigan to be administered by a governor and Privy Council reporting to the king. This plan was supported by George III, but had little chance of being adopted, since Parliament had no intention of increasing the king&#x27;s power.

Meanwhile, Gage used every opportunity to defame Rogers, portraying him as an opportunist who had gotten rich on the war only to gamble away his money as a profligate. It is difficult to say how many of these allegations were true and how much Gage believed them to be true. Gage apparently saw Rogers as of questionable loyalty—certainly he was not loyal to Gage—and therefore he needed watching. Rogers&#x27; dealings with the American Indians troubled Gage, as he and many other British officers in America had come to regard the Indians with great suspicion.

===Arrest for treason===
Gage hired spies to intercept Rogers&#x27; mail and suborned his subordinates. Unfortunately, Rogers offended his private secretary, Nathaniel Potter, who subsequently gave Gage the excuse that he needed. Potter swore in an affidavit that Rogers had said that he would offer his province to the French if the British authorities failed to approve his method of governance.

Potter&#x27;s claims were questionable. The French were not in any position to receive Rogers, particularly with a British governor sitting in Montreal. Nevertheless, on the strength of Potter&#x27;s affidavit, Rogers was arrested in 1767, charged with treason, and taken to Montreal in chains for trial. However, the trial was postponed until 1768. Elizabeth, carrying their only child, went home to Portsmouth. There she gave birth to a son; he was named Arthur. After reaching adulthood, Arthur decided to become a lawyer based in his home town of Portsmouth. He also chose to start a family, the descendants of whom are still living today.

===Vindication===
Gage sent Rogers to Montreal to stand trial but, once there, Rogers was among friends of Amherst. Due to Amherst&#x27;s influence, Rogers was acquitted of all charges and the verdict was sent to King George III for approval. The king approved, but could not call Gage a liar openly. Instead, he made a note that there was reason to think Rogers might have been treasonous.

Returning to Michigan under the power of Gage was unthinkable; hence, Rogers went to England in 1769 to petition again for debt relief. However, the king had decided that he could do nothing more to help Rogers, and had become preoccupied by the issue of the disaffected colonies. Rogers went again to debtors&#x27; prison and tried suing Gage for false imprisonment. Gage settled out of court by offering Rogers the half-pay of a major in return for dropping the suit.

===American Revolutionary War===
Because of his legal troubles in England, Robert Rogers missed the major events in the disaffected colonies. He heard that revolution was likely to break out and returned to America in 1775. The Americans were as out of touch with Rogers as he was with them, looking upon him as the noted ranger leader and expecting him to behave as one; they were at a total loss to explain his drunken and licentious behavior. At that time, Rogers was perhaps suffering from the alcoholism that blighted his later life and led to the loss of his family, land, money, and friends.

It is unclear exactly what transpired between the revolutionary leaders and Rogers. Rogers was arrested by the local Committee of Safety as a possible spy and released on parole that he would not serve against the colonies. He was offered a commission in the Revolutionary Army by the Continental Congress, but declined on the grounds that he was a British officer. He later wrote to George Washington asking for a command, but instead Washington had him arrested.

He escaped from Washington&#x27;s custody only to find revolutionary ranks firm against him, so he offered his services to the British Army. They also were hoping that he would live up to his reputation. In August 1776, he formed another ranger-type unit called the Queen&#x27;s Rangers as its colonel. In September 1776, Rogers assisted in the capture of Nathan Hale, a spy for the Continental Army. A contemporaneous account of Hale&#x27;s capture is in the Library of Congress, written by Consider Tiffany, a Connecticut shopkeeper and Loyalist. In Tiffany&#x27;s account, Rogers did not believe Hale&#x27;s cover story that he was a teacher, and lured him into his own betrayal by pretending to be a patriot spy himself.

In May 1777, the British Army forcibly retired Rogers on grounds of &quot;poor health&quot;. A return home now was impossible; Hale&#x27;s execution and Rogers raising troops against the colonials seemed to confirm Washington&#x27;s suspicions. At Washington&#x27;s prompting, the New Hampshire legislature passed two decrees regarding Rogers: one a proscription, and the other a divorce from his wife on grounds of abandonment and infidelity. She could not afford any friendship or mercy toward Robert now if she expected to remain in New Hampshire. Later, Elizabeth married American naval officer John Roche. She died in 1811.

==Later life and death==
After a brief sojourn in England, Rogers returned in 1779 to raise the King&#x27;s Rangers in Nova Scotia for General Sir Henry Clinton. He was unable to keep the position due to his alcoholism, so his place was taken by his brother James. Robert Rogers played no further part in the war.

Rogers was captured by an American privateer and spent some time in a prison in New York, escaping in 1782. In 1783, he was evacuated with other British troops to England. There, he was unable to earn a living, nor was he able to defeat his alcoholism. He died in obscurity and debt in 1795, what little money he had going to pay an arrears in rent. He was buried in London but his gravesite has been lost.

==Legacy==
Maj. Rogers is an inaugural inductee into the United States Army Ranger Hall of Fame in 1992, for tactics and success as a Ranger, setting the standard for today&#x27;s U.S. Army Rangers.

Camp Rogers, on the eastern edge of Fort Moore, is the location of the Ranger Assessment Phase of U.S. Army Ranger School, and the headquarters compound for the United States Army Airborne and Ranger Training Brigade.

On 30 May 2005, (Memorial Day in the U.S.), a statue of Rogers was unveiled during a ceremony on Rogers Island in the Hudson River, north of Albany, New York. This is near to the site where Rogers penned his &quot;Rules of Ranging&quot;.

Rogers is mentioned respectfully in &quot;The Ranger Handbook&quot; which is given to every soldier in the U.S. Army&#x27;s Ranger School, and is referred to in that publication as the originator of ranger tactics in the American military. The Handbook summarizes Rogers&#x27; principles of irregular warfare as presented in &quot;Rules of Ranging&quot;.&quot;

Methuen High School, in the town in which Rogers was born, uses the &quot;Rangers&quot; as their mascot.

==See also==
* Long-range reconnaissance patrol
* United States Army Rangers

==References==
==Further reading==
* Beattie, Daniel J. (1986). “The Adaptation of the British Army to Wilderness Warfare, 1755–1763”, Adapting to Conditions: War and Society in the Eighteenth Century, ed. Maarten Ultee (University of Alabama Press), 56–83.
* Chet, Guy. “The Literary and Military Career of Benjamin Church: Change or Continuity in Early American Warfare,” Historical Journal of Massachusetts 35:2 (Summer 2007): 105–112
* Chet, Guy (2003). Conquering the American Wilderness: The Triumph of European Warfare in the Colonial Northeast. University of Massachusetts Press.
* 
* Pargellis, Stanley McCrory. “Braddock’s Defeat”, American Historical Review 41 (1936): 253–269.
* Pargellis, Stanley McCrory (1933). Lord Loudoun in North America. Yale University Press.
* Potter, Tiffany, ed. Robert Rogers&#x27; &quot;Ponteach, or the Savages of America: A Tragedy&quot;. University of Toronto Press, 2010. 
* plus Author Interview at the Pritzker Military Museum &amp; Library on 27 March 2010
* 

==External links==
* 
* Contains descendants of Robert Rogers, James Rogers, Samuel Rogers and his other siblings.
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4368198" start="0" end="18" title="Lieutenant colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant-Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186571" start="19" end="32" title="Robert Rogers (British Army officer)" label="Robert Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="71" end="83" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q54179" start="118" end="140" title="Methuen, Massachusetts" label="Methuen, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q517578" start="155" end="177" title="King George&amp;#x27;s War" label="King George&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="183" end="204" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="213" end="239" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768093" start="303" end="323" title="Rogers&amp;#x27; Rangers" label="Rogers&amp;#x27; Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501784" start="327" end="338" title="United States Army Rangers" label="ranger unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="364" end="382" title="asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="427" end="439" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Ulster-Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q54179" start="505" end="512" title="Methuen, Massachusetts" label="Methuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="543" end="556" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="605" end="616" title="Scotch-Irish American" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617382" start="654" end="667" title="Province of New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28249" start="795" end="802" title="Concord, New Hampshire" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q192208" start="900" end="918" title="County Londonderry" label="County Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417104" start="1021" end="1045" title="Dunbarton, New Hampshire" label="Dunbarton, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="1061" end="1091" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q517578" start="1193" end="1215" title="King George&amp;#x27;s War" label="King George&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177722" start="1812" end="1827" title="Braddock expedition" label="Braddock&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q524828" start="1835" end="1860" title="Battle of the Monongahela" label="Battle of the Monongahela"/>
<link wikidata="Q209679" start="1879" end="1892" title="Fort Duquesne" label="Fort Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q622130" start="2039" end="2052" title="Israel Putnam" label="Israel Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49191" start="2262" end="2287" title="Portsmouth, New Hampshire" label="Portsmouth, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="2626" end="2634" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142365" start="2683" end="2688" title="James Rogers (soldier)" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2769" end="2778" title="small pox" label="small pox"/>
<link wikidata="Q519254" start="2790" end="2808" title="Fort William Henry" label="Fort William Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768093" start="2946" end="2966" title="Rogers&amp;#x27; Rangers" label="Rogers&amp;#x27; Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="2983" end="2994" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="3006" end="3027" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495651" start="3073" end="3084" title="Lake George (lake), New York" label="Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="3089" end="3103" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030538" start="3770" end="3821" title="Robert Rogers&amp;#x27; 28 &amp;quot;Rules of Ranging&amp;quot;" label="Robert Rogers&amp;#x27; 28 &amp;quot;Rules of Ranging&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522380" start="3827" end="3852" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s York Rangers" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501784" start="3879" end="3896" title="U.S. Army Rangers" label="U.S. Army Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547710" start="3906" end="3941" title="1st Battalion 119th Field Artillery" label="1st Battalion 119th Field Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030538" start="3987" end="4015" title="Rangers Standing Orders" label="Rogers&amp;#x27; Standing Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q457369" start="4632" end="4647" title="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet" label="William Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q331323" start="4663" end="4678" title="William Shirley" label="William Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210746" start="4688" end="4704" title="William Haviland" label="William Haviland"/>
<link wikidata="Q570947" start="4724" end="4740" title="James Abercrombie (general)" label="James Abercromby"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="4826" end="4840" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438494" start="4842" end="4853" title="Fort Crown Point" label="Crown Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438776" start="4855" end="4866" title="Fort Ticonderoga" label="Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="4882" end="4888" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873073" start="5278" end="5307" title="Battle on Snowshoes (1757)" label="First Battle of the Snowshoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="5358" end="5367" title="Canadians" label="Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077799" start="5373" end="5386" title="Fort Carillon" label="Fort Carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="5474" end="5486" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080325" start="5668" end="5698" title="Battle of Fort William Henry" label="surrendered Fort William Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359303" start="5757" end="5770" title="Rogers Island (New York)" label="Rogers Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q592240" start="5776" end="5787" title="Fort Edward (village), New York" label="Fort Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873072" start="5904" end="5934" title="Battle on Snowshoes" label="Second Battle of the Snowshoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q697897" start="6360" end="6378" title="Battle of Carillon" label="Battle of Carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="6461" end="6466" title="Major (rank)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701806" start="6492" end="6502" title="John Stark" label="John Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="6671" end="6689" title="Quebec City" label="the city of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q335063" start="6705" end="6720" title="Jeffrey Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst" label="Jeffrey Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152172" start="6742" end="6795" title="Commander-in-Chief, North America" label="Commander-in-Chief of British forces in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="6935" end="6942" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462181" start="6947" end="6960" title="Saint-François-du-Lac, Quebec" label="Saint-Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="6964" end="6970" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013523" start="7069" end="7090" title="Crown Point, New York" label="Crown Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="7514" end="7521" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="7569" end="7586" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472310" start="7604" end="7618" title="Fort Wentworth" label="Fort Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472450" start="7710" end="7726" title="Fort at Number 4" label="Fort at Number 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278175" start="7732" end="7758" title="Charlestown, New Hampshire" label="Charlestown, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q749314" start="8326" end="8345" title="Fort Sainte Thérèse" label="Fort Sainte Thérèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078043" start="8450" end="8465" title="Fort Saint-Jean (Quebec)" label="Fort Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="8592" end="8600" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="8633" end="8645" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="8668" end="8688" title="Saint Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809877" start="8721" end="8736" title="Richelieu River" label="Richelieu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435942" start="9193" end="9208" title="Robert Monckton" label="Robert Monckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q209377" start="9224" end="9233" title="Fort Pitt (Pennsylvania)" label="Fort Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q209679" start="9244" end="9257" title="Fort Duquesne" label="Fort Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="9330" end="9337" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="9464" end="9475" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="9720" end="9734" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q28249" start="10071" end="10093" title="Concord, New Hampshire" label="Concord, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="10130" end="10149" title="indentured servants" label="indentured servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817778" start="10595" end="10613" title="Anglo-Cherokee War" label="Anglo-Cherokee War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="10832" end="10853" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="10878" end="10893" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="11029" end="11040" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="11208" end="11226" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="11244" end="11256" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="11258" end="11263" title="Odawa" label="Odawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q314960" start="11271" end="11278" title="Pontiac (Ottawa leader)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q74880" start="11300" end="11312" title="Fort Detroit" label="Fort Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485885" start="11490" end="11500" title="Siege of Fort Detroit" label="laid siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q335063" start="11679" end="11694" title="Jeffrey Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst" label="Jeffrey Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q74880" start="11765" end="11777" title="Fort Detroit" label="Fort Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870506" start="11825" end="11845" title="Battle of Bloody Run" label="Battle of Bloody Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q314960" start="11887" end="11901" title="Chief Pontiac" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485885" start="11902" end="11907" title="siege of Fort Detroit" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219629" start="13016" end="13026" title="John Askin" label="John Askin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="13791" end="13801" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="13861" end="13878" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q370648" start="13918" end="13933" title="Fort Michilimackinac" label="Michilimackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477724" start="13935" end="13958" title="Mackinaw City, Michigan" label="Mackinaw City, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q370648" start="14142" end="14162" title="Fort Michilimackinac" label="Fort Michilimackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="14261" end="14272" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346228" start="15259" end="15274" title="Jonathan Carver" label="Jonathan Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220" start="15387" end="15398" title="Peace River" label="Peace River"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="15417" end="15436" title="Alexander Mackenzie (explorer)" label="Alexander MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="16298" end="16313" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49191" start="17233" end="17243" title="Portsmouth, New Hampshire" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="18838" end="18848" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="19225" end="19245" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="19324" end="19341" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270087" start="19672" end="19692" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Rangers" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465574" start="19762" end="19773" title="Nathan Hale" label="Nathan Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="19789" end="19805" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="19866" end="19885" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198543" start="19898" end="19914" title="Consider Tiffany" label="Consider Tiffany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411064" start="20858" end="20877" title="King&amp;#x27;s Rangers" label="King&amp;#x27;s Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="20881" end="20892" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="20897" end="20922" title="Henry Clinton (American War of Independence)" label="General Sir Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142365" start="21020" end="21025" title="James Rogers (soldier)" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501784" start="21542" end="21580" title="United States Army Rangers" label="United States Army Ranger Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="21721" end="21731" title="Fort Moore" label="Fort Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418943" start="21783" end="21806" title="Ranger School" label="U.S. Army Ranger School"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="21921" end="21933" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359303" start="22001" end="22014" title="Rogers Island (New York)" label="Rogers Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="22022" end="22034" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="22045" end="22061" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030538" start="22118" end="22134" title="Robert Rogers&amp;#x27; 28 &amp;quot;Rules of Ranging&amp;quot;" label="Rules of Ranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073630" start="22434" end="22451" title="irregular warfare" label="irregular warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823905" start="22505" end="22524" title="Methuen High School" label="Methuen High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673153" start="22626" end="22658" title="Long-range reconnaissance patrol" label="Long-range reconnaissance patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501784" start="22661" end="22687" title="United States Army Rangers" label="United States Army Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q588030" start="23639" end="23677" title="Pritzker Military Museum &amp;amp; Library" label="Pritzker Military Museum &amp;amp; Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981069" wikidata="Q163176" url="?curid=981069" title="Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia">
<text>Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia (; – 24 November 1960) was the youngest child of Emperor Alexander III of Russia and younger sister of Emperor Nicholas II.

Olga was raised at the Gatchina Palace outside Saint Petersburg. Olga&#x27;s relationship with her mother, Empress Marie, the daughter of King Christian IX of Denmark, was strained and distant from childhood. In contrast, she and her father were close. He died when she was 12, and her brother Nicholas became emperor. In 1901, at 19, she married Duke Peter Alexandrovich of Oldenburg, who was privately believed by family and friends to be homosexual. Their marriage of 15 years remained unconsummated, and Peter at first refused Olga&#x27;s request for a divorce. The couple led separate lives and their marriage was eventually annulled by the Emperor in October 1916. The following month Olga married cavalry officer Nikolai Kulikovsky, with whom she had fallen in love several years before. During the First World War, Olga served as an army nurse and was awarded a medal for personal gallantry. At the downfall of the Romanovs in the Russian Revolution of 1917, she fled with her husband and children to Crimea, where they lived under the threat of assassination. Her brother Nicholas and his family were shot and bayoneted to death by revolutionaries.

Olga escaped revolutionary Russia with her second husband and their two sons in February 1920. They joined her mother, the Dowager Empress, in Denmark. In exile, Olga acted as companion and secretary to her mother and was often sought out by Romanov impostors who claimed to be her dead relatives. She met Anna Anderson, the best-known impostor, in Berlin in 1925. After the Dowager Empress&#x27;s death in 1928, Olga and her husband purchased a dairy farm in Ballerup, near Copenhagen. She led a simple life: raising her two sons, working on the farm and painting. During her lifetime, she painted over 2,000 works of art, which provided extra income for both her family and the charitable causes she supported.

In 1948, feeling threatened by Joseph Stalin&#x27;s regime, Olga and her immediate family relocated to a farm in Campbellville, Ontario, Canada. With advancing age, Olga and her husband moved to a bungalow near Cooksville, Ontario. Colonel Kulikovsky died there in 1958. Two years later, as her health deteriorated, Olga moved with friends to a small apartment in East Toronto. She died aged 78, seven months after her older sister, Xenia. At the end of her life and afterwards, Olga was widely labelled the last Grand Duchess of Imperial Russia.

==Early life==

Olga was the youngest daughter of Emperor Alexander III and his consort, Empress Marie, formerly Princess Dagmar of Denmark. She was born in the purple (i.e., during her father&#x27;s reign) on 13 June 1882 in the Peterhof Palace, west of central Saint Petersburg. Her birth was announced by a traditional 101-gun salute from the ramparts of the Peter and Paul Fortress, and similar salutes throughout the Russian Empire. Her mother, advised by her sister, Alexandra, Princess of Wales, placed Olga in the care of an English nanny, Elizabeth Franklin.

The Russian imperial family was a frequent target for assassins, so for safety reasons the Grand Duchess was raised at the country palace of Gatchina, about 50 miles (80 km) west of Saint Petersburg. Although Olga and her siblings lived in a palace, conditions in the nursery were modest, even Spartan. They slept on hard camp beds, rose at dawn, washed in cold water, and ate a simple porridge for breakfast.

Olga left Gatchina for the first time in 1888 when the imperial family visited the Caucasus. On 29 October, their return train approached the small town of Borki at speed. Olga&#x27;s parents and their four older children were eating lunch in the dining-car when the train lurched violently and came off the rails. The carriage was torn open; the heavy iron roof caved in, and the wheels and floor of the car were sliced off. Survivors claimed the Tsar crawled out from beneath the crushed roof, and held it up with &quot;a Herculean effort&quot; so that the others could escape; a story subsequently considered unbelievable. There were 21 fatalities. Empress Marie helped tend the wounded and made makeshift bandages from her own clothes. An official investigation found that the crash was an accident, but it was widely and falsely believed that two bombs had been planted on the line.

The Grand Duchess and her siblings were taught at home by private tutors. Subjects included history, geography, Russian, English, and French, as well as drawing and dancing. Physical activities such as equestrianism were taught at an early age, and the children became expert riders.

The family was deeply religious. While Christmas and Easter were times of celebration and extravagance, Lent was strictly observed—meat, dairy products and any form of entertainment were avoided. 

Empress Marie was reserved and formal with Olga as a child, and their relationship remained a difficult one. But Olga, her father, and the youngest of her brothers, Michael, had a close relationship. Together, the three frequently went on hikes in the Gatchina forests, where the Tsar taught Olga and Michael woodsmanship. Olga said of her father:
Family holidays were taken in the summer at Peterhof and with Olga&#x27;s grandparents in Denmark. However, in 1894, Olga&#x27;s father became increasingly ill, and the annual trip to Denmark was cancelled. On 13 November 1894, he died at the age of 49. The emotional impact on Olga, aged 12, was traumatic, and her eldest brother, the new Tsar Nicholas II, was propelled into a role for which, in Olga&#x27;s later opinion, he was ill-prepared.

==Court life==
Olga was due to enter society in mid-1899 at the age of 17, but after the death of her brother George at the age of 28, her first official public appearance was delayed by a year until 1900. She hated the experience, and later told her official biographer Ian Vorres, &quot;I felt as though I were an animal in a cage—exhibited to the public for the first time.&quot; From 1901 Olga served as the honorary Commander-in-Chief of the of the Imperial Russian Army. The Akhtyrsky Hussars, famous for their victory over Napoleon Bonaparte at the Battle of Kulm in 1813, wore a distinctive brown dolman.

By 1900, Olga, aged 18, was being escorted to the theatre and opera by a distant cousin, Duke Peter Alexandrovich of Oldenburg, a member of the Russian branch of the House of Oldenburg. He was 14 years her senior and known for his passion for literature and gambling. Peter asked for Olga&#x27;s hand in marriage the following year, a proposal that took the Grand Duchess completely by surprise: &quot;I was so taken aback that all I could say was &#x27;thank you&#x27;,&quot; she later explained.
Their engagement, announced in May 1901, surprised family and friends, as Peter had shown no prior interest in women, and members of society assumed he was homosexual. At the age of 19, on , Olga married 33-year-old Peter. After the celebration the newlyweds left for the Oldenburg palace on the Field of Mars. Olga spent her wedding night alone in tears, while her husband left for a gambling club, returning the next morning. Their marriage remained unconsummated, and Olga suspected that Peter&#x27;s ambitious mother had pushed him into proposing. Biographer Patricia Phenix thought Olga may have accepted his proposal to gain independence from her own mother, the Dowager Empress, or to avoid marriage into a foreign court. The couple initially lived with her in-laws Alexander Petrovich and Eugénie Maximilianovna of Oldenburg. The arrangement was not harmonious, as Peter&#x27;s parents, both well known for their philanthropic work, berated their only son for his laziness. Olga took a dislike to her mother-in-law; although Eugénie, a close friend of the Dowager Empress, gave her daughter-in-law many gifts, including a ruby tiara that Napoleon had given as a present to Joséphine de Beauharnais. A few weeks after the wedding Olga and her husband travelled to Biarritz, France, from where they sailed to Sorrento, Italy, on a yacht loaned to them by King Edward VII of the United Kingdom.

On their return to Russia, they settled into a 200-room palace (the former Baryatinsky mansion) at 46 Sergievskaya Street (present-day ) in Saint Petersburg. (The palace, a gift from Tsar Nicholas II to his sister, now houses the Saint Petersburg Chamber of Commerce and Industry.) Olga and Peter had separate bedrooms at opposite ends of the building, and the Grand Duchess had her own art studio. Unhappy in her marriage, she fell into bouts of depression that caused her to lose her hair, forcing her to wear a wig. It took two years for her hair to regrow.

Near the Oldenburgs&#x27; estate, Ramon in Voronezh province, Olga had her own villa, called &quot;Olgino&quot; after the local town. She subsidized the village school out of her own pocket, and established a hospital. Her daughter-in-law later wrote, &quot;She tried to help every needy person as far as her strengths and means would permit.&quot; At the hospital she learned basic medical treatment and proper care from the local doctor. She exemplified her strong Orthodox faith by creating religious icons, which she distributed to the charitable endeavours she supported. At Ramon, Olga and Peter enjoyed walking through the nearby woods and hunted wolves together. He was kind and considerate towards her, but she longed for love, a normal marriage, and children.

In April 1903, during a royal military review at Pavlovsk Palace, Olga&#x27;s brother Michael introduced her to a Blue Cuirassier Guards officer, Nikolai Kulikovsky. Olga and Kulikovsky began to see each other and exchanged letters regularly. The same year, at the age of 22, she confronted her husband and asked for a divorce, which he refused – with the qualification that he might reconsider after seven years. Nevertheless, Oldenburg appointed Kulikovsky as an aide-de-camp, and allowed him to live in the same residence as Oldenburg and the Grand Duchess on Sergievskaya Street. The relationship between Kulikovsky and the Grand Duchess was not public, but gossip about their romance spread through society.

From 1904 to 1906 Duke Peter had an appointment to a military post in Tsarskoye Selo, a complex of palaces just south of Saint Petersburg. In Tsarskoye Selo, the Grand Duchess grew close to her brother Nicholas and his family, who lived at the Alexander Palace near her own residence. Olga prized her connection to the Tsar&#x27;s four daughters. From 1906 to 1914, Olga took her nieces to parties and engagements in Saint Petersburg, without their parents, every weekend throughout the winter. She especially took a liking to the youngest of Nicholas&#x27;s daughters, her god-daughter Anastasia, whom she called &quot;Shvipsik&quot; (&quot;little one&quot;). Through her brother and sister-in-law, Olga met Rasputin, a self-styled holy man who purported to have healing powers. Although she made no public criticisms of Rasputin&#x27;s association with the imperial family, she was unconvinced of his supposed powers and privately disliked him. As Olga grew close to her brother&#x27;s family, her relationship with her other surviving brother, Michael, deteriorated. To her and Nicholas&#x27;s horror, Michael eloped with his mistress, a twice-divorced commoner, and communication between Michael and the rest of the family essentially ceased.

Public unrest over the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905 and demands for political reform increased in the early years of the twentieth century. At Epiphany 1905, a band of revolutionaries fired live rounds at the Winter Palace from the Peter and Paul Fortress. Olga and the Dowager Empress were showered with glass splinters from a smashed window, but remained unharmed. Three weeks later, on &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot; (), Cossack troops killed at least 92 people during a demonstration, and a month later Olga&#x27;s uncle, Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich of Russia, was assassinated. Uprisings occurred throughout the country, and parts of the navy mutinied. Olga supported the appointment of the liberal Pyotr Stolypin as prime minister, and he embarked on a programme of gradual reform, but in 1911 he was assassinated. The public unrest, Michael&#x27;s elopement, and Olga&#x27;s sham marriage placed her under strain, and in 1912, while visiting England with her mother, she suffered a nervous breakdown. Tsarina Alexandra was also unwell with fatigue, concerned by the poor health of her hemophiliac son, Alexei. Olga stood in for the Tsarina at public events and accompanied her brother on a tour of the interior, while the Tsarina remained at home.

==War and revolution==

On 1 August 1914, with World War I looming, Olga&#x27;s regiment, the Akhtyrsky Hussars, appeared at an Imperial Review before her and the Tsar at Krasnoe Selo. Kulikovsky volunteered for service with the Hussars, who were stationed on the frontlines in Southwestern Russia. With the Grand Duchess&#x27;s prior medical knowledge from the village of Olgino, she started work as a nurse at an under-staffed Red Cross hospital in Rovno, near to where her own regiment was stationed. During the war, she came under heavy Austrian fire while attending the regiment at the front. Nurses rarely worked so close to the frontline and consequently, she was awarded the Order of St. George by General Mannerheim, who later became President of Finland. As the Russians lost ground to the Central Powers, Olga&#x27;s hospital was moved eastwards to Kiev, and Michael returned to Russia from exile abroad.

In 1916, Tsar Nicholas II annulled the marriage between Duke Peter Alexandrovich and the Grand Duchess, allowing her to marry Colonel Kulikovsky. The service was performed on 16 November 1916 in the Kievo-Vasilievskaya Church on Triokhsviatitelskaya (Three Saints Street) in Kiev. The only guests were the Dowager Empress, Olga&#x27;s brother-in-law Grand Duke Alexander, four officers of the Akhtyrsky Regiment, and two of Olga&#x27;s fellow nurses from the hospital in Kiev.

During the war, internal tensions and economic deprivation in Russia continued to mount and revolutionary sympathies grew. After Tsar Nicholas II abdicated in early 1917, many members of the Romanov dynasty, including Nicholas and his immediate family, were detained under house arrest. In search of safety, the Dowager Empress, Grand Duke Alexander, and Grand Duchess Olga travelled to Crimea by special train, where they were joined by Olga&#x27;s sister (Alexander&#x27;s wife) Grand Duchess Xenia. They lived at Alexander&#x27;s estate, Ai-Todor, about 12 miles (19 km) from Yalta, where they were placed under house arrest by the local forces. On 12 August 1917, her first child and son, Tikhon Nikolaevich was born during their virtual imprisonment. He was named after Tikhon of Zadonsk, the Saint venerated near the Grand Duchess&#x27;s estate at Olgino.

The Romanovs isolated in Crimea knew little of the fate of the Tsar and his family. Nicholas, Alexandra, and their children were originally held at their official residence, the Alexander Palace, but the Provisional government under Alexander Kerensky relocated them to Tobolsk, Siberia. In February 1918, most of the imperial family at Ai-Todor was moved to another estate at Djulber, where Grand Dukes Nicholas and Peter were already under house arrest. Olga and her husband were left at Ai-Todor. The entire Romanov family in Crimea was condemned to death by the Yalta revolutionary council, but the executions were delayed by political rivalry between the Yalta and Sevastopol Soviets. By March 1918, the Central Power of Germany had advanced on Crimea, and the revolutionary guards were replaced by German ones. In November 1918, the German forces were informed that their nation had lost the war, and they evacuated homewards. Allied forces took over the Crimean ports, in support of the loyalist White Army, which allowed the surviving members of the Romanov family time to escape abroad. The Dowager Empress and, at her insistence, most of her family and friends were evacuated by the British warship HMS &quot;Marlborough&quot;. Nicholas II had already been shot dead and the family assumed, correctly, that his wife and children had also been killed.

Olga and her husband refused to leave Russia and decided to move to the Caucasus, which the White Army had cleared of revolutionary Bolsheviks. An imperial bodyguard, Timofei Yatchik, guided them to his hometown, the large Cossack village of Novominskaya. In a rented five-room farmhouse there, Olga gave birth to her second son, Guri Nikolaevich, on 23 April 1919. He was named after a friend of hers, Guri Panayev, who was killed while serving in the Akhtyrsky Regiment during World War I. In November 1919, the family set out on what would be their last journey through Russia. Just ahead of revolutionary troops, they escaped to Novorossiysk and took refuge in the residence of the Danish consul, Thomas Schytte, who informed them of the Dowager Empress&#x27;s safe arrival in Denmark. After a brief stay with the consul, the family was shipped to a refugee camp on the island of Büyükada in the Dardanelles Strait near Istanbul, Turkey, where Olga, her husband and children shared three rooms with eleven other adults. After two weeks, they were evacuated to Belgrade in the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes where she was visited by Prince Regent Alexander. Alexander offered the Grand Duchess and her family a permanent home, but Olga was summoned to Denmark by her mother. On Good Friday 1920, Olga and her family arrived in Copenhagen. They lived with the Dowager Empress, at first at the Amalienborg Palace and then at the royal estate of Hvidøre, where Olga acted as her mother&#x27;s secretary and companion.

==Anna Anderson==

In 1925, Olga and Colonel Kulikovsky travelled to Berlin to meet Anna Anderson, who claimed to be Olga&#x27;s niece, Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia. Anderson had attempted suicide in Berlin in 1920, which Olga later called &quot;probably the only indisputable fact in the whole story&quot;. Anderson claimed that with the help of a man named Tchaikovsky she had escaped from revolutionary Russia via Bucharest, where she had given birth to his child. Olga thought the story &quot;palpably false&quot;, since Anderson made no attempt to approach Queen Marie of Romania (first cousin of both of Anastasia&#x27;s parents), during her entire alleged time in Bucharest. Olga said:
Anderson stated she was in Berlin to inform Princess Irene of Prussia (sister of Tsarina Alexandra and cousin of Tsar Nicholas II) of her survival. Olga commented, &quot;[Princess Irene] was one of the most straightlaced women in her generation. My niece would have known that her condition would have indeed have shocked [her].&quot;

Olga met Anderson, who was being treated for tuberculosis, at a nursing home. Of the visit Olga later said:
Olga also said she was dismayed that Anderson spoke only German and showed no sign of knowing either English or Russian, while Anastasia spoke both those languages fluently and was ignorant of German. Nevertheless, Olga remained sympathetic towards Anderson, perhaps because she thought that she was ill rather than deliberately deceitful. Olga later explained:

Conceivably, Olga was initially either open to the possibility that Anderson was Anastasia or unable to make up her mind. Anderson&#x27;s biographer and supporter Peter Kurth claimed that Olga wrote to the Danish ambassador, Herluf Zahle, at the end of October 1925: &quot;My feeling is that she is not the one she believes—but one can&#x27;t say she is not as a fact&quot;. Within a month she had made up her mind. She wrote to a friend, &quot;There is no resemblance, and she is undoubtedly not A.&quot; Olga sent Anderson a scarf and five letters, which were used by Anderson&#x27;s supporters to claim that Olga recognized Anderson as Anastasia. Olga later said she sent the gift and letters &quot;out of pity&quot;, and called the claims &quot;a complete fabrication&quot;. When Olga refused to recognize Anderson as Anastasia publicly and published a statement denying any resemblance in a Danish newspaper, Anderson&#x27;s supporters, Harriet von Rathlef and Gleb Botkin, claimed that Olga was acting on instructions received from her sister Xenia by telegram, which Olga denied in private letters and sworn testimony. She told her official biographer, &quot;I never received any such telegram.&quot; The telegram was never produced by Anderson&#x27;s supporters, and it has never been found among any of the papers relating to the case. Xenia said,
==Danish residency and exodus==
The Dowager Empress died on 13 October 1928 at Hvidøre. Her estate was sold and Olga purchased &quot;Knudsminde&quot;, a farm in Ballerup about from central Copenhagen, with her portion of the proceeds. She and her husband kept horses, in which Colonel Kulikovsky was especially interested, along with Jersey cows, pigs, chickens, geese, dogs and cats. For transport they had a small car and a sledge. Tihon and Guri (age thirteen and eleven, respectively when they moved to Knudsminde) grew up on the farm. Olga ran the household with the help of her elderly, faithful lady&#x27;s maid Emilia Tenso (&quot;Mimka&quot;), who had come along with her from Russia. The Grand Duchess lived with simplicity, working in the fields, doing household chores, and painting.

The farm became a center for the Russian monarchist community in Denmark, and many Russian emigrants visited. Olga maintained a high level of correspondence with the Russian émigré community and former members of the imperial army. On 2 February 1935 in the Russian Orthodox Church in Copenhagen, she and her husband were godparents, with her cousin Prince Gustav of Denmark, to Aleksander Schalburg, son of Russian-born Danish army officer Christian Frederik von Schalburg. In the 1930s, the family took annual holidays at Sofiero Palace, Sweden, with Crown Prince Gustaf of Sweden and his wife, Louise. Olga began to sell her own paintings, of Russian and Danish scenes, with exhibition auctions in Copenhagen, London, Paris, and Berlin. Some of the proceeds were donated to the charities she supported.

Neutral Denmark was invaded by Nazi Germany on 9 April 1940 and was occupied for the remainder of World War II. Food shortages, communication restrictions, and transport closures followed. As Olga&#x27;s sons, Tikhon and Guri, served as officers in the Danish Army, they were interned as prisoners of war, but their imprisonment in a Copenhagen hotel lasted less than two months. Tikhon was imprisoned for a further month in 1943 after being arrested on charges of espionage. Other Russian émigrés, keen to fight against the Soviets, enlisted in the German forces. Despite her sons&#x27; internment and her mother&#x27;s Danish origins, Olga was implicated in her compatriots&#x27; collusion with German forces, as she continued to meet and extend help to Russian émigrés fighting against communism. On 4 May 1945, German forces in Denmark surrendered to the British. When economic and social conditions for Russian exiles failed to improve, General Pyotr Krasnov wrote to the Grand Duchess, detailing the wretched conditions affecting Russian immigrants in Denmark. She in turn asked Prince Axel of Denmark to help them, but her request was refused.

With the end of World War II, Soviet troops occupied the Danish island of Bornholm, and the Soviet Union wrote to the Danish government accusing Olga and a Danish Catholic bishop of conspiracy against the Soviet government. The surviving Romanovs in Denmark grew fearful of an assassination or kidnap attempt, and Olga decided to move her family across the Atlantic to the relative safety of rural Canada.

==Emigration to Canada==

In May 1948, the Kulikovskys travelled to London by Danish troopship. They were housed in a grace and favour apartment at Hampton Court Palace while arrangements were made for their journey to Canada as agricultural immigrants. On 2 June 1948, Olga, Kulikovsky, Tikhon and his Danish-born wife Agnete, Guri and his Danish-born wife Ruth, Guri and Ruth&#x27;s two children, Xenia and Leonid, and Olga&#x27;s devoted companion and former maid Emilia Tenso (&quot;Mimka&quot;) departed Liverpool on board the &quot;Empress of Canada&quot;. After a rough crossing, the ship docked at Halifax, Nova Scotia. The family lived in Toronto, until they purchased a farm in Halton County, Ontario, near Campbellville.

By 1952, the farm had become a burden to Olga and her husband. They were both elderly; their sons had moved away; labour was hard to come by; the Colonel suffered increasing ill-health, and some of Olga&#x27;s remaining jewelry was stolen. The farm was sold, and Olga, her husband and her former maid, Mimka, moved to a smaller five-room house at 2130 Camilla Road, Cooksville, Ontario, a suburb of Toronto now amalgamated into Mississauga. Mimka suffered a stroke that left her disabled, and Olga nursed her until Mimka&#x27;s death on 24 January 1954.

Neighbours and visitors to the region, including foreign and royal dignitaries, took interest in Olga, and visited her home. Among these were members of her extended family, including first cousin once removed Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent, in 1954, and second cousin Louis Mountbatten, and his wife Edwina, in August 1959. In June 1959, Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip (a first cousin twice removed and a first cousin once removed, respectively) visited Toronto and invited the Grand Duchess for lunch on board the royal yacht &quot;Britannia&quot;. Her home was also a magnet for Romanov impostors, whom Olga and her family considered a menace.

By 1958, Olga&#x27;s husband was virtually paralyzed, and she sold some of her remaining jewelry to raise funds. Following her husband&#x27;s death in 1958, she became increasingly infirm until hospitalized in April 1960 at Toronto General Hospital. She was not informed or was not aware that her elder sister, Xenia, died in London that month. Unable to care for herself, Olga went to stay with Russian émigré friends, Konstantin and Sinaida Martemianoff, in an apartment above a beauty salon at 716 Gerrard Street East, Toronto. She slipped into a coma on 21 November 1960, and died on 24 November at the age of 78.

She was interred next to her husband in York Cemetery, Toronto, on 30 November 1960, after a funeral service at Christ the Saviour Cathedral, Toronto. Officers of the Akhtyrsky Hussars and the Blue Cuirassiers stood guard in the small Russian church, which overflowed with mourners. Although she lived simply, bought cheap clothes, and did her own shopping and gardening, her estate was valued at more than 200,000 Canadian dollars (about C$ in ) and was mostly held as stock and bonds. Her material possessions were appraised at $350 in total, which biographer Patricia Phenix considered an underestimate.

==Legacy==

Olga began drawing and painting at a young age. She told her official biographer Ian Vorres:

She painted throughout her life, on paper, canvas and ceramic, and her output is estimated at over 2,000 pieces. Her usual subject was scenery and landscape, but she also painted portraits and still lifes. Vorres wrote,

Her daughter-in-law wrote,
Her paintings were a profitable source of income. According to her daughter-in-law, Olga preferred to exhibit in Denmark to avoid the commercialism of the North American market. The Russian Relief Programme, which was founded by Tikhon and his third wife Olga in honour of the Grand Duchess, exhibited a selection of her work at the residence of the Russian ambassador in Washington in 2001, in Moscow in 2002, in Ekaterinburg in 2004, in Saint Petersburg and Moscow in 2005, in Tyumen and Surgut in 2006, at the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow and Saint Michael&#x27;s Castle in Saint Petersburg in 2007, and at the Vladimir Arsenyev Museum in Vladivostok in 2013. Pieces by Olga are included in the collections of the British queen Elizabeth II, the Norwegian king Harald V, and private collections in North America and Europe. Ballerup Museum in Pederstrup, Denmark, has around 100 of her works.

===Ancestry===


== Notes ==
== References ==
*Belyakova, Zoia (2010) &quot;Honour and Fidelity: The Russian Dukes of Leuchtenberg&quot;. Saint Petersburg: Logos Publishers. 
*Crawford, Rosemary; Crawford, Donald (1997) &quot;Michael and Natasha: The Life and Love of the Last Tsar of Russia&quot;. London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. 
*Hall, Coryne (1993) &quot;The Grand Duchess of Knudsminde&quot;. Article published in Royalty History Digest.
*Harcave, Sidney (2004) &quot;Count Sergei Witte and the Twilight of Imperial Russia: A Biography&quot;. New York: M. E. Sharpe. 
*Hough, Richard (1984) &quot;Louis and Victoria: The Family History of the Mountbattens. Second edition&quot;. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 
*Klier, John; Mingay, Helen (1995) &quot;The Quest for Anastasia&quot;. London: Smith Gryphon. 
*Kulikovsky-Romanoff, Olga (Undated) &quot;The Unfading Light of Charity: Grand Duchess Olga As a Philanthropist And Painter&quot;, &quot;Historical Magazine&quot;, Gatchina, Russia: Gatchina Through The Centuries, retrieved 6 March 2010
*Kurth, Peter (1983) &quot;Anastasia: The Life of Anna Anderson&quot;. London: Jonathan Cape. 
*Massie, Robert K. (1995) &quot;The Romanovs: The Final Chapter&quot;. London: Random House. 
*Phenix, Patricia (1999) &quot;Olga Romanov: Russia&#x27;s Last Grand Duchess&quot;. Toronto: Viking/Penguin. 
*von Nidda, Roland Krug (1958) Commentary in &quot;I, Anastasia: An autobiography with notes by Roland Krug von Nidda translated from the German by Oliver Coburn&quot;. London: Michael Joseph.
*Vorres, Ian (2001) [1964] &quot;The Last Grand Duchess&quot;. Toronto: Key Porter Books. 

==External links==

* HIH Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna Memorial Fund
* Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna-Royal Russia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q163176" start="0" end="41" title="Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="99" end="122" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="153" end="164" title="Nicholas II" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461" start="190" end="205" title="Gatchina Palace" label="Gatchina Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="214" end="230" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="282" end="287" title="Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151305" start="310" end="333" title="Christian IX of Denmark" label="Christian IX of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q682770" start="514" end="551" title="Duke Peter Alexandrovich of Oldenburg" label="Duke Peter Alexandrovich of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q829235" start="887" end="905" title="Nikolai Kulikovsky" label="Nikolai Kulikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="1090" end="1097" title="Romanov" label="Romanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="1106" end="1132" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="1176" end="1182" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356047" start="1277" end="1323" title="Shooting of the Romanov family" label="shot and bayoneted to death by revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397387" start="1568" end="1585" title="Romanov impostors" label="Romanov impostors"/>
<link wikidata="Q285563" start="1632" end="1645" title="Anna Anderson" label="Anna Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1675" end="1681" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28143" start="1786" end="1794" title="Ballerup" label="Ballerup"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="2071" end="2084" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028230" start="2153" end="2175" title="Campbellville, Ontario" label="Campbellville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167214" start="2251" end="2270" title="Cooksville, Ontario" label="Cooksville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2409" end="2416" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q165113" start="2473" end="2478" title="Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Xenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="2638" end="2659" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Emperor Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="2677" end="2690" title="Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)" label="Empress Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q643330" start="2737" end="2755" title="born in the purple" label="born in the purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258473" start="2818" end="2833" title="Peterhof Palace" label="Peterhof Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="2851" end="2867" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38646" start="2950" end="2973" title="Peter and Paul Fortress" label="Peter and Paul Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3010" end="3024" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="3061" end="3089" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Alexandra, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436" start="3298" end="3306" title="Gatchina" label="Gatchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="3651" end="3659" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130432" start="3724" end="3729" title="Birky, Chuhuiv Raion" label="Borki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312139" start="4345" end="4354" title="Borki train disaster" label="the crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="4659" end="4672" title="equestrianism" label="equestrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="4846" end="4850" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q154444" start="5105" end="5112" title="Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich of Russia" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="5628" end="5644" title="Tsar Nicholas II" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296853" start="5772" end="5779" title="Society (disambiguation)" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q170293" start="5845" end="5851" title="Grand Duke George Alexandrovich of Russia" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="6189" end="6210" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="6265" end="6283" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q48253" start="6291" end="6305" title="Battle of Kulm" label="Battle of Kulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q925572" start="6340" end="6346" title="dolman" label="dolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q682770" start="6438" end="6475" title="Duke Peter Alexandrovich of Oldenburg" label="Duke Peter Alexandrovich of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="6515" end="6533" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194336" start="7143" end="7156" title="Field of Mars (Saint Petersburg)" label="Field of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210424" start="7620" end="7639" title="Duke Alexander Petrovich of Oldenburg" label="Alexander Petrovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709348" start="7644" end="7666" title="Princess Eugenia Maximilianovna of Leuchtenberg" label="Eugénie Maximilianovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7993" end="8001" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171480" start="8028" end="8052" title="Joséphine de Beauharnais" label="Joséphine de Beauharnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q132790" start="8118" end="8126" title="Biarritz" label="Biarritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q72672" start="8162" end="8170" title="Sorrento" label="Sorrento"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="8213" end="8223" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185881" start="8844" end="8849" title="Ramon Palace" label="Ramon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447" start="8853" end="8870" title="Voronezh Oblast" label="Voronezh province"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="9277" end="9285" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q118121947" start="9630" end="9645" title="Pavlovsk Palace" label="Pavlovsk Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q44865" start="9700" end="9710" title="Cuirassier" label="Cuirassier"/>
<link wikidata="Q829235" start="9727" end="9745" title="Nikolai Kulikovsky" label="Nikolai Kulikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="10046" end="10058" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="10365" end="10379" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519034" start="10539" end="10555" title="Alexander Palace" label="Alexander Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q151130" start="10882" end="10891" title="Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia" label="Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="11004" end="11012" title="Rasputin" label="Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="11566" end="11584" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="11602" end="11630" title="1905 Russian Revolution" label="demands for political reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="11689" end="11697" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="11755" end="11768" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q38646" start="11778" end="11801" title="Peter and Paul Fortress" label="Peter and Paul Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q185642" start="11935" end="11960" title="Bloody Sunday (1905)" label="&amp;quot;Bloody Sunday&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="11965" end="11972" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q248900" start="12067" end="12108" title="Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich of Russia" label="Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q138487" start="12249" end="12263" title="Pyotr Stolypin" label="Pyotr Stolypin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221926" start="12304" end="12331" title="Stolypin reform" label="programme of gradual reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="12553" end="12570" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Tsarina Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q134003" start="12637" end="12647" title="hemophilia" label="hemophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154045" start="12654" end="12660" title="Tsarevich Alexei Nikolaevich of Russia" label="Alexei"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12848" end="12859" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q155587" start="12972" end="12984" title="Krasnoe Selo" label="Krasnoe Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q156739" start="13252" end="13257" title="Rovno" label="Rovno"/>
<link wikidata="Q831282" start="13484" end="13503" title="Order of St. George" label="Order of St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q152306" start="13507" end="13525" title="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim" label="General Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558" start="13544" end="13564" title="President of Finland" label="President of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="13601" end="13615" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="13661" end="13665" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="13727" end="13743" title="Tsar Nicholas II" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q464626" start="14068" end="14088" title="Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich of Russia" label="Grand Duke Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="14583" end="14589" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q165113" start="14677" end="14696" title="Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Grand Duchess Xenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="14775" end="14780" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358788" start="14971" end="14988" title="Tikhon of Zadonsk" label="Tikhon of Zadonsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q48211" start="15292" end="15310" title="Alexander Kerensky" label="Alexander Kerensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q168782" start="15329" end="15336" title="Tobolsk" label="Tobolsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="15338" end="15345" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160869" start="15463" end="15471" title="Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich of Russia (1856–1929)" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q446676" start="15476" end="15481" title="Grand Duke Peter Nikolaevich of Russia" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="15625" end="15630" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="15729" end="15739" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q211201" start="15740" end="15747" title="Soviet (council)" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="15768" end="15781" title="Central Powers" label="Central Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="15785" end="15792" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="15992" end="15998" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851355" start="16062" end="16072" title="White Army" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q432251" start="16268" end="16295" title="HMS Marlborough (1912)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Marlborough&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356047" start="16376" end="16418" title="Execution of the Romanov family" label="his wife and children had also been killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851355" start="16513" end="16523" title="White Army" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="16553" end="16563" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="16644" end="16651" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16900" end="16911" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="17054" end="17066" title="Novorossiysk" label="Novorossiysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q989883" start="17305" end="17313" title="Büyükada" label="Büyükada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="17321" end="17332" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="17345" end="17353" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="17485" end="17493" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="17564" end="17587" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Prince Regent Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="17823" end="17841" title="Amalienborg Palace" label="Amalienborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787754" start="17874" end="17881" title="Hvidøre (building)" label="Hvidøre"/>
<link wikidata="Q285563" start="18031" end="18044" title="Anna Anderson" label="Anna Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151130" start="18083" end="18127" title="Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia" label="Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="18380" end="18389" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="18531" end="18547" title="Marie of Romania" label="Marie of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q233990" start="18700" end="18725" title="Princess Irene of Hesse and by Rhine" label="Princess Irene of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="18737" end="18754" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Tsarina Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="18769" end="18785" title="Tsar Nicholas II" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="19037" end="19049" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067799" start="19688" end="19700" title="Herluf Zahle" label="Herluf Zahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586145" start="20405" end="20424" title="Harriet von Rathlef" label="Harriet von Rathlef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567416" start="20429" end="20440" title="Gleb Botkin" label="Gleb Botkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28143" start="20981" end="20989" title="Ballerup" label="Ballerup"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="21700" end="21717" title="White émigré" label="Russian emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q701099" start="21967" end="21991" title="Prince Gustav of Denmark" label="Prince Gustav of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q656477" start="22058" end="22090" title="Christian Frederik von Schalburg" label="Christian Frederik von Schalburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q891918" start="22141" end="22155" title="Sofiero Palace" label="Sofiero Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="22170" end="22199" title="Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden" label="Crown Prince Gustaf of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q115477" start="22214" end="22220" title="Louise Mountbatten" label="Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="22455" end="22467" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22522" end="22534" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575188" start="22677" end="22688" title="Danish Army" label="Danish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q35448" start="23374" end="23387" title="Pyotr Krasnov" label="Pyotr Krasnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004187" start="23509" end="23531" title="Prince Axel of Denmark" label="Prince Axel of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23620" end="23658" title="Bornholm#Soviet Occupation 1945–1946" label="occupied the Danish island of Bornholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="23668" end="23680" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q671079" start="24068" end="24077" title="troopship" label="troopship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846851" start="24101" end="24117" title="grace and favour" label="grace and favour"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="24131" end="24151" title="Hampton Court Palace" label="Hampton Court Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="24492" end="24501" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277081" start="24521" end="24538" title="RMS Empress of Canada (1928)" label="Empress of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="24589" end="24609" title="City of Halifax" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="24631" end="24638" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875161" start="24671" end="24693" title="Halton County, Ontario" label="Halton County, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028230" start="24700" end="24713" title="Campbellville, Ontario" label="Campbellville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167214" start="25082" end="25101" title="Cooksville, Ontario" label="Cooksville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="25144" end="25155" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q170184" start="25481" end="25513" title="Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent" label="Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="25542" end="25559" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Louis Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q271995" start="25574" end="25580" title="Edwina Mountbatten, Countess Mountbatten of Burma" label="Edwina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="25612" end="25630" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="25635" end="25648" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529544" start="25807" end="25828" title="HMY Britannia" label="&amp;quot;Britannia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397387" start="25861" end="25878" title="Romanov impostors" label="Romanov impostors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444359" start="26151" end="26175" title="Toronto General Hospital" label="Toronto General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q165113" start="26238" end="26243" title="Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Xenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104294" start="26428" end="26456" title="Gerrard Street (Toronto)" label="Gerrard Street East, Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055381" start="26586" end="26608" title="York Cemetery, Toronto" label="York Cemetery, Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="26961" end="26976" title="Canadian dollar" label="Canadian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="27922" end="27934" title="Ekaterinburg" label="Ekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815" start="27987" end="27993" title="Tyumen" label="Tyumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183002" start="27998" end="28004" title="Surgut" label="Surgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q183334" start="28021" end="28038" title="Tretyakov Gallery" label="Tretyakov Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000542" start="28053" end="28080" title="Saint Michael&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Saint Michael&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="28149" end="28160" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="28238" end="28250" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="28271" end="28279" title="Harald V" label="Harald V"/>
<link wikidata="Q28143" start="28334" end="28342" title="Ballerup" label="Ballerup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849494" start="28981" end="28995" title="Richard Hough" label="Hough, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243269" start="29126" end="29137" title="John Klier" label="Klier, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343649" start="29555" end="29572" title="Robert K. Massie" label="Massie, Robert K."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981085" wikidata="Q1173509" url="?curid=981085" title="David A. Johnston">
<text>David Alexander Johnston (December 18, 1949 – May 18, 1980) was an American United States Geological Survey (USGS) volcanologist who was killed by the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens in the U.S. state of Washington. A principal scientist on the USGS monitoring team, Johnston was killed in the eruption while manning an observation post away on the morning of May 18, 1980. He was the first to report the eruption, transmitting &quot;Vancouver! Vancouver! This is it!&quot; before he was swept away by a lateral blast; despite a thorough search, Johnston&#x27;s body was never found, but state highway workers discovered remnants of his USGS trailer in 1993.

Johnston&#x27;s career took him across the United States, where he studied the Augustine Volcano in Alaska, the San Juan volcanic field in Colorado, and long-extinct volcanoes in Michigan. Johnston was a meticulous and talented scientist, known for his analyses of volcanic gases and their relationship to eruptions. This, along with his enthusiasm and positive attitude, made him liked and respected by many co-workers. After his death, other scientists lauded his character, both verbally and in dedications and letters. Johnston felt scientists must do what is necessary, including taking risks, to help protect the public from natural disasters. His work, and that of fellow USGS scientists, convinced authorities to close Mount St. Helens to the public before the 1980 eruption. They maintained the closure despite heavy pressure to re-open the area; their work saved thousands of lives. His story became intertwined with the popular image of volcanic eruptions and their threat to society, and a part of volcanology&#x27;s history. To date, Johnston, along with his mentee Harry Glicken, is one of two American volcanologists known to have died in a volcanic eruption.

Following his death, Johnston was commemorated in several ways, including a memorial fund established in his name at the University of Washington to fund graduate-level research. Two volcano observatories were established and named after him: one in Vancouver, Washington, and another on the ridge where he died. Johnston&#x27;s life and death are featured in several documentaries, films, docudramas and books. A biography of his life, &quot;A Hero on Mount St. Helens: The Life and Legacy of David A. Johnston&quot;, was published in 2019.

== Life and career ==
Johnston was born at the University of Chicago Hospital on December 18, 1949, to Thomas and Alice Johnston. They originally lived in Hometown, Illinois, but moved to Oak Lawn shortly after Johnston&#x27;s birth, where he grew to adulthood. Johnston grew up with one sister. His father worked as an engineer at a local company and his mother as a newspaper editor. Johnston often took photographs for his mother&#x27;s newspaper and contributed articles to his school&#x27;s newspaper. He never married.

After graduating from Harold L. Richards High School in Oak Lawn, Johnston attended the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He planned to study journalism, but became intrigued by an introductory geology class, and changed his major. His first geologic project was a study of the Precambrian rock that forms Michigan&#x27;s Upper Peninsula. There he investigated the remains of an ancient volcano: a suite of metamorphosed basalts, a gabbroic sill, and volcanic roots in the form of a dioritic and gabbroic intrusion. The experience planted the seed of Johnston&#x27;s passion for volcanoes. After working hard to learn the subject, he graduated with &quot;Highest Honors and Distinction&quot; in 1971.

Johnston spent the summer after college in the San Juan volcanic field of Colorado working with volcanologist Pete Lipman in his study of two extinct calderas. This work became the inspiration for the first phase of his graduate work at the University of Washington in Seattle, in which he focused on the Oligocene Cimarron andesitic volcanic complex in the western San Juans. Johnston&#x27;s reconstruction of the eruptive history of the extinct volcanoes prepared him to study active volcanoes. Johnston&#x27;s first experience with active volcanoes was a geophysical survey of Mount Augustine in Alaska in 1975. When Mount Augustine erupted in 1976, Johnston raced back to Alaska, shunting his former work on the Cimmaron Volcano into a master&#x27;s thesis, and making Mount Augustine the focus of his Ph.D. work. He graduated in 1978 with his Ph.D., having shown that (1) the emplacement mechanism of the pyroclastic flows had changed over time, as they became less pumaceous, (2) the magmas contained high quantities of volatile water, chlorine, and sulfur, and (3) underground mixing of the felsic (silicic) magmas with less-viscous mafic (basaltic) magmas could have triggered eruptions. Mount Augustine was also the site of an early near-disaster for Johnston, when he became trapped on Augustine Island as the volcano was building toward another eruption.

During the summers of 1978 and 1979, Johnston led studies of the ash-flow sheet emplaced in the 1912 eruption of Mount Katmai in the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. The gas phase is extremely important in propelling volcanic eruptions. Because of this, Johnston mastered the many techniques required to analyze glass-vapor inclusions in phenocrysts embedded in lavas, which provide information about gases present during past eruptions. His work at Mount Katmai and other volcanoes in the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes paved the way for his career, and his &quot;agility, nerve, patience, and determination around the jet-like summit fumaroles in the crater of Mt. Mageik&quot; impressed his colleagues.

Later in 1978, Johnston joined the United States Geological Survey (USGS), where he monitored volcanic emission levels in the Cascades and Aleutian Arc. There he helped to strengthen the theory that eruptions can be predicted, to some degree, by changes in the makeup of volcanic gases. Fellow volcanologist Wes Hildreth said of Johnston, &quot;I think Dave&#x27;s dearest hope was that systematic monitoring of fumarolic emissions might permit detection of changes characteristically precursory to eruptions ... Dave wanted to formulate a general model for the behavior of magmatic volatiles prior to explosive outbursts and to develop a corollary rationale for the evaluation of hazards.&quot; During this time, Johnston continued to visit Mount Augustine every summer and also assessed the geothermal energy potential of the Azores and Portugal. In the last year of his life, Johnston developed an interest in the health, agricultural, and environmental effects of both volcanic and anthropogenic emissions to the atmosphere.

Johnston was based at the branch of the USGS in Menlo Park, California, but his work on volcanoes took him all over the Pacific Northwest region. When the first earthquakes shook Mount St. Helens on March 16, 1980, Johnston was nearby at the University of Washington, where he had pursued his doctorate. Intrigued by the possible event of an eruption, Johnston contacted Stephen Malone, a professor of geology at the university. Malone had been his mentor when Johnston had worked at the San Juan complex in Colorado, and Johnston admired his work. Malone stated that he &quot;put him to work&quot; almost instantly, allowing Johnston to escort interested reporters to a place near the volcano. Johnston was the first geologist on the volcano, and soon became a leader within the USGS team, taking charge of monitoring of volcanic gas emissions.

== Eruption of Mount St. Helens ==
=== Precursor activity ===
Since its last eruptive activity in 1857, Mount St. Helens had been largely dormant. Seismographs were not installed until 1972. This period of 123 years of inactivity ended in early 1980. On March 15, a cluster of tiny earthquakes rocked the area around the mountain. For six days, more than 100 earthquakes clustered around Mount St. Helens, an indication that magma was moving. There was initially some doubt as to whether the earthquakes were precursors to an eruption. By March 20, a magnitude 4.2 earthquake shook the wilderness around the volcano. The next day, seismologists installed three seismic recorder stations. By March 24, volcanologists at the USGS—including Johnston—became more confident that the seismic activity was a sign of an impending eruption. After March 25, seismic activity drastically increased. By March 26, more than seven earthquakes over magnitude 4.0 had been recorded, and the next day, hazard warnings were publicly issued. On March 27, a phreatic eruption took place, ejecting a plume of ash nearly into the air.

Similar activity continued at the volcano over the following weeks, excavating the crater, forming an adjacent caldera, and erupting small amounts of steam, ash, and tephra. With each new eruption, the plumes of steam and ash from the volcano rose, eventually climbing to . By late March, the volcano was erupting up to 100 times per day. Spectators congregated in the vicinity of the mountain, hoping for a chance to see its eruptions. They were joined by reporters in helicopters, as well as mountain climbers.

On April 17, a bulge (or &quot;cryptodome&quot;) was discovered on the mountain&#x27;s north flank, suggesting that Mount St. Helens could produce a lateral blast. Rising magma under Mount St. Helens had veered off to the north flank, creating a growing bulge on the surface.

=== Final signs and primary blast ===
Given the increasing seismic and volcanic activity, Johnston and the other volcanologists working for the USGS in its Vancouver branch prepared to observe any impending eruption. Geologist Don Swanson and others placed reflectors on and around the growing domes, and established the Coldwater I and II observation posts to use laser ranging to measure how the distances to these reflectors changed over time as the domes deformed. Coldwater II, where Johnston died, was located just north of the mountain. To the astonishment of the USGS geologists, the bulge was growing at a rate of 5 to 8 feet (1.5 to 2.4 meters) per day.
Tiltmeters installed on the volcano&#x27;s north side displayed a northwest trending tilt for that side of the mountain, and a southwest trending tilt was observed on the south side. Worried that the amount of pressure on the magma underground was increasing, scientists analyzed gases by the crater, and found high traces of sulfur dioxide. After this discovery, they began to regularly check the fumarolic activity and monitor the volcano for dramatic changes, but none were observed. Disheartened, they instead opted to study the growing bulge and the threat an avalanche could have for humans relatively near the volcano. An evaluation of the threat was carried out, concluding that a landslide or avalanche in the Toutle River could spawn lahars, or mudflows, downstream.

At that point, the previously consistent phreatic activity had become intermittent. Between May 10 and 17, the only change occurred on the volcano&#x27;s north flank, as the bulge increased in size. On May 16 and 17, the mountain stopped its phreatic eruptions completely.

The active Mount St. Helens was radically different from its dormant form, now featuring an enormous bulge and several craters. In the week preceding the eruption, cracks formed in the north sector of the volcano&#x27;s summit, indicating a movement of magma.

At 8:32 a.m. local time the next day, May 18, 1980, an earthquake measuring magnitude 5.1 rocked the area, triggering the landslide that started the main eruption. In a matter of seconds, vibrations from the earthquake loosened of rock on the mountain&#x27;s north face and summit, creating a massive landslide. It was the largest subaerial (on land) landslide in Earth&#x27;s recorded history. With the loss of the confining pressure of the overlying rock, Mount St. Helens began to rapidly emit steam and other volcanic gases. A few seconds later, it erupted laterally, sending swift pyroclastic flows down its flanks at near supersonic speeds. These flows were later joined by lahars. Before being struck by a series of flows that, at their fastest, would have taken less than a minute to reach his position , Johnston attempted to radio his USGS co-workers with the message: &quot;Vancouver! Vancouver! This is it! Vancouver, is the transmitter on?&quot; The cloud of the eruption blocked the transmission of his message to Vancouver; his final words were recorded by an amateur radio operator. Seconds later, the signal from the radio went silent, and all contact with the geologist was lost. Initially, there was some debate as to whether Johnston had survived; records soon showed a radio message from fellow eruption victim and amateur radio operator Gerry Martin, located near the Coldwater peak and farther north of Johnston&#x27;s position, reporting his sighting of the eruption enveloping the Coldwater II observation post. As the blast overwhelmed Johnston&#x27;s post, Martin declared solemnly: &quot;Gentlemen, the camper and car that’s sitting over to the south of me is covered. It’s going to hit me, too.&quot; before his radio too went silent.

The extent, speed and direction of the avalanche and pyroclastic flows that overwhelmed Johnston, Martin, and others were later described in detail in a paper titled &#x27;Chronology and Character of the May 18, 1980 Explosive Eruptions of Mount St. Helens&#x27;, published in 1984 in a collection published by the National Research Council&#x27;s Geophysics Study Committee. In this paper, the authors examined photographs and satellite images of the eruption to construct a chronology and description of the first few minutes. Included in the paper is figure 10.3, a series of timed photographs taken from Mount Adams, east of Mount St. Helens. These six photographs, taken sideways on to the lateral blast, vividly show the extent and size of the avalanche and flows as they reached northwards over and beyond Johnston&#x27;s position. Figure 10.7 from the same paper is an overhead diagram showing the position of the pyroclastic surge front at half-minute intervals, with the positions of Johnston (Coldwater II) and Martin included.

The eruption was heard hundreds of miles away, but some of those who survived the eruption declared that the landslide and pyroclastic flows were silent as they raced down the mountain. Kran Kilpatrick, an employee of the United States Forest Service, recalled, &quot;There was no sound to it, not a sound. It was like a silent movie and we were all in it.&quot; The reason for this discrepancy is a &quot;quiet zone&quot;, created as a result of the motion and temperature of air and, to a lesser extent, upon local topography.

Famous for telling reporters that being on the mountain was like &quot;standing next to a dynamite keg and the fuse is lit&quot;, Johnston had been among the first volcanologists at the volcano when eruptive signs appeared, and shortly after was named the head of volcanic gas monitoring. He and several other volcanologists prevented people from being near the volcano during the few months of pre-eruptive activity, and successfully fought pressure to re-open the area. Their work kept the death toll at a few tens of individuals, instead of the thousands who possibly could have been killed had the region not been sealed off.

=== USGS team and rescue efforts ===

Many USGS scientists worked on the team monitoring the volcano, but it was graduate student Harry Glicken who had been manning the Coldwater II observation post for the two and a half weeks immediately preceding the eruption. The evening before the eruption he was scheduled to be relieved by USGS geologist Don Swanson, but something came up, and Swanson asked Johnston to take his place. Johnston agreed. That Saturday, the day before the eruption took place, Johnston ascended the mountain and went on a patrol of the volcano with geologist Carolyn Driedger. Tremors shook the mountain. Driedger was supposed to camp on one of the ridges overlooking the volcano that night, but Johnston told her to head home and said that he would stay on the volcano alone. While at Coldwater II, Johnston was to observe the volcano for any further signs of an eruption. Just prior to his departure, at 7 p.m. on the evening of May 17, 13½ hours before the eruption, Glicken took the famous photograph of Johnston sitting by the observation-post trailer with a notebook on his lap, smiling.

The following morning, May 18, at , the volcano erupted. Immediately, rescue workers were dispatched to the area. The official USGS pilot, Lon Stickney, who had been flying the scientists to the mountain, conducted the first rescue attempt. He flew his helicopter over the scarred remains of trees, valleys, and the Coldwater II observation post ridge, where he saw bare rock and uprooted trees. Because he saw no sign of Johnston&#x27;s trailer, Stickney began to panic, becoming &quot;emotionally distraught&quot;.

Frantic and guilt-stricken, Harry Glicken convinced three separate helicopter pilots to take him up on flights over the devastated area in a rescue attempt, but the eruption had so changed the landscape that they were unable to locate any sign of the Coldwater II observation post. In 1993, while building a extension of Washington State Route 504 (also called &quot;Spirit Lake Memorial Highway&quot;) to lead to the Johnston Ridge Observatory, construction workers discovered pieces of Johnston&#x27;s trailer. His body, however, has never been found.

=== Consequences and response ===
The public was shocked by the extent of the eruption, which had lowered the elevation of the summit by , destroyed of woodland, and spread ash into other states and Canada. The lateral blast that killed Johnston started at a speed of and accelerated to . Even USGS scientists were awed. With a Volcanic Explosivity Index value of 5, the eruption was catastrophic. More than 50 people were killed or missing, including Johnston, mountain resident Harry R. Truman, photographer Robert Landsburg, and &quot;National Geographic&quot; photographer Reid Blackburn.

The disaster was the deadliest and most destructive volcanic eruption in the history of the United States of America. A total of 57 people are known to have died, and more were left homeless when the ash falls and pyroclastic flows destroyed or buried 200 houses. In addition to the human fatalities, thousands of animals perished. The official estimate from the USGS was 7,000 game animals, salmon fingerlings, and 40,000 salmon.

Two years after the eruption, the United States government set aside of land for the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument. This protected area, which includes the Johnston Ridge Observatory and several other research and visitor centers, serves as an area for scientific research, tourism, and education.

== Legacy ==
===Scientific===

Johnston was commemorated by both his fellow scientists and by the government. Known for his diligent and particular nature, he was called &quot;an exemplary scientist&quot; by a USGS dedication paper, which also described him as &quot;unaffectedly genuine, with an infectious curiosity and enthusiasm&quot;. He was quick to &quot;dissipate cynicism&quot; and believed that &quot;careful evaluation and interpretation&quot; was the best approach to his work. An obituary notice for Johnston stated that at the time of his death he had been &quot;among the leading young volcanologists in the world&quot; and that his &quot;enthusiasm and warmth&quot; would be &quot;missed at least as much as his scientific strength&quot;. Following the eruption, Harry Glicken and other geologists at the USGS dedicated their work to Johnston.

Because Johnston was believed to be safe at the Coldwater II observation post, the fact that he died shocked his friends and co-workers alike. However, most of his colleagues and family asserted that Johnston died &quot;doing what he wanted to do.&quot; His mother stated in an interview shortly after the eruption, &quot;Not many people get to do what they really want to do in this world, but our son did. ... He would tell us he may never get rich but he was doing what he wanted. He wanted to be near if the eruption came. In a phone call on Mother&#x27;s Day, he told us it&#x27;s a sight very few geologists get to see.&quot; Dr. Stephen Malone agreed that Johnston died doing what he loved, and stated that he &quot;was very good at his work&quot;.

Johnston&#x27;s role in the study of the volcano in the weeks leading up to the eruption was acknowledged in 1981 in a chronology of the eruption, published as part of the USGS report titled &#x27;The 1980 Eruptions of Mount St. Helens, Washington&#x27;:


Since Johnston&#x27;s death, his field of volcanic eruption prediction has advanced significantly, and volcanologists are now able to predict eruptions based on a number of precursors that become apparent between days and months in advance. Geologists can now identify characteristic patterns in seismic waves that indicate particular magmatic activity. In particular, volcanologists have used deep, long-period earthquakes that indicate that magma is rising through the crust. They can also use carbon dioxide emission as a proxy for magma supply rate. Measurements of surface deformation due to magmatic intrusions, like those that were conducted by Johnston and the other USGS scientists at the Coldwater I and II outposts, have advanced in scale and precision. Ground deformation monitoring networks around volcanoes now consist of InSAR (interferometry), surveys of networks of GPS monuments, microgravity surveys in which scientists measure the change in gravitational potential or acceleration because of the intruding magma and resulting deformation, strain meters, and tiltmeters. Though there is still work to be done, this combination of approaches has greatly improved scientists&#x27; abilities to forecast volcanic eruptions.

In addition to his work, Johnston himself has become part of the history of volcanic eruptions. With Harry Glicken, he is one of two volcanologists from the United States to die in a volcanic eruption. Glicken was being mentored by Johnston, who relieved Glicken of his watch at the Coldwater II observation post 13 hours before Mount St. Helens erupted. Glicken died in 1991, eleven years later, when a pyroclastic flow overran him and several others at Mount Unzen in Japan.

===Commemoration===
Early acts of commemoration included two trees that were planted in Tel Aviv, Israel, and the renaming of a community center in Johnston&#x27;s hometown as the &quot;Johnston Center&quot;. These actions were reported in newspapers during the first anniversary of the eruption in May 1981.

On the second anniversary of the eruption, the USGS office in Vancouver (which had been permanently established following the 1980 eruption) was renamed the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory (CVO) in his memory. This volcano observatory is the one most responsible for monitoring Mount St. Helens, and helped to predict all of the volcano&#x27;s eruptions between 1980 and 1985. In a 2005 open day, the lobby area of the CVO included a display and painting commemorating Johnston.

Johnston&#x27;s connections with the University of Washington (where he had carried out his masters and doctoral research) are remembered by a memorial fund that established an endowed graduate-level fellowship within what is now the department of Earth and Space Sciences. By the time of the first anniversary of his death, the fund had exceeded $30,000. Known as the &#x27;David A. Johnston Memorial Fellowship for Research Excellence&#x27;, a number of awards of this fellowship have been made over the years since it was launched.

Following the eruption, the area where the Coldwater II observation post had been was sectioned off. Eventually, an observatory was built in the area in Johnston&#x27;s name, and opened in 1997. Located just over from the north flank of Mount St. Helens, the Johnston Ridge Observatory (JRO) allows the public to admire the open crater, new activity, and the creations of the 1980 eruption, including an extensive basalt field. Part of the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument, the JRO was constructed for , equipped with monitoring equipment. Visited by thousands of tourists annually, it also includes tours, a theater, and an exhibit hall.

There are several public memorials where Johnston&#x27;s name is inscribed in a list of those known to have died in the eruption. These memorials include a large curved granite monument at an outside viewing area at the Johnston Ridge Observatory, which opened in 1997, and a plaque at the Hoffstadt Bluffs Visitor Center, which was unveiled in a memorial grove in May 2000.

===Depictions===

There have been several tellings of Johnston&#x27;s story in documentaries, films and docudramas about the eruption.

In the 1981 HBO television film &quot;St. Helens&quot;, actor David Huffman starred as David Jackson, a fictional character supposedly based on Johnston, but with almost no representation of his actions in 1980. Johnston&#x27;s parents objected to the production of the film, arguing that it possessed not &quot;an ounce of David in it&quot; and portrayed &quot;him as a daredevil rather than a careful scientist&quot;. Johnston&#x27;s mother stated that the film had changed many true aspects of the eruption, and depicted her son as &quot;a rebel&quot; with &quot;a history of disciplinary trouble&quot;. Prior to the film&#x27;s premiere on May 18, 1981, the first anniversary of the eruption, 36 scientists who knew Johnston signed a letter of protest. They wrote that, &quot;Dave&#x27;s life was too meritorious to require fictional embellishments,&quot; and that, &quot;Dave was a superbly conscientious and creative scientist.&quot;  

Several documentaries and docudramas have covered the history of the eruption, including archive footage and dramatisations of Johnston&#x27;s story. These include &quot;Up From the Ashes&quot; (1990) by KOMO-TV, an episode of the 2005 second series of &quot;Seconds From Disaster&quot; broadcast by the National Geographic Channel, an episode of the 2006 series &quot;Surviving Disaster&quot; made by the BBC, and the episode &quot;Rescued From Mount St. Helens&quot; from the 2017 series &quot;We&#x27;ll Meet Again with Ann Curry&quot; on PBS.

== Works ==
*
*
*

== Notes==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

*David A. Johnston (United States Geological Survey obituary, hosted by the Cascades Volcano Observatory)
*David Alexander Johnston – memoriam article by Wes Hildreth – includes 1978 photograph of Johnston (USGS Geological Survey Circular 838, hosted by the US National Park Service)
*David Johnston – memorial page that includes photographs of Johnston following his arrival at the volcano (St. Helens Hero website)
*This is it – 1995 local newspaper retrospective on Johnston (St. Helens Hero website)
*The Victims of the Eruption – memorial page that includes a photograph of the Hoffstadt Bluffs memorial plaque (The many faces of Mount St. Helens website)
*Mount St. Helens - Victims – map that shows the position of Johnston and the others killed by the eruption (The Daily News, TDN.com)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1173509" start="0" end="24" title="David A. Johnston" label="David Alexander Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="76" end="107" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940086" start="115" end="128" title="volcanologist" label="volcanologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q778218" start="151" end="184" title="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens" label="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="206" end="216" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387245" start="506" end="519" title="lateral eruption" label="lateral blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193964" start="741" end="758" title="Augustine Volcano" label="Augustine Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="762" end="768" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948596" start="774" end="797" title="San Juan volcanic field" label="San Juan volcanic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="801" end="809" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="841" end="849" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q552571" start="927" end="939" title="volcanic gas" label="volcanic gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452793" start="1741" end="1754" title="Harry Glicken" label="Harry Glicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="1959" end="1983" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q234053" start="2088" end="2097" title="Vancouver, Washington" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895258" start="2428" end="2458" title="University of Chicago Medical Center" label="University of Chicago Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q387760" start="2536" end="2554" title="Hometown, Illinois" label="Hometown, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007947" start="2569" end="2577" title="Oak Lawn, Illinois" label="Oak Lawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="2995" end="3037" title="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="3111" end="3118" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="3195" end="3206" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="3223" end="3231" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="3239" end="3254" title="Upper Peninsula" label="Upper Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="3324" end="3337" title="metamorphism (geology)" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="3338" end="3344" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="3349" end="3355" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q830230" start="3358" end="3362" title="sill (geology)" label="sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q187408" start="3400" end="3408" title="diorite" label="dioritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="3422" end="3431" title="intrusion (geology)" label="intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948596" start="3666" end="3689" title="San Juan volcanic field" label="San Juan volcanic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="3693" end="3701" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940086" start="3715" end="3728" title="volcanologist" label="volcanologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="3769" end="3776" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="3860" end="3884" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="3924" end="3933" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3934" end="3942" title="Cimarron Volcano" label="Cimarron"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="3943" end="3952" title="Andesite" label="andesitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="4177" end="4188" title="Geophysics" label="geophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193964" start="4199" end="4214" title="Mount Augustine" label="Mount Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="4218" end="4224" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="4359" end="4379" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="4425" end="4430" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="4529" end="4545" title="pyroclastic flow" label="pyroclastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="4590" end="4599" title="pumice" label="pumaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q847257" start="4717" end="4723" title="felsic" label="felsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="4759" end="4764" title="mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053435" start="5099" end="5111" title="Mount Katmai" label="Mount Katmai"/>
<link wikidata="Q259233" start="5119" end="5148" title="Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes" label="Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q552571" start="5154" end="5157" title="Volcanic gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15084935" start="5296" end="5301" title="Melt inclusions" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822828" start="5302" end="5318" title="Fluid inclusions" label="vapor inclusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q383481" start="5322" end="5332" title="phenocryst" label="phenocryst"/>
<link wikidata="Q576906" start="5646" end="5656" title="Mount Mageik" label="Mt. Mageik"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="5725" end="5756" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="5816" end="5824" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascades"/>
<link wikidata="Q749968" start="5829" end="5841" title="Aleutian Arc" label="Aleutian Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q56115068" start="5998" end="6010" title="Wes Hildreth" label="Wes Hildreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q105880" start="6102" end="6111" title="fumarole" label="fumarolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127993" start="6483" end="6500" title="geothermal energy" label="geothermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="6518" end="6524" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="6529" end="6537" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="6676" end="6689" title="human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q74195" start="6768" end="6790" title="Menlo Park, California" label="Menlo Park, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="6881" end="6891" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="7705" end="7712" title="inactive volcano" label="dormant"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="7714" end="7725" title="Seismograph" label="Seismograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q38768" start="8118" end="8127" title="Richter magnitude scale" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067217" start="8605" end="8622" title="phreatic eruption" label="phreatic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q209245" start="8847" end="8853" title="tephra" label="tephra"/>
<link wikidata="Q534282" start="9226" end="9236" title="cryptodome" label="cryptodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387245" start="9344" end="9357" title="lateral blast" label="lateral blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="9366" end="9371" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426632" start="9837" end="9850" title="laser ranging" label="laser ranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528565" start="10136" end="10145" title="Tiltmeter" label="Tiltmeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="10462" end="10476" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535886" start="10855" end="10867" title="Toutle River" label="Toutle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q47212" start="10880" end="10885" title="lahar" label="lahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="12077" end="12087" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47212" start="12129" end="12135" title="lahars" label="lahars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="13529" end="13554" title="United States National Research Council" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q267646" start="13822" end="13833" title="Mount Adams (Washington)" label="Mount Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="14476" end="14504" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452793" start="15545" end="15558" title="Harry Glicken" label="Harry Glicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q836431" start="17372" end="17398" title="Washington State Route 504" label="Washington State Route 504"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="17934" end="17960" title="Volcanic Explosivity Index" label="Volcanic Explosivity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q509891" start="18086" end="18101" title="Harry R. Truman" label="Harry R. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q156869" start="18116" end="18132" title="Robert Landsburg" label="Robert Landsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="18144" end="18163" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068540" start="18183" end="18197" title="Reid Blackburn" label="Reid Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832888" start="18599" end="18610" title="Juvenile fish" label="fingerlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326044" start="18717" end="18760" title="Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument" label="Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409314" start="20862" end="20890" title="Prediction of volcanic activity" label="volcanic eruption prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="21225" end="21231" title="period (physics)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="21316" end="21339" title="Greenhouse gas emissions" label="carbon dioxide emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q106808925" start="21390" end="21409" title="Deformation (volcanology)" label="surface deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124439509" start="21656" end="21661" title="InSAR" label="InSAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="21703" end="21706" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544012" start="21781" end="21804" title="gravitational potential" label="gravitational potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q30006" start="21808" end="21820" title="gravitational acceleration" label="acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990546" start="21879" end="21885" title="strain (mechanics)" label="strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q620860" start="22516" end="22527" title="Mount Unzen" label="Mount Unzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="22627" end="22643" title="Tel Aviv, Israel" label="Tel Aviv, Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348499" start="23006" end="23052" title="Cascades Volcano Observatory" label="David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="25011" end="25020" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="25055" end="25058" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588321" start="25081" end="25091" title="St. Helens (film)" label="St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174788" start="25105" end="25118" title="David Huffman" label="David Huffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191472" start="26190" end="26197" title="KOMO-TV" label="KOMO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140582" start="26245" end="26266" title="Seconds From Disaster" label="Seconds From Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="26290" end="26317" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954412" start="26355" end="26373" title="Surviving Disaster" label="Surviving Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="26392" end="26395" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815727" start="26482" end="26518" title="We&amp;#x27;ll Meet Again with Ann Curry" label="We&amp;#x27;ll Meet Again with Ann Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="26528" end="26531" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981088" wikidata="Q445330" url="?curid=981088" title="Scotty Nguyen">
<text>Thuận B. &quot;Scotty&quot; Nguyễn (born October 28, 1962) is a Vietnamese-American professional poker player who is a five-time World Series of Poker (WSOP) bracelet winner, most notably as the winner of the 1998 World Series of Poker Main Event and the 2008 World Series of Poker $50,000 H.O.R.S.E. World Championship. He is the first and only player to win both the WSOP Main Event and $50,000 Players&#x27; Championship.

==Early life==

Scotty Nguyen was born in Nha Trang, Vietnam. Due to the conflict in Vietnam, his mother sent him out of the country, first to Taiwan. He came to the United States at the age of 14 after finding a sponsor in Orange County, California. He was expelled from school for spending too much time in underground poker games. Nguyen attended dealer school at the age of 21 and was employed at Harrah’s poker room. While with Harrah&#x27;s, he made about $150 a night and lost most of it playing $3–$6 stud. He described himself as a &quot;fish&quot; but wanted to gamble regardless.

His luck improved in 1985 when he was invited to Lake Tahoe to deal in a no-limit Hold’em tournament. He dealt all day and played cash games all night with the meager bankroll he brought with him. He built his bankroll to $7,000 and felt he was invincible. He returned to Las Vegas and gambled his bankroll up to $1 million. His name spread around Vegas and soon he began playing poker with Johnny Chan, Puggy Pearson, and David Grey. He purchased a Chevrolet Camaro for $17,000, a Corvette for $21,000, and a condominium for $60,000 all in cash. He lived in Caesars Palace and was winning $50,000 to $900,000 a night.

Bad habits plagued Nguyen; recreational use of marijuana, cocaine, and alcohol developed into full-scale addictions. After a costly losing streak, he ended up going broke. Nguyen was spared a room and $5,000 in cash.

==Poker career==
Nguyen had to rebuild his bankroll after losing his million. His next success came at the 1997 World Series of Poker where he won the $2,000 Omaha 8 or Better event, netting a profit of over $150,000. Unfortunately, Nguyen blew this bankroll again and was completely broke shortly before the 1998 World Series of Poker. Nguyen had to play in a small satellite tournament which he did not even have enough money to buy into. Mike Matusow saw potential in Nguyen and decided to bankroll 1/3 of the buy-in. He went on to win the 1998 World Series of Poker and split 1/3 of the winnings ($333,333) with Matusow. 

Nguyen is noted for playing emotionally. On the final hand of the 1998 World Series of Poker&#x27;s Main Event, a full house was dealt on the table (). Nguyen memorably said to his opponent Kevin McBride: &quot;You call, it&#x27;s gonna be all over baby!&quot; Previously in the game, with McBride all-in, Nguyen had quipped &quot;It&#x27;s gonna be all over if I read you right&quot; before calling. However Nguyen&#x27;s read hadn&#x27;t been correct and McBride had won the pot, bringing him back in the game.

This time, McBride called and went all-in, saying &quot;I call. I play the board.&quot; Nguyen beat McBride with a better full house by holding . In the post-game interview McBride admitted that he would not have called if not for Nguyen&#x27;s quip. Main Event triumph in 1998 was followed immediately by tragedy—the very next day, one of his brothers was hit by a car back home in Vietnam, and killed. For this reason, Scotty does not wear his 1998 WSOP championship bracelet. In the 2001 WSOP, he won two bracelets.

After making several World Poker Tour (WPT) final tables, Nguyen eventually won a WPT event in January 2006, defeating Michael Mizrachi heads-up in the fourth season Gold Strike World Poker Open when his made a flush against Mizrachi&#x27;s on the very first hand of heads-up round. With this WPT victory, Scotty became one of only 6 people to win both the main event of the World Series of Poker and a World Poker Tour title. Nguyen earned a second-place finish at the 2007 World Series of Poker in the seven card stud high low split eight or better event won by Eli Elezra. Scotty stated after the event that he hadn&#x27;t played cash games in over two years because he enjoys a friendly environment which is difficult in serious cash games. Scotty also nearly made the final table of the 2007 World Series of Poker Main Event, finishing in 11th place out of a field of 6,358 and earning $476,926.

At the 2008 $50,000 World Series of Poker H.O.R.S.E. event, Nguyen, the eventual winner, exhibited what many have considered objectionable, and even rule-breaking behavior, including a soft-play in a hand with Erick Lindgren. In the broadcast of the prestigious event, Nguyen was shown drinking numerous alcoholic beverages while swearing and scolding others (including waiters/waitresses) at the final table, drawing criticism from commentators. Following the event (which Nguyen won), Nguyen issued an apology to his fans and stated that the event&#x27;s editing depicted him unfairly. He also cited issues like exhaustion, frustration with the perceived gloating of Michael DeMichele, and pressure to succeed as reasons for his unconventional behavior. Nguyen later formally apologized to the fans in an interview, and said that he no longer blamed any other players for his behavior, and that there was no excuse for his behavior at the 2008 H.O.R.S.E. event. Since the incident, Nguyen has refused to drink alcoholic beverages during televised games.

In 2009, Nguyen won the inaugural LA Poker Classic $10,000 H.O.R.S.E World Championship at the Commerce Casino&#x27;s annual LA Poker Classic Series, which earned him $260,485, and further cemented Nguyen&#x27;s reputation as one of the greatest masters of all variations of fixed limit poker.

As of 2023, his total live tournament winnings exceed $12,700,000. Of those winnings, $5,100,999 have come at the WSOP. Nguyen has also made appearances on the Ultimate Blackjack Tour playing Elimination Blackjack. Nguyen also made an appearance on &quot;Late Night with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; in April 2004.

In January 2012, Nguyen was named as team captain of the Expekt Poker pro team for EPT Deauville. The team also included Julian Kabitzke and Jack Salter as well as EPT London 3rd-place finisher Andre Klebanov.

In 2013, Nguyen was voted into the Poker Hall of Fame along with fellow WSOP Main Event winner, Tom McEvoy.

===World Series of Poker bracelets===
==References==
==External links==
*Card Player profile
*Global Poker Index profile
* Hendon Mob profile
*PokerNews profile
*WSOP profile
* WPT profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q445330" start="0" end="34" title="Scotty Nguyen" label="Thuận B. &amp;quot;Scotty&amp;quot; Nguyễn"/>
<link wikidata="Q80131" start="97" end="102" title="poker" label="poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q819961" start="129" end="150" title="World Series of Poker" label="World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q896560" start="158" end="166" title="WSOP bracelet" label="bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785655" start="209" end="235" title="1998 World Series of Poker" label="1998 World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031797" start="255" end="281" title="2008 World Series of Poker" label="2008 World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562524" start="290" end="300" title="H.O.R.S.E." label="H.O.R.S.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q19491" start="468" end="477" title="Nha Trang" label="Nha Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="479" end="486" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="569" end="575" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="650" end="675" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q892498" start="827" end="835" title="Harrah’s" label="Harrah’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="1290" end="1299" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471830" start="1409" end="1420" title="Johnny Chan (poker player)" label="Johnny Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384546" start="1422" end="1435" title="Puggy Pearson" label="Puggy Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q352613" start="1441" end="1451" title="David Grey" label="David Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="1468" end="1484" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Chevrolet Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="1500" end="1508" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q569978" start="1577" end="1591" title="Caesars Palace" label="Caesars Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="1685" end="1694" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="1696" end="1703" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="1709" end="1716" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247795" start="1963" end="1989" title="1997 World Series of Poker" label="1997 World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785655" start="2165" end="2191" title="1998 World Series of Poker" label="1998 World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q797955" start="2297" end="2309" title="Mike Matusow" label="Mike Matusow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2597" end="2607" title="Rank of hands (poker)#Full house" label="full house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137849" start="3538" end="3554" title="World Poker Tour" label="World Poker Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367268" start="3636" end="3652" title="Michael Mizrachi" label="Michael Mizrachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q86520452" start="3653" end="3661" title="Heads up poker" label="heads-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631752" start="3669" end="3682" title="World Poker Tour season 4 results" label="fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036052" start="3695" end="3711" title="World Poker Open" label="World Poker Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3728" end="3733" title="Rank of hands (poker)#Flush" label="flush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296483" start="3987" end="4013" title="2007 World Series of Poker" label="2007 World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q264099" start="4021" end="4067" title="seven-card stud" label="seven card stud high low split eight or better"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328814" start="4081" end="4091" title="Eli Elezra" label="Eli Elezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562524" start="4461" end="4471" title="H.O.R.S.E." label="H.O.R.S.E."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4604" end="4613" title="Cheating in poker#Collusion" label="soft-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q784353" start="4629" end="4643" title="Erick Lindgren" label="Erick Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829764" start="5088" end="5105" title="Michael DeMichele" label="Michael DeMichele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880126" start="5931" end="5954" title="Ultimate Blackjack Tour" label="Ultimate Blackjack Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361054" start="5963" end="5984" title="Elimination Blackjack" label="Elimination Blackjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639429" start="6026" end="6060" title="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000402" start="6329" end="6347" title="Poker Hall of Fame" label="Poker Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981096" wikidata="Q549276" url="?curid=981096" title="Flotilla">
<text>A flotilla (from Spanish, meaning a small &quot;flota&quot; (fleet) of ships), or naval flotilla, is a formation of small warships that may be part of a larger fleet.

==Composition==
A flotilla is usually composed of a homogeneous group of the same class of warship, such as frigates, destroyers, torpedo boats, submarines, gunboats, or minesweepers. Groups of larger warships are usually called squadrons, but similar units of non-capital ships may be called squadrons in some instances, and flotillas in others. Formations including more than one capital ship, e.g. men-of-war, battleships, and aircraft carriers, typically alongside smaller ships and support craft, are typically called fleets, each portion led by a capital ship being a squadron or task force. 

A flotilla is usually commanded by a rear admiral, a commodore or a captain, depending on the importance of the command (a vice admiral would normally command a squadron). A flotilla is often divided into two or more divisions, each of which might be commanded by the most senior commander, nearly always a lieutenant at the very least. A flotilla is often, but not necessarily, a permanent formation.

In modern navies, flotillas have tended to become administrative units containing several squadrons. As warships have grown larger, the term squadron has gradually replaced the term flotilla for formations of destroyers, frigates and submarines in many navies.

A naval flotilla has no direct equivalent on land, but is, perhaps, the rough equivalent in tactical value of a brigade or regiment.

==Specific usage==
=== United States Coast Guard Auxiliary===
In the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary, a flotilla is the basic organizational unit and consists of members at a local level where the majority of the work of the auxiliary is done. A flotilla is led by an elected flotilla commander assisted by an elected vice flotilla commander, who is in turn assisted by appointed flotilla staff officers. A Coast Guard Auxiliary division consists of multiple flotillas and a district consists of multiple divisions. Auxiliary districts are organized along Coast Guard district lines and are administered by a Coast Guard officer (usually a commander or captain) who is called the &quot;director of the auxiliary&quot;.

=== Russian and Soviet navies ===
In the Imperial Russian Navy, Soviet Navy, and Russian Federation Navy, the word &quot;flotilla&quot; (, &quot;flotilliya&quot;) has tended to be used for &quot;brown-water&quot; naval units – those operating not on the oceans and real seas, but on inland seas or rivers. Among the former are the present-day Caspian Flotilla, the early-20th-century Satakundskaya Flotilla, or the Aral Flotilla of the 1850s; among the latter, the Don Military Flotilla (which was created several times over more than 200 years), the Dnieper Flotilla (also extant in the 18th and 20th centuries), the Red Volga Flotilla, which participated in the Kazan Operation during the Russian Civil War, and the Danube Flotilla. In the 18th century, the term also applied to the comparatively small fleets operating on those seas where Russia did not have much naval presence yet, e.g. the Okhotsk Flotilla.

===Non-military usage===
The word flotilla has also been used at times to refer to a small fleet of vessels, commercial or otherwise. There is also such a thing as a &quot;flotilla holiday&quot;, which is a group of chartered yachts that set sail together on the same route. Also outside of a military context, the Center for International Maritime Security, an open-membership Naval Strategy think tank based in the United States, maintains a similar use of the word Flotilla to that of the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary. In this context, Flotilla refers to a specialized sub-group of individuals within the broader organization, such as the Center&#x27;s Warfighting Flotilla.

==See also==
*10th Assault Vehicle Flotilla
*Chesapeake Bay Flotilla of U.S. Navy (War of 1812)
*Tactical formation
*Flotilla admiral

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q549276" start="2" end="10" title="Flotilla" label="flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="17" end="24" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q189524" start="61" end="66" title="Naval fleet" label="fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q549276" start="82" end="96" title="Flotilla" label="naval flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069238" start="103" end="112" title="Tactical formation" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="122" end="129" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q559026" start="250" end="255" title="ship class" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="276" end="284" title="frigates" label="frigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="286" end="296" title="destroyers" label="destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="298" end="311" title="torpedo boats" label="torpedo boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="313" end="323" title="submarines" label="submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="325" end="333" title="gunboats" label="gunboats"/>
<link wikidata="Q202527" start="338" end="350" title="Minesweeper (ship)" label="minesweepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q955920" start="397" end="406" title="Squadron (naval)" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194368" start="550" end="562" title="capital ship" label="capital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735997" start="569" end="579" title="man-of-war" label="men-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="581" end="591" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="598" end="614" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q189524" start="691" end="697" title="naval fleet" label="fleets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637368" start="754" end="764" title="task force" label="task force"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="805" end="817" title="rear admiral" label="rear admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q506249" start="821" end="830" title="Commodore (rank)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="836" end="843" title="Captain (naval)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q214443" start="891" end="903" title="vice admiral" label="vice admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161250" start="985" end="994" title="division (naval)" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="1048" end="1057" title="commander" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="1075" end="1085" title="lieutenant (navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q955920" start="1261" end="1270" title="Squadron (naval)" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="1545" end="1552" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="1556" end="1564" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889621" start="1636" end="1671" title="United States Coast Guard Auxiliary" label="United States Coast Guard Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13543682" start="2211" end="2220" title="Commander (United States)" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="2224" end="2231" title="Captain (United States O-6)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="2332" end="2353" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Imperial Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="2355" end="2366" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="2372" end="2395" title="Russian Federation Navy" label="Russian Federation Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746796" start="2486" end="2497" title="Brown-water navy" label="brown-water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359797" start="2634" end="2650" title="Caspian Flotilla" label="Caspian Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502725" start="2675" end="2697" title="Satakundskaya Flotilla" label="Satakundskaya Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2706" end="2719" title="Aral Flotilla" label="Aral Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293148" start="2756" end="2777" title="Don Military Flotilla" label="Don Military Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031493" start="2842" end="2858" title="Dnieper Flotilla" label="Dnieper Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2913" end="2927" title="Volga Flotilla" label="Volga Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341052" start="2955" end="2970" title="Kazan Operation" label="Kazan Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="2982" end="2999" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996134" start="3009" end="3024" title="Danube Flotilla (Soviet Union)" label="Danube Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3187" end="3203" title="Okhotsk Flotilla" label="Okhotsk Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q19321798" start="3521" end="3563" title="Center for International Maritime Security" label="Center for International Maritime Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="3599" end="3609" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3623" end="3636" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638425" start="3906" end="3935" title="Decima Flottiglia MAS" label="10th Assault Vehicle Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092829" start="3937" end="3960" title="Chesapeake Bay Flotilla" label="Chesapeake Bay Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069238" start="3989" end="4007" title="Tactical formation" label="Tactical formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q565077" start="4009" end="4025" title="Flotilla admiral" label="Flotilla admiral"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981099" wikidata="Q109249292" url="?curid=981099" title="Koa (disambiguation)">
<text>Koa is a species of tree endemic to Hawaii.

Koa or KOA may also refer to:
*Guwa language, or Koa, an Australian language
*Kampgrounds of America, a franchise chain of North American campgrounds
*KCNC-TV, an American television station, which used the callsign KOA-TV from December 24, 1953 until August 1983
*KOA (AM), an American radio station
*KOA Corporation of Japan
*Koa people (Guwa), an Aboriginal Australian people 
*IATA code KOA Kona International Airport, Hawaii
*Konami of America, the North American subsidiary of Konami, later known as Konami Corporation of America
*Koya language, or Koa, a language of India
*Kick Off Association, an organization for fans of the soccer simulation computer game &quot;Kick Off&quot;
*&quot;Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning&quot;, a 2012 video game</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1777801" start="0" end="3" title="Koa" label="Koa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621992" start="76" end="89" title="Guwa language" label="Guwa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988635" start="123" end="145" title="Kampgrounds of America" label="Kampgrounds of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327023" start="196" end="203" title="KCNC-TV" label="KCNC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334770" start="310" end="318" title="KOA (AM)" label="KOA (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718868" start="347" end="362" title="KOA Corporation" label="KOA Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812310" start="373" end="383" title="Koa people" label="Koa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781135" start="440" end="466" title="Kona International Airport" label="Kona International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="551" end="580" title="Konami#America" label="Konami Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33471" start="582" end="595" title="Koya language" label="Koya language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815064" start="718" end="726" title="Kick Off (video game)" label="Kick Off"/>
<link wikidata="" start="740" end="769" title="Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning" label="Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981103" wikidata="Q3812029" url="?curid=981103" title="KHJ">
<text>KHJ may refer to:

* KHJ (AM), a radio station (930 AM) licensed to Los Angeles, California, United States
* KRTH, a radio station (101.1 FM) licensed to Los Angeles, California, United States, which formerly used the call sign KHJ-FM
* KCAL-TV, a television station (channel 9 analog/43 digital) licensed to Los Angeles, California, United States, which used the call sign KHJ-TV from December 1951 to December 1989
* KKHJ-FM, a radio station (93.1 FM) licensed to Pago Pago, American Samoa, which uses the branding &quot;93 KHJ&quot;
* KBAD-LD, a low-power television station (channel 30) licensed to Pago Pago, American Samoa, which used the branding &quot;KHJ-TV&quot;
* CKHJ (AM), a radio station (1260 AM) licensed to Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada, which used the branding &quot;KHJ&quot; until May 2019
* WKHJ (FM), a radio station (104.5 FM) licensed to Mountain Lake Park, Maryland, which uses the branding &quot;KHJ&quot;
* The IATA airport code for Kauhajoki Airport in Finland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6330167" start="21" end="29" title="KHJ (AM)" label="KHJ (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337203" start="109" end="113" title="KRTH" label="KRTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="237" end="244" title="KCAL-TV" label="KCAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331869" start="419" end="426" title="KKHJ-FM" label="KKHJ-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331867" start="538" end="545" title="KBAD-LD" label="KBAD-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012388" start="675" end="684" title="CKHJ (AM)" label="CKHJ (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951666" start="817" end="826" title="WKHJ (FM)" label="WKHJ (FM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q431551" start="965" end="982" title="Kauhajoki Airport" label="Kauhajoki Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981105" wikidata="Q1636538" url="?curid=981105" title="State of Grace (1990 film)">
<text>State of Grace is a 1990 American neo-noir crime drama film directed by Phil Joanou and starring Sean Penn, Ed Harris and Gary Oldman, also featuring Robin Wright, John Turturro, and John C. Reilly. Written by playwright Dennis McIntyre, the film was produced by Ned Dowd, Randy Ostrow, and Ron Rotholz, with a musical score by Ennio Morricone.

Although the film was not a box office success and its release overshadowed by that of the similarly-themed &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, it was received positively by most critics. Shot on location in New York City, the film was inspired by the real-life Hell&#x27;s Kitchen gang, the Westies.

==Plot==
Irish-American Terry Noonan returns to Hell&#x27;s Kitchen in New York City after a long absence, where his unpredictable childhood friend Jackie Flannery is involved in an Irish crime organization run by older brother Frank. Terry rekindles an old relationship with Jackie&#x27;s sister Kathleen.

Terry is actually an undercover cop, and confesses it to Kathleen. She is reluctant to have anything to do with him after being told by her brother Frank that Terry is now a member of his gang after killing two people, although Terry explains to Kathleen the killing was staged by his police boss Nick, with blanks used.

Jackie is drinking in a bar one night when three members of a rival Italian gang enter. Suspecting their involvement in the killing of his friend, Stevie, Jackie snaps and ends up killing all three for intruding on his gang&#x27;s territory. Frank is summoned to a meeting with Italian Mafia boss Joe Borelli and is told he must kill his brother Jackie. Frank has told his men to lie in wait in case the meeting goes wrong, and manages to avert a shoot out by hugging the Italian leader outside the restaurant in full view of the gang, causing them to retreat.

Frank arranges for Jackie to collect $25,000 after lying to him that the Italians are actually supporting them and that this is their reward, telling him to go to Battery Park. Terry tags along as Jackie&#x27;s secret backup, finding that the location has been changed to Pier 84. As they wait at Pier 84, Frank arrives with his enforcer Pat Nicholson just as Terry has stepped away to frantically phone his police handlers to inform them that they have been sent to the wrong location. Frank shoots Jackie in cold blood. The police finally arrive and Terry tells Nick that he is quitting as an undercover operative.

At Jackie&#x27;s funeral, Terry reveals to Frank that he was at Pier 84, and also hands him his police badge. Hours later, while Kathleen is watching the St. Patrick&#x27;s Day parade alone, Terry goes to the bar where Frank and his gang are. In a shootout, Frank and all of his men are killed. Having been shot three times, Terry slumps to the floor.

==Cast==

* Sean Penn as Detective Terence “Terry” Noonan
* Ed Harris as Frank &quot;Frankie&quot; Flannery
* Gary Oldman as Jack “Jackie” Flannery
* Robin Wright as Kathleen “Kate” Flannery
* John Turturro as Detective Nick Richardson
* John C. Reilly as Stevie McGuire
* R.D. Call as Pat Nicholson
* Joe Viterelli as Joe Borelli
* Burgess Meredith as Finn
* Marco St. John as Jimmy Cavello
* Michael P. Moran as Bartender
* Mo Gaffney as Maureen Flannery
* Deirdre O&#x27;Connell as Irene
* Thomas G. Waites as Ed, Frankie&#x27;s Goon
* Michael Cumpsty as Ryan, Frankie&#x27;s Goon
* Mick Cunningham as Frankie&#x27;s Goon
* Jaime Tirelli as Detective Alvarez
* Vincent Pastore as Borelli&#x27;s Goon
* James Russo as DeMarco (uncredited)
==Reception==

===Box office===
The film was released on a limited basis on September 14, 1990. First-week box office totaled $179,927 (14 screens).

According to &quot;The Numbers&quot; web site, the film was in circulation a few weeks and appeared on 335 screens in its widest release. Total receipts were $1,911,542.

Ebert believed the difficulty &quot;State of Grace&quot; had at the box office was due to another film with the same theme being released the same week, Martin Scorsese&#x27;s &quot;Goodfellas&quot;.

===Critical response===
&quot;State of Grace&quot; was generally well received by critics. Of the reviews collected from notable publications by popular review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an overall approval rating of 85% from 26 critics. The consensus summarizes: &quot;&quot;State of Grace&quot; brings an impressive ensemble cast to bear on its epic gangster saga, elevating a largely familiar story with outstanding performances.&quot;

Janet Maslin, film critic for &quot;The New York Times,&quot; wrote, &quot;Mr. Joanou attempts to capture the sense of place that defines urban crime, and the ethnic and territorial distinctions that give it shape. He is successful much of the time here.&quot; Maslin praised Oldman and Harris, writing, &quot;Jackie Flannery is played by the phenomenal Gary Oldman, who since &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; has taken on a string of new accents and dramatic identities with stunning ease&quot;, and &quot;Jackie&#x27;s icy older brother ... is played by Ed Harris with an eeriness to match Mr. Oldman&#x27;s.&quot;

Critic Vincent Leo praised Penn&#x27;s performance, noting, &quot;While Oldman gets the accolades for his energetic performance, it is really Penn&#x27;s inner demons that provides the film with the right amount of conflict, always letting us be aware that fine lines are the difference between life and death, as well as right and wrong, out in the streets of New York. Is Penn doing the noble thing by taking down the criminals, or is he a rat bastard, disowning himself from the way of life and people who helped him along the way? It&#x27;s the question that makes him sick to the pit of his stomach, and Penn shows it in his face with almost every scene.&quot;

Roger Ebert, film critic of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot;, felt the film begins as &quot;original and challenging&quot; but then &quot;turns into a story filled with familiar elements&quot;. He nevertheless awarded it three stars out of four and had particular praise for the work of Gary Oldman, writing: &quot;Oldman&#x27;s performance in the movie is the best thing about it...What&#x27;s best about &quot;State of Grace&quot; is what&#x27;s unique to it - the twisted vision of the Oldman character, who lives in a world of evil and betrayal and has somehow thought himself around to the notion that he is doing the right thing.&quot;

&quot;State of Grace&quot; has been recognized as a cult classic. Actor Leonardo DiCaprio cited Oldman&#x27;s performance as one of his inspirations, adding that it &quot;influenced an entire generation of actors&quot;.

==Soundtrack==
The original soundtrack was released on October 1, 1990, by MCA. The CD has eighteen tracks, is 53:45 in length, and features a score composed, orchestrated and conducted by Ennio Morricone.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="34" end="42" title="neo-noir" label="neo-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="43" end="59" title="crime drama film" label="crime drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q716373" start="72" end="83" title="Phil Joanou" label="Phil Joanou"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="97" end="106" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791" start="108" end="117" title="Ed Harris" label="Ed Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="122" end="133" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q272972" start="150" end="162" title="Robin Wright" label="Robin Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q244234" start="164" end="177" title="John Turturro" label="John Turturro"/>
<link wikidata="Q223110" start="183" end="197" title="John C. Reilly" label="John C. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155247" start="263" end="271" title="Ned Dowd" label="Ned Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="328" end="343" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="460" end="470" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="542" end="555" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q840133" start="596" end="615" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen, Manhattan" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493546" start="626" end="633" title="Westies" label="Westies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="645" end="659" title="Irish-American" label="Irish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q840133" start="684" end="703" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="707" end="720" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843058" start="818" end="842" title="Irish Mob" label="Irish crime organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424040" start="1252" end="1258" title="Blank (cartridge)" label="blanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="1334" end="1346" title="Italian-American Mafia" label="Italian gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="1544" end="1557" title="American Mafia" label="Italian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13689" start="1991" end="2003" title="Battery Park" label="Battery Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="2811" end="2820" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791" start="2859" end="2868" title="Ed Harris" label="Ed Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="2909" end="2920" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q272972" start="2949" end="2961" title="Robin Wright" label="Robin Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q244234" start="2992" end="3005" title="John Turturro" label="John Turturro"/>
<link wikidata="Q223110" start="3037" end="3051" title="John C. Reilly" label="John C. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16144824" start="3072" end="3081" title="R.D. Call" label="R.D. Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q706246" start="3101" end="3114" title="Joe Viterelli" label="Joe Viterelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q343633" start="3132" end="3148" title="Burgess Meredith" label="Burgess Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q434014" start="3159" end="3173" title="Marco St. John" label="Marco St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370285" start="3193" end="3209" title="Michael P. Moran" label="Michael P. Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886226" start="3225" end="3235" title="Mo Gaffney" label="Mo Gaffney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524102" start="3258" end="3280" title="Deirdre O&amp;#x27;Connell (actress)" label="Deirdre O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380339" start="3292" end="3308" title="Thomas G. Waites" label="Thomas G. Waites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675624" start="3338" end="3353" title="Michael Cumpsty" label="Michael Cumpsty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3385" end="3400" title="Mick Cunningham" label="Mick Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q512986" start="3463" end="3478" title="Vincent Pastore" label="Vincent Pastore"/>
<link wikidata="Q978857" start="3504" end="3515" title="James Russo" label="James Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="4014" end="4029" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="4043" end="4053" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="4233" end="4248" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="4518" end="4530" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4554" end="4572" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="4872" end="4883" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q600950" start="4901" end="4914" title="Sid and Nancy" label="Sid and Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791" start="5067" end="5076" title="Ed Harris" label="Ed Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="5796" end="5807" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="5834" end="5851" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="6492" end="6504" title="Cult film" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="6512" end="6529" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q304509" start="6736" end="6739" title="Music Corporation of America" label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="6745" end="6747" title="Compact Disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="6850" end="6865" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="981106" wikidata="Q17023364" url="?curid=981106" title="José Szapocznik">
<text>José Szapocznik (born in Havana, Cuba), is a clinical psychologist of Polish-Cuban ancestry and one of the nation&#x27;s leading family therapists specializing in Hispanic families. He is the developer of One-Person Family Therapy and Brief Structural Therapy. He is a leading scholar on Hispanic psychology.

He is director of the Center for Family Studies at the University of Miami, where he has been inducted into the Iron Arrow Honor Society, the highest honor bestowed by the University of Miami. He has authored numerous scientific publications and has received numerous awards for his work on behalf of Hispanic families.

==References==

*National Hispanic Science Network 
*PsycNet (pay for article)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17023364" start="0" end="15" title="José Szapocznik" label="José Szapocznik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="25" end="31" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="54" end="66" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="70" end="76" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195125" start="77" end="82" title="Cubans" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="163" end="171" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q870449" start="216" end="230" title="Family therapy" label="Family Therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="297" end="307" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="365" end="384" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072314" start="422" end="446" title="Iron Arrow Honor Society" label="Iron Arrow Honor Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
